Nematic Fermi Fluids in Condensed Matter Physics 1
Nematic Fermi Fluids in Condensed Matter Physics
Eduardo Fradkin
Department of Physics, University of Illinois, Urbana, Illinois 61801-3080; efradkin@illinois.edu
Steven A. Kivelson
Department of Physics, Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305-4060
Michael J. Lawler
Department of Physics, Applied Physics & Astronomy, Binghamton University, Binghamton, New
York 13902, USA, and Department of Physics, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York 14853, USA
James P. Eisenstein
Condensed Matter Physics, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, California 91125
Andrew P. Mackenzie
Scottish Universities Physics Alliance, School of Physics and Astronomy, University of St.
Andrews, North Haugh, St. Andrews, Fife KY16 9SS, United Kingdom
Abstract Correlated electron fluids can exhibit a startling array of complex phases, among which one of the
more surprising is the electron nematic, a translationally invariant metallic phase with a spontaneously generated
spatial anisotropy. Classical nematics generally occur in liquids of rod-like molecules; given that electrons are point
like, the initial theoretical motivation for contemplating electron nematics came from thinking of the electron fluid
as a quantum melted electron crystal, rather than a strongly interacting descendent of a Fermi gas. Dramatic
transport experiments in ultra-clean quantum Hall systems in 1999 and in Sr Ru O in a strong magnetic field in
2007 established that such phases exist in nature. In this article, we briefly review the theoretical considerations
governingnematicorder,summarizethequantumHallandSr Ru O experimentsthatunambiguouslyestablishthe
existence of this phase, and survey some of the current evidence for such a phase in the cuprate and Fe-based high
temperature superconductors.
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
General Theoretical Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
]le-rts.tam-dnoc[
2v6614.0190:viXra
Definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
Symmetry Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
Mechanism of electron nematic formation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
The Quantum Hall Nematic Phase . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
Transport Anisotropy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
Early Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
Orientational Pinning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
Nematic to Isotropic Transition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
Metamagnetism and nematicity in the bilayer ruthenate Sr Ru O . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
Basic properties and electronic structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
Empirical link between metamagnetism and nematic phase formation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
Angle dependent properties and the importance of spin-orbit coupling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
Open questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
Nematic phases in the cuprates and other interesting materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
Nematic order in YBa Cu O . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
Nematic order on the surface of Bi Sr CaCu O . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
Nematic order in the Fe-pnictide superconductors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
Some Future Directions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
1 Introduction
Strongly correlated electron systems are mostly defined by what they are not: they are not gases
of weakly interacting quasiparticles (QPs) (Fermi gases), but they are still electron fluids (i.e. not
insulators). Perhaps classical liquids are a good analogy. They are so different locally from a gas
thatthetwophasesareusuallyseparatedbyastronglyfirstorderphasetransition. Inaddition, the
phase diagrams of complex classical fluids contain a rich set of liquid crystalline phases that exhibit
varying degrees of translation and rotational symmetry breaking. Alas, it is nearly as difficult
to obtain a satisfactory understanding of classical liquids as of highly correlated quantum fluids.
Nevertheless, many spectacular thermodynamic and hydrodynamic properties follow directly from
the symmetry breaking in liquid crystalline phases [1,2].
Research in strongly correlated electronic systems during the past decade has revealed the exis-
tence of a variety of novel phases of quantum matter, electronic liquid crystal phases. In partic-
ular the simplest of these phases, the nematic Fermi fluid, has received a great deal of attention.
Transport measurements in two-dimensional electron systems (2DES) at high magnetic fields [3,4],
strontium ruthenate materials [5] and in several high temperature superconductors [6,7], show
unusually large strongly temperature-dependent transport anisotropies in these otherwise essen-
tially isotropic electronic systems. By analogy with their classical counterparts, the homogeneous
anisotropic phase of these strongly quantum mechanical systems is said to be an electronic nematic
phase [8,9,10].
The origin of the behavior of classical complex fluids lies in the microscopic structure of the
molecules (i.e. their rod-like shapes) and their anisotropic interactions. In their nematic phase
rotational invariance is broken spontaneously and the fluid exhibits orientational order. Various
Nematic Fermi Fluids in Condensed Matter Physics 3
sortsofsmecticphasesthatbreaktranslationalandrotationalinvariancetovariousdegreesarealso
observed [1]. If the rod-like molecules are chiral (i.e. have a screw-like structure) more complex
phases such as cholesterics and blue phases result. Whereas liquid crystals typically have short
range interactions, the related behavior of ferrofluids arises, in part, from their long-range dipolar
interactions.
In contrast to their classical relatives, the quantum versions of liquid crystal phases typically
arise in strongly correlated systems whose constituents are electrons and hence are point particles.
Thus the physical origin of quantum liquid crystal phases is very different from that of classical
ones. Typically, various forms of quantum soft matter arise as a consequence of a form of local
(often Coulomb-frustrated) electronic phase separation [11]. Rather than a fluid of electrons the
systemconsistsofmesoscaleemulsionsoflocallyMottinsulatingregionsseparatedbymoremetallic
regions. Asaconsequence,thesesystemshaverichphasediagramswhosephasesexhibitaspectrum
of patterns each breaking different spatial symmetries ranging from uniform fluids, typically with
the standard properties of Fermi liquids [12], to complex Wigner-like solids (possibly with many
electronsperunitcell),withvarioussortsofelectronicliquidcrystalsinbetween,especiallynematic
andstripe(smectic)phases. Forsimilarreasons,pastaphases(analoguesofthesmecticphase)were
proposed to arise in the crusts of neutron stars (lightly doped with protons) to explain the glitches
observed in gamma-ray emissions [13,14].
One important and unique feature of electronic liquid crystals [8] is that other types of order,
including magnetic and superconducting order, can be intertwined with the liquid crystalline order.
This leads to an array of new phases such as stripe phases [15,10,16], and the striped supercon-
ductor [17,18,19] in which the charge, spin and superconducting orders all have smectic character.
Moreover,ahostofphasesarepossibleinwhichrotationalinvarianceinrealspaceandinspinspace
are broken simultaneously. An example of such a state is the nematic-spin-nematic phase,[10] and
its generalizations[20,21]. A rich set of phases of this type is discussed in Reference [21]. There
are interesting conceptual connections between these more general liquid crystal phases and hid-
den orders that have been suggested in the context of the cuprate superconductors[22,23] and
heavy-fermion systems [24].
In this review we will discuss the physics of the electronic nematic phase. In the next section, we
defineandcharacterizethebrokensymmetries,anddiscusshowpoint-likeelectronscannevertheless
exhibit nematic order. The following three sections then focus on dramatic realizations of these
phases in quantum Hall systems, Sr Ru O and high temperature superconductors. We conclude
with an outlook on future directions with an emphasis on new systems that may exhibit nematic
order and open questions.
2 General Theoretical Considerations
2.1 Definitions
We use the term electron nematic to denote an electron fluid that spontaneously breaks a symme-
try of the underlying Hamiltonian which interchanges two axes of the system. In its pure form, a
nematic phase does not spontaneously break inversion symmetry, time reversal symmetry, or trans-
lational symmetry. However, we sometimes use the term when one of those additional symmetries
4 Fradkin, Kivelson, Lawler, Eisenstein & Mackenzie
is explicitly broken. For instance, we talk about nematic phases in the presence of an applied
magnetic field that explicitly breaks time reversal symmetry. That the nematic phase is a fluid
implies that it is conducting (metallic) or superconducting.
In the simple case of a crystal with a four-fold rotational symmetry, the nematic phase breaks
the C symmetry to a residual C . A nematic phase can also occur when reflection symmetry
through a plane is spontaneously broken. Since the spatial symmetries of a crystal are discrete,
this nematic phase always leads to a two-fold degenerate ground-state, and hence it is sometimes
referred to as an Ising nematic. In some cases, however, crystal field effects are weak and the
system may have an approximate continuous rotational symmetry. In two dimensions or quasi-2D
systems, the nematic state then breaks a continuous rotational symmetry, C , to C ; this we refer
to as an XY-nematic phase. For instance, since the full rotational symmetry of electrons near
the Γ point in a semiconductor is only broken by higher order corrections to the effective mass
approximation, nematic phases in such circumstances (including the quantum Hall nematic) are
likelytobeapproximatelyXYnematics. Forsystemswithfullrotationalsymmetry, itisreasonable
toconsidermorecomplexpatternsofrotationsymmetrybreaking,suchasanelectronhexaticphase
which would break C to C .
As is so often the case, there are many ways of looking at a given pattern of broken symmetry,
with different names associated with different presumptions concerning the underlying physics. In
this case, transitions in which the point group symmetry of a crystal alters have been known for
decades. A metal that undergoes a transition from a tetragonal to an orthorhombic or from an
orthorhombictoamonocliniccrystalstructurehasundergoneanematictransitionaccordingtothe
above definition. In many cases, when the transition is driven largely by structural forces having
little to do with the low energy electronic degrees of freedom, there is no insight to be drawn from
the electronic liquid crystalline perspective. However, when the driving force for the symmetry
change comes from interesting electronic physics, and especially where the effects of the symmetry
breaking are much more pronounced on the electronic structure than on the crystalline structure,
the liquid crystalline perspective is appropriate. Nevertheless, symmetry breaking in the electron
fluid necessarily implies symmetry breaking in the crystal structure and vice versa.
2.2 Symmetry Considerations
Many features of the physics of the nematic phase are dictated by symmetry. In most cases in
whichelectronnematicphasesarise, theLandautheoryadmitsonlyeven-orderinvariants, andthus
whether the transition is continuous or discontinuous involves microscopic considerations. Clearly,
the transition to an Ising nematic phase, if continuous, is in the Ising universality class whereas
for an XY-nematic, it is XY-like, e.g. the transition is Kosterliz-Thouless-like in two dimensions.
In the ordered phase, an XY-nematic will possess a Goldstone mode associated with the broken
symmetry.
The order parameter of a nematic phase is properly represented as a traceless symmetric tensor,
N . Thus any measurable traceless symmetric tensor physical property can represent N . As
an example, consider the case in which the nematic order is associated with the breaking of C
rotational symmetry in the x-y plane. (For a 2D system, this is just the plane of the system,
whereas for a 3D non-cubic crystal, this is an appropriately chosen symmetry plane.) In this case,
Nematic Fermi Fluids in Condensed Matter Physics 5
choosing x and y to be the principle axes of the nematic phase, possible order parameters are:
ρ xx −ρ yy S(Q(cid:126))−S(Q(cid:126)(cid:48)) (cid:104)(cid:126)σ R(cid:126) ·(cid:126)σ R(cid:126)+xˆ (cid:105)−(cid:104)(cid:126)σ R(cid:126) ·(cid:126)σ R(cid:126)+yˆ (cid:105)
N = or N = or N = (1)
S(Q(cid:126))+S(Q(cid:126)(cid:48)) (cid:104)(cid:126)σ
R(cid:126)
(cid:105)+(cid:104)(cid:126)σ
R(cid:126)
where ρ is the resistivity tensor, S(Q(cid:126)) is a convenient structure factor with Q(cid:126) = Qxˆ and Q(cid:126)(cid:48) = Qyˆ
being any symmetry-related vectors along the symmetry axes, and (cid:126)σ is a spin operator on site
R(cid:126)
R(cid:126), and N ≡ Nδ [δ − δ ]. Other possible definitions of the nematic order parameter can
ab ab a,x a,y
be constructed by analogy with these. In all cases, the order parameter is identically zero in the
symmetric phase and non-zero in the nematic phase. It is also sometimes convenient to think of
the nematic order parameter as a headless vector pointing parallel or antiparallel to the preferred
axis. So long as this vector lies in a fixed plane of the crystal, its direction can be specified by a
single azimuthal angle, θ which is defined mod π, since it is a headless vector.
In real-world situations, it is not possible to ignore the role of quenched disorder. Because the
nematicphaseinvolvesabrokenspatialsymmetry, thedegeneracybetweenthetwopossibleground
states is always lifted by disorder. In the equivalent Ising or XY model, this means that disorder
appears as a random field, that is, it produces a term in the effective Hamiltonian of the form
H = d(cid:126)r Tr[ h((cid:126)r)N((cid:126)r) ] (2)
wherehisaquenched,randomtensorquantitywithzeromeanwhichreflectsthelocalconfiguration
of the disorder. Note that the trace of h (which represents the scalar disorder) does not couple
to the nematic order. In more physical terms the value of the disorder potential at a given point
in space does not define a preferred direction, and thus does not serve to pin the nematic order.
However, in a patch large enough that the disorder potential varies substantially, a preferred axis
can be defined in terms of appropriate spatial derivatives of the disorder potential. This means
that smoothly varying disorder potentials, for which h ((cid:126)r) ∝ ∂ ∂ V((cid:126)r), couple relatively weakly
to nematic order.
Nonetheless, once there is any random field at all, the consequences are qualitatively important,
as can be seen from the precise analogy implied by Eq. 2 and the random-field Ising model or
the random-field XY model. For an XY nematic in D < 4 and for an Ising nematic in D ≤ 2,
no macroscopic symmetry breaking can occur in the presence of randomness, no matter how weak
the coupling to the nematic order. Whereas for an Ising nematic in 3D, macroscopic symmetry
breaking survives to a critical disorder strength, if the system is quasi 2D (as is typically the case in
the materials that have shown tendencies to nematic order to date), the critical disorder strength is
parametrically small. Moreover, in the absence of symmetry breaking, one generally expects that
the phase transition found in the absence of disorder will be rounded, leaving no precise criterion
to distinguish the two phases.
The absence of spontaneous nematic symmetry breaking in the presence of disorder makes the
identification of electron nematic phases intrinsically difficult. One solution is to look for nematic
symmetry breaking using some form of local probe: There is a length scale, ξ , which charac-
terizes the size of nematic domains and which diverges as the strength of the random field tends
to zero. Any probe that is sensitive to correlations at shorter length scales than ξ will see
symmetrybreakingeffectsthatareuntaintedbythequenchedrandomness. Moreover, inveryclean
6 Fradkin, Kivelson, Lawler, Eisenstein & Mackenzie
samples, the local pinning of the nematic domains is very weak and, hence, a substantial degree of
nematic order can be induced by the application of a relatively weak applied symmetry breaking
field (i.e. by the addition of a uniform component of h). Thus, an anomalously large response to a
small symmetry breaking field that onsets below a well defined crossover temperature, T∗ (roughly
equal to the transition temperature in the absence of disorder), is also a possible way to detect a
nematic phase. An attractive approach that is only beginning to be exploited [25,26] is to look for
characteristic dynamical (e.g. noise) signatures of the presence of pinned domains; again, where
there is a nematic phase, then for weak enough disorder, glassy signatures of the presence of large
nematic domains should onset fairly sharply below a well defined crossover temperature, T∗.
2.3 Mechanism of electron nematic formation
Whilethe symmetry-relatedfeaturesof thenematic phase arethoroughlydiscussed inthestandard
statistical mechanics literature, microscopic features of the nematic state are much more compli-
cated, difficult to treat theoretically, and dependent on details of the material in question. We
cover this below where we discuss specific realizations of the nematic state. However, there is a
general issue that we do address here: the mechanisms by which point-like shapeless electrons form
a nematic phase.
Nematic fluids can be visualized from either a strong coupling or a weak coupling perspective
(see Figure 1). From the strong coupling perspective, one views a nematic as a partially melted
solid. Specifically, a striped or smectic state can arise in various ways, and if it melts in such a
way that the translational symmetry is restored but the orientation symmetry remains broken, the
result is a nematic state. Under certain circumstances, the thermal melting of a stripe state to
form a nematic fluid is readily understood theoretically [9,29,18,30,31] and, indeed, the resulting
description is similar to the theory of the nearly smectic nematic fluid that has been developed in
the context of complex classical fluids [2,32]. Within this perspective, the nematic state arises from
theproliferationofdislocations,thetopologicaldefectsofthestripestate. Thiscantakeplaceeither
via a thermal phase transition (as in the standard classical case) or as a quantum phase transition.
Whereas the thermal phase transition is well understood [32,2], the theory of the quantum smectic-
nematic phase transition by a dislocation proliferation mechanism is largely an open problem. Two
notable exceptions are the work of Zaanen et al. [31] who studied this phase transition in an
effectively insulating system, and the work of Wexler & Dorsey [33] who estimated the core energy
ofthedislocationsofastripequantumHallphase. Nevertheless,themicroscopic(orposition-space)
pictureofthequantumnematicphasethatresultsconsistsofasystemofstripesegments,theanalog
of nematogens, whose typical size is the mean separation between dislocations. The system is in a
nematic state if the nematogens exhibit long range orientational order on a macroscopic scale[8,9].
However,sincetheunderlyingdegreesoffreedomaretheelectronsfromwhichthesenano-structures
form, the electron nematic is typically an anisotropic metal. Similarly, nematic order can also arise
from thermal or quantum melting a frustrated quantum antiferromagnet [34,35,36].
An alternative picture of the nematic state (and of the mechanisms that may give rise to it)
can be gleaned from a Fermi-liquid-like perspective. In this momentum space picture one begins
with a metallic state consisting of a system of fermions with a Fermi surface (FS) and well defined
quasiparticles (QP). In the absence of any sort of symmetry breaking the shape of the FS reflects
Nematic Fermi Fluids in Condensed Matter Physics 7
the underlying symmetries of the system. There is a classic result due to Pomeranchuk [37] that
shows that a Fermi liquid is thermodynamically stable provided none of the Landau parameters
is negative and of large enough magnitude to overcome the stabilizing effects of Fermi pressure.
When these conditions are violated a thermodynamic (Pomeranchuk) instability occurs and the
system must undergo a quantum phase transition to a state in which the symmetries of the Fermi
liquid state are lowered [27]. If the instability takes place in the spin-singlet channel, the result
is that the FS spontaneously distorts. The shape of the FS in the stable broken symmetry phase
depends on the angular momentum channel in which the instability takes place, on details of the
quasiparticle dispersion relation, and on the many-body interactions (all of which are irrelevant to
the physics of the Landau Fermi liquid). In its simplest version, the Pomeranchuk instability is a
quantum phase transition in a 2D Fermi system between a Fermi liquid with a circular FS and a
nematic Fermi fluid in which the FS has a quadrupolar distortion and hence looks like an ellipse.
From the FS viewpoint, it is more straightforward to consider the nematic phase in terms of
the anomalous expectation value of a fermion bilinear in the particle-hole channel, rather than the
order parameters in Eq. 1. For instance, in a rotationally invariant 2D system, we can define a
Fermi surface distortion in a given angular momentum channel, (cid:96) ≥ 1, in terms of a complex order
parameter N :
(cid:126)k
where n((cid:126)k) = (cid:104)ψ†((cid:126)k)ψ((cid:126)k)(cid:105) is the expectation value of the occupation number for wavevector(cid:126)k and
θ((cid:126)k) is the polar angle defined by(cid:126)k. One can define similar order parameters in 3D, labelled by the
orbital angular momentum quantum numbers ((cid:96),m) [38]. In the isotropic (Landau) phase N = 0
by symmetry. The nematic order parameter corresponds to (cid:96) = 2 (i.e. a quadrupolar distortion).
Clearly,theseparticle-holecondensatesareinsomewayssimilartotheparticle-particlecondensates
found in anisotropic superfluids, e.g. the p-wave superfluid 3He or the d-wave superconducting
cuprates. Indeed,Keeetalrecentlynotedtheexistenceofaunitarytransformationrelatingnematic
order and d-wave superconductivity [39]. Similar transformations relate d-wave superconductivity
to either d-density wave order [22], or antiferromagnetism [40].
Other, still more exotic Pomeranchuk phases are also possible. The (cid:96) = 3 state breaks parity
and time-reversal symmetry, which makes it a continuum version of an orbital current loop phase
[41,42]. An (cid:96) = 6 condensate corresponds to a hexatic phase. If the instability occurs in a spin-
triplet channel, phases that break both rotational invariance either in spin or in real space or both
can occur. Examples of the latter are the nematic-spin-nematic phase [10] and its generalizations
[21]. In the spin triplet channel the QP’s are subject to an effective (and generally large) effective
spin-orbit interaction resulting from the nature of the ordered state (and not from atomic physics).
For a lattice system, the FS in the nematic state breaks the point-group symmetry. The relevant
fermion bilinear order parameters are essentially an anisotropic component of the fermion kinetic
energy. Severaldetailedmicroscopicstudiesofthemechanismofformationofanematicphasehave
been carried out in the context of simple lattice models. A nematic phase has been shown [43] to
be the ground state of the (three band) Emery model of the cuprates, in a carefully constructed
strong coupling limit and close to half-filling. A variety of lattice models have been studied, and
have been shown to have nematic phases by means of perturbative approaches (and in some cases
8 Fradkin, Kivelson, Lawler, Eisenstein & Mackenzie
mean field theory) leading to a Pomeranchuk mechanism [28,44,45,46,47,48,49,50,51,52,53,54].
With the exception of systems near a van Hove singularity (vHs), the nematic quantum phase
transition is generally found at some finite value of a coupling constant (as in the Stoner theory
of ferromagnetism), and it is typically found to be first order (although fluctuations can turn
these transitions continuous [55]). Although Hartree-Fock-type theories are not reliable in strong
correlation regimes, they are useful in that they yield a simple and clear picture of the nematic
phase.
The most salient results from these theories of the isotropic (Fermi liquid) quantum nematic
phase transition include the following:
1. The anisotropic nature of the nematic ground state leads to a transport anisotropy which is
tuned by the magnitude of the order parameter; it becomes stronger deeper in the nematic
phase.
2. At the nematic quantum critical point the collective modes are strongly (Landau) over-
damped, with dynamic quantum critical exponent z = 3. In continuum systems, but not
in lattice systems, the Goldstone modes continue to be similarly overdamped throughout the
nematic phase, except for propagation along two symmetry determined directions where they
are underdamped. Where the collective modes are overdamped, they modify the leading low
T behavior of the specific heat. In two dimensions, this contribution is found to scale as T2/3.
(A recent reexamination of the quantum critical behavior at the nematic transition is given
in References [56] and [57].) In 3D the continuum model, the nematic phase is [27] a marginal
Fermi liquid [58], and the specific heat scales at T lnT [59].
3. Lattice effects generally gap the Goldstone modes, thereby suppressing the non-Fermi liquid
behavior in the nematic ordered phase at very low energies. Perturbative renormalization
group methods show [60] that at the quantum phase transition, lattice anisotropies are ir-
relevant (although quantities such as quasiparticle rates are strongly anisotropic [61]), thus
restoring the non-Fermi liquid behavior of the continuum models sufficiently close to the
transition.
4. PerturbativeapproachespredictastrongbroadeningoftheQPexcitationsthatintwodimen-
sions acquire a decay rate Σ(cid:48)(cid:48)(ω) ∼ ω2/3, strong enough to wipe out the conventional QP pole
oftheLandautheory. Thesameapproaches,extendedtothenematicphaseinthecontinuum,
result in a non-Fermi liquid phase with a strongly anisotropic Σ(cid:48)(cid:48)((cid:126)k,ω) in momentum space:
It has the same singular frequency dependence as at the quantum critical point except when
(cid:126)k is directed along a principle axis of the nematic state, where the QP’s are still well defined.
In contrast, in the nematic phase of lattice models at very low temperatures and frequencies,
anisotropic Fermi liquid behavior is recovered below a low energy scale set by the magnitude
of the crystal fields. Whereas all approaches confirm the breakdown of Fermi liquid theory
over the entire Fermi surface at the quantum critical point, and for all but isolated points
in the continuum nematic phase, the (non-perturbative) higher dimensional bosonization ap-
proach predicts a still more drastic destruction of the quasiparticles [62], leading to a form
of local quantum criticality [63,64]. It is worth to note that there are conflicting results on
this subject. Chubukov et al. [65] have argued that in itinerant quantum critical systems
Σ(cid:48)(cid:48) ∼ ω2/3 holds to all orders in perturbation theory. (See, however, the results of Reference
Nematic Fermi Fluids in Condensed Matter Physics 9
[57]).
5. Deepinthenematicphase, theelectronnematicmaysubsequentlyundergofurthersymmetry
breaking transition, such as to a smectic (stripe) phase. This quantum phase transition is
[29] a quantum mechanical analog of the McMillan-deGennes nematic-smectic transition of
classical liquid crystals [1,2]. A signature of the vicinity of such a transition is the existence
of (generally incommensurate) low energy collective modes associated with various density
wave states: a fluctuating stripe state [10].
3 The Quantum Hall Nematic Phase
Particularly striking evidence for the existence of an electron nematic phase comes from ultra-high
mobility two-dimensional electron systems (2DES) in GaAs/GaAlAs heterostructures [3,4]. Such
systemsareofcoursebestknownfortheirdisplayofthefractionalquantizedHall(FQH)effectwhen
a large magnetic field is applied perpendicular to the 2D plane. Unlike the FQH states which are
primarily confined to the lowest Landau level, the nematic phases appear when the Fermi level lies
near the middle of the third and higher Landau levels. Additional interesting non-FQH collective
phases also exist in these higher Landau levels, but they are not discussed here.
3.1 Transport Anisotropy
Figure 2 shows typical low temperature magneto-resistance data from a high mobility (µ ∼ 107
cm2/Vs) 2DES sample with a sheet density of approximately n = 2.7×1011 cm−2. The sample
itself is a square chip, 5 mm on a side, cleaved from a larger (cid:104)001(cid:105)-oriented GaAs wafer upon which
theepilayersneededtoestablishthe2DESweregrownbymolecularbeamepitaxy. DiffusedIndium
ohmic contacts are positioned at the corners and side midpoints of the square, as shown in the inset
diagrams. For the data shown in Figure 2 the magnetic field B is perpendicular to the 2D plane.
The Landau level filling fraction ν is determined by the 2D density n and the spin-resolved level
degeneracy eB/h. For example, ν = nh/eB = 4 at B ≈ 2.7 T. At higher magnetic fields the Fermi
level lies in either the ground (N = 0) or first excited (N = 1) Landau level while at lower fields
the Fermi level lies in the third (N = 2) or higher Landau level. The varying Landau level index
N is shown in the figure.
The two traces, dashed and solid, shown in Figure 2 were taken during the same cool-down from
room temperature. The only difference between them is the mean direction of the current flow.
As the insets to the figure suggest, the current is driven between opposing mid-point contacts on
the chip. For the solid trace the mean current flow direction is along the (cid:104)110(cid:105) crystallographic
direction whereas for the dashed trace it is along (cid:104)110(cid:105). The associated voltage drops are measured
between corner contacts as shown in the insets. Remarkably, the resistances measured in these
two orthogonal directions differ enormously at certain magnetic fields and yet are nearly equal at
others. In fact, the anisotropy shown in Figure 2 is centered at half filling of several N ≥ 2 Landau
levels. At ν = 9/2 in the N = 2 Landau level the two resistances differ by a factor of approximately
100. Substantial anisotropy is also observed at ν = 11/2, 13/2, and 15/2, and a few higher half-odd
integerfillingfactorsbeforedisappearingathigherν inthelowfieldsemiclassicalregime. Notethat
no significant anisotropy is evident at ν = 5/2 and 7/2 in the N = 1 Landau level. Interestingly, if
10 Fradkin, Kivelson, Lawler, Eisenstein & Mackenzie
the magnetic field is tilted away from perpendicular to the 2D plane, the otherwise isotropic FQHE
states at ν = 5/2 and 7/2 are destroyed and replaced by compressible anisotropic states [66,67].
Apparently, in a perpendicular field an electron nematic phase is only slightly higher in energy
than these incompressible FQHE states and an in-plane field component can tip the balance. No
analogous effect has been found anywhere in the N = 0 Landau level. [Nematic or hexatic versions
of the FQH states may also exist, and were proposed sometime ago [68,69], but have not yet been
observed.] Though not shown in the figure, no evidence for any anisotropic states has been found
within the N = 0 lowest Landau level.
The anisotropy shown in Figure 2 subsides rapidly with increasing temperature and is essentially
absentaboveaboutT = 150mK.Figure3showsthetemperaturedependenceofthetworesistances
at ν = 9/2 in two samples with different densities. In both cases the anisotropy turns on rapidly
at low temperatures. Both samples also display a small resistive anisotropy (albeit of different
signs) at high temperature. This effect, which is largely independent of temperature and magnetic
field, is commonly observed in GaAs/AlGaAs heterostructure samples and is generally attributed
either to small misalignments of the contacts or to large scale density inhomogeneities. It is readily
distinguished from the sharply temperature and filling factor dependent anisotropy revealed in
Figure 2 and Figure 3.
3.2 Early Theory
Hartree-Fock analyses of 2D electrons in high Landau levels by Koulakov at al. [71,72] and by
Moessner & Chalker [73], found ground states with stripe order, unidirectional CDW states, due to
the softening of the short range Coulomb interaction by the nodes of the electron wave functions
in excited Landau levels. For example, at ν = 9/2 the system separates into equal width stripes
of ν = 4 and ν = 5. Since the long-range part of the interaction is unaffected by the nodes, a
maximum length scale λ for the phase separation is imposed, and calculations suggest that
λ ∼ R , the classical cyclotron radius. At ν = 9/2 in typical samples, λ ∼ 100 nm.
In remarkable agreement with the subsequent experiments, these analyses [71,72] predicted that
CDW states were favored in a range around half filling in the third and higher Landau level (i.e. at
ν = 9/2, 11/2, etc.). Quantum fluctuations in the ground and first excited Landau levels destroy
CDW orderand leadto uniform density liquid groundstates. Indeed, evenin theN = 2and higher
Landau levels quantum and thermal fluctuations can disrupt the long-range translational order of
the CDWs at half-filling and render the system a nematic liquid crystal with short-ranged stripe
order and long or quasi-long ranged orientational order [9,74]. Far enough away from half filling,
stripe-like order breaks down and crystalline bubble phases develop in the flanks of the Landau
levels. There is strong experimental evidence for these insulating bubble phases [70].
Not surprisingly, transport in a striped system is expected to be highly anisotropic, with the
quantum Hall edge state conductivity along the stripes greatly exceeding the hopping conductivity
between stripes [75,76]. Given that experimentally the hard transport direction lies along (cid:104)110(cid:105),
we conclude that the stripes tend to lie along (cid:104)110(cid:105).
Nematic Fermi Fluids in Condensed Matter Physics 11
3.3 Orientational Pinning
The anisotropy of the resistance observed at ν = 9/2, 11/2, etc. is consistently oriented relative
to the crystalline axes: The “hard” direction is almost always along (cid:104)110(cid:105). [In some samples with
very high electron density the hard direction switches to (cid:104)110(cid:105)(see J. Zhu et al. [77]).] Ultimately,
there must exist a native symmetry breaking field within the semiconductor heterostructure that
is responsible for this consistent orientation of the resistive anisotropy. Remarkably, after a decade
of research, this symmetry breaker has not been identified. The crystal structure of bulk GaAs
requires 4-fold symmetry (e.g. cos(4φ), with φ measured relative to, say, the (cid:104)110(cid:105) direction) for
the band structure of electrons confined to a (cid:104)001(cid:105)-plane. However, as Kroemer first noted [78], the
2DES lies close to one surface of a finite crystal and thus inversion symmetry is broken. Although
this opens the door to the needed 2-fold (e.g. cos(2φ)) symmetry breaker, it does not identify it.
It has, however, turned out to be possible to estimate the strength of the ordering potential.
Early experiments [66,67] showed that the application of a weak magnetic field component in the
2Dplanecouldre-orienttheanisotropyaxes. Comparisonwithdetailedcalculations[79,80]revealed
that the orientational energy associated with the native symmetry breaking field is on the order of
1 mK per electron. Interestingly, additional experiments [81] demonstrated that in addition to a
native cos(2φ) symmetry breaking potential, there is also an even larger cos(4φ) potential, possibly
arising from the piezoelectricity of GaAs [82,83].
3.4 Nematic to Isotropic Transition
TheearlyHartree-FocktheoriesofCDWformationinhighLandaulevelsestimatedthattheCDWs
wouldformattemperaturesofafewKelvin[71,72]. Thisismorethananorderofmagnitudelarger
thanthetypically100mKscalewhereresistiveanisotropybeginstobecomepronouncedatν = 9/2.
Althoughdisorderinthe2Dsystemmightaccountforsomeofthissuppression(inamannersimilar
to the reduction of FQH energy gaps), a more interesting possibility is that local stripe order may
appear at quite high temperatures within small domains but thermal fluctuations prevent long
range orientational order of those domains. In this view, the resistive transition at approximately
100mKisanalogoustoanisotropictonematicphasetransitioninclassicalliquidcrystals[9,74,33].
To examine this question, Cooper et al. [84] studied the temperature dependence of the resistive
anisotropy at ν = 9/2 in the presence of a large in-plane magnetic field. Since an in-plane was
already known to produce an orienting potential [79,80], it is to be expected that if fluctuating
stripedomainsexistattemperaturesabove100mKtheparallelfieldwouldorderthemandthereby
induce resistive anisotropy at elevated temperatures.
In effect, this is precisely what Cooper et al. [84] observed. Figure 4(a) shows the temperature
dependenceoftheresistivity.Theresistivitymustbecomputedfromthemeasuredresistancetaking
into account geometric effects pointed out by S. Simon[85]. ρ at ν = 9/2 in the hard (cid:104)110(cid:105)
direction for various in-plane magnetic fields applied along that same direction. In-plane fields
applied along the (cid:104)110(cid:105) direction do not alter the orientation of the resistive anisotropy; along
(cid:104)110(cid:105) they interchange the hard and easy transport directions, but produce the same expansion of
the temperature scale of the anisotropy found for fields along (cid:104)110(cid:105) [84]. As observed previously,
withnoin-planefieldapplied(solidcirclesinFigure4(a))ρ issmallandessentiallytemperature
independent above about 100 mK while at lower temperatures it rises rapidly. Adding an in-plane
12 Fradkin, Kivelson, Lawler, Eisenstein & Mackenzie
field gradually alters this temperature dependence, extending it to higher and higher temperatures.
With B = 9.2 T applied along (cid:104)110(cid:105) ρ remains quite substantial out to beyond 500 mK.
Meanwhile, since the resistivity in the easy direction shows relatively little dependence upon the
in-planefield[84]wecanconcludethatthein-planefieldhasdramaticallyincreasedthetemperature
range over which resistive anisotropy exists at ν = 9/2. This result strongly supports the notion
that local stripe domains exist at temperatures above 100 mK and that an in-plane field is merely
orienting them. Importantly, in-plane field experiments performed at ν = 3/2 in the lowest Landau
level show no significant anisotropy at any similar temperature or in-plane field (K.B. Cooper,
J.P Eisenstein, unpublished manuscript). This discounts the idea that the in-plane field is itself
creating a significant anisotropy that does not exist in the absence of the field.
The in-plane field behavior discussed here is reminiscent of how a ferromagnet responds to an
externalmagneticfield. Intheabsenceoftheexternalfieldthespinsintheferromagnetorderspon-
taneously at the Curie temperature. Above the Curie point the system is an ordinary paramagnet.
Applying a substantial magnetic field broadens the ferromagnetic transition, producing significant
magnetization above the Curie point. Following Fradkin et al. [74], Cooper et al. [84] performed
Monte Carlo calculations on a classical 2D XY model with a varying h ∼ cos(2φ) symmetry break-
ingpotential. Asobservedpreviously[74],suchamodelcansimulatethehighLandaulevelresistive
anisotropy observed in purely perpendicular fields reasonably well. Figure 4(b) demonstrates that
increasing the cos(2φ) term (which is assumed to be closely related to the in-plane magnetic field
in the actual experiments) substantially extends the range over which the 2D XY magnetization is
large. The comparison of Figure 4(a) and Figure 4(b) is striking.
4 Metamagnetism and nematicity in the bilayer ruthenate Sr Ru O
4.1 Basic properties and electronic structure
The bilayer ruthenate metal Sr Ru O is a member of the Ruddlesden-Popper series of layered
ruthenates that includes the itinerant ferromagnets SrRuO [86] and Sr Ru O [87] and the un-
conventional superconductor Sr RuO [88]. It is strongly two-dimensional, and can be thought of
as a stack of weakly coupled bilayers, giving high conductivity in the ab plane. Although it does
not order magnetically in ambient conditions, Sr Ru O is an enhanced paramagnet with a Wilson
ratio of order 10 [89]; charge and magnetic degrees of freedom are strongly coupled.
ThecoreexperimentalevidencefornematicfluidbehaviorinSr Ru O isshowninFigure5. Asa
functionofmagneticfieldappliedparalleltothecaxis(i.e. perpendiculartotheconductinglayers),
thematerialdisplaysastandardmetallicmagnetoresistanceuptoapproximately7.5Twhereitdips
slightly before rising steeply at 7.8 T and then falling again at 8.1 T. For the field applied in this
high symmetry direction the measured in-plane resistivity remains four-fold symmetric throughout
(Figure 5a). However, if the sample is tilted slightly to provide an in-plane field component,
the resistivity becomes strongly anisotropic, with two-fold symmetry (Figure 5b). The resistively
defined order parameter of Eq. 2.1 is shown in Figure 5c, and is consistent with the behavior of a
second-order phase transition in an external field conjugate to its order parameter.
The natural interpretation of these data is that Sr Ru O hosts a symmetry broken nematic
phase between 7.8 T and 8.1 T, with domain formation masking the anisotropy when the field is
Nematic Fermi Fluids in Condensed Matter Physics 13
perpendiculartotheconductingplanes. Providinganin-planefieldcomponentalignsthesedomains
and reveals the full effects of the symmetry breaking.
As described in Reference [5], the phenomenology of nematic transport in Sr Ru O is strik-
ingly similar to that seen in the high purity 2DES discussed in Section 3 above, even though the
underlying physics of the two systems appears to differ quite substantially. Experimentally, they
complement each other because each offers the opportunity to perform different classes of exper-
iment. Rather than repeat the discussion of transport given above, we will concentrate here on
the new experiments that are accessible in Sr Ru O , notably bulk thermodynamics and surface
spectroscopies.
The electronic structure of Sr Ru O is complicated, with many bands crossing the Fermi level.
The experimental Fermi surface as determined by angle-resolved photoemission [90], is similar to
the results of LDA calculations[91]. As discussed by several authors [91,90,51,92], much of the
complexity results from an analysis that uses the relatively simple Fermi surface of the single layer
material Sr RuO [93], taking into account bilayer coupling and a 2− 2 reconstruction. The
symmetry lowering due to the reconstruction allows for a small pocket, centered on Γ, with Ru
4d character, but this is not thought to have much influence on the metamagnetic or nematic
physics. The important sheets have strong Ru 4d character (α and α ) or mixed 4d
xz,yz 1 2 xz,yz
and 4d character (β, γ , γ ), with spin-orbit coupling also playing a role [51]. Of particular
significance to what follows are vHs centered on the tiny γ pockets. The γ sheet could not be
definitely determined to cross the Fermi level at the resolution of the photoemission study, but
subsequent de Haas-van Alphen work gives evidence that it does [92]. The de Haas-van Alphen
measurementsalsoconfirmthatthephotoemissionworkinSr Ru O givesagenuinerepresentation
ofthebulkproperties,sincethereisgoodagreementbetweenthetwoprobesconcerningbothpocket
areas and quasiparticle effective masses.
4.2 Empirical link between metamagnetism and nematic phase formation
The coupling between spin and charge degrees of freedom in Sr Ru O gives a natural link be-
tween nematicity and metamagnetism. For magnetic fields applied parallel to the c axis, samples
with mean free paths of 300 ˚A have a single metamagnetic transition centered on approximately
7.7 T [96] and show no macroscopic nematicity. If the purity is increased by an order of magni-
tude, this transition splits into three, as shown in Figure 6a. The rise in moment at 7.5 T is a
crossover, but those at 7.8 and 8.1 T are first order phase transitions corresponding to the sharp
featuresinresistivityshowninFigure5[97]. Combiningresultsfromtransport, thermalexpansion,
magnetostriction, a.c. susceptibility and magnetization allowed Grigera and co-workers to propose
the existence of a fully bounded thermodynamic phase, as shown in Figure 6b [95]. A series of
subsequent measurements have established the following key facts:
1. Magnetocaloric and specific heat measurements show that all the boundaries in Figure 6b
represent transitions between equilibrium thermodynamic phases [94].
2. The transitions shown in Figure 6 are between metallic fluid phases. This is confirmed both
by transport [97,95,5] and, more recently, quantum oscillation measurements [98]. The latter
show that oscillations can be seen in each of the field ranges below, within and above the
enclosed phase.
14 Fradkin, Kivelson, Lawler, Eisenstein & Mackenzie
3. In common with most itinerant metamagnets, there is a large magnetostriction, but within
the resolution of elastic neutron scattering it is isotropic in the plane [5]. This rules out the
measured transport anisotropy being driven by a large structural change.
4. Unusually,theentropywithinthephaseishigherthanthatoftheadjacentfluids. Specifically,
theentropyjumpsupacrossthefirst-orderphasetransitionat7.8Tbeforefallingagainacross
that at 8.1 T.
5. The criterion for the observation of bulk nematicity is a mean free path of ∼ 1000 ˚A or more.
Fermi velocities in Sr Ru O lie in the range 10 – 50 km/s [90,99]. Thus, this corresponds
to a scattering rate of order 0.5 – 3 K, spanning the observed T of 1.2 K. This disorder
sensitivity is addressed in Reference [100] (though note the discussion in Section 2.2).
4.3 Angle dependent properties and the importance of spin-orbit coupling
Although spin-orbit coupling in a ruthenate metal is expected to be weaker than that in, for
example, a heavy-fermion system, it has been shown to play a measurable role in determining the
electronic structure in Sr RuO [101,102]. Its importance in Sr Ru O is seen in the variation of
the metamagnetic transition scale from ∼ 8 T to ∼ 5 T for applied fields (cid:107) c and (cid:107) ab respectively
[96]. In fact, rotation of the field between these two limits acts as a control parameter for the
metamagnetism and nematicity, as shown first for slightly disordered samples [103] and later for
high purity samples displaying macroscopic nematicity [104,5].
The low temperature angle-dependent (the angle of the magnetic field with the c-axis) phase
diagram of ultra-pure Sr Ru O was presented in Reference [103]. As the angle increases, the
regioninthefield-angleplaneinwhichnematictransportisobservedshrinks,remainingboundedby
first-order phase transitions, until they merge into a single transition at approximately 40 degrees.
There is also a second (and much less understood) phase that appears for fields applied near the
ab plane. It seems reasonable to attribute most of this phase richness to spin-orbit coupling, which
will therefore have to be taken properly into account in any full theory of Sr Ru O , (see Reference
[51]).
4.4 Open questions
In closing this section on Sr Ru O , we describe a number of issues that have still to be resolved.
Some of these are specific to the particular situation in this material, whereas others are likely to
apply to other nematic systems as well.
4.4.1 The link to quantum criticality Up to now, theoretical approaches to Sr Ru O
have been mean-field treatments, many stressing the significance of the vHs near the Fermi energy
as a starting point for describing the metamagnetism and the nematicity [105,95,104,106,51,107,
108,109,110].
These vHs are certainly important, but several pieces of experimental evidence point to the need
to go further. First, experiments involving electron doping by substitution of La3+ for Sr2+ are
inconsistent with the hypothesis of a simple rigid band shift of the chemical potential through fixed
density of states peaks, even though the equivalent experiment in Sr RuO is compatible with
a rigid band shift [111,112]. Second, the phase diagram of Sr Ru O outside the metamagnetic
Nematic Fermi Fluids in Condensed Matter Physics 15
region displays a number of transport and thermodynamic signatures of quantum criticality [96,
113,114,115]. This is summarized in the entropy landscape shown in Figure 7a. The entropy peak
seen above the temperature of formation of the nematic phase is fully consistent with the approach
to a quantum critical point. At lower temperatures the peaking becomes sharper but is cut off
with the onset of metamagnetism at 7.5 T. The low temperature behavior can be put on a more
quantitative footing by plotting the field dependence of S/T and C/T (Figure 7b). Below and
(cid:12) (cid:12)−1
above the metamagnetic phase both quantities diverge as (cid:12)(H −H c )/H c(cid:12) . Although vHs exist
in Sr Ru O and have, correctly, been emphasized in the (mean field) theories mentioned above,
neither a simple one- or two-dimensional vHs is capable of capturing a divergence with this power
law.
A definitive interpretation of the thermodynamic data is still lacking. The Hertz-Millis theory
of the metamagnetic quantum critical point [116] predicts a specific heat divergence as (cid:12)(H −
H c )/H c(cid:12) . However, such theories calculate only the quantum critical contribution, whereas the
experimental data are a combination of this and the mean-field contribution from the underlying
density of states structure. Work on relating critical fluctuations of a nematic to the behavior of
Sr Ru O has already been reported [117], and it seems clear that full theories going beyond the
mean-field approximation will eventually be required.
4.4.2 Entropyandspecificheatinthenematicphase TheentropicbehaviorofSr Ru O
is also intriguing within the nematic phase itself. First, the orientation of the first order transition
lines in Figure 6 implies, through the application of the Clausius-Clapeyron law, that the low-
temperature entropy is higher within the nematic phase than in the adjacent fluids. Second, on
cooling into the phase the specific heat shows the anomaly expected of a second order phase tran-
sition but the specific heat C then contains a substantial quadratic correction to the temperature
dependence expected in a Fermi liquid [94]. Neither of these facts is currently understood.
The entropy jump is surprising but not unprecedented. For example, the Pomeranchuk effect in
superfluid 3He is based on the existence of an enclosed phase with a higher entropy than that of
its neighbors. However, in Sr Ru O the entropy jump should also be considered in the context
of the broader entropy landscape. As shown in Figure 7b, the metamagnetic crossover at 7.5 T
appears to cut off a divergence in S/T. Although the entropy rises at the first-order transition into
the nematic phase at 8.1 T, this is still against a background of a large saving of entropy compared
to that which would have been developed had the divergence continued. It is tempting to think of
domains as a source for the entropy rise in the nematic phase, and this possibility still needs to be
investigated further. However, the entropy jump on entering the phase at (7.8 T, 250 mK) (Figure
5b) is quite substantial: 5 mJ/molRuK or about one part in 103 of Rln2. Another quantitative
statement concerns the amount of entropy developed by T . By the maximum T of 1.2 K, S ≈
250 mJ/molRuK, similar to the entropy developed by T in many heavy-fermion superconductors
[118], suggesting a possible entropic criterion for novel phase formation.
4.4.3 The scale of resistive anisotropy Afurtheroutstandingchallengefortheoryisthe
sizeoftheresistiveanisotropy. The‘bare’anisotropyseeninFigure5bisnearlyafactoroftwo, but
it seems unlikely that all bands contribute equally to forming the nematic, thus some background
4-fold conductivity is to be expected. The form of the two resistivity curves then suggests that
more or less all of the extra scattering caused by entering the nematic phase is removed by driving
16 Fradkin, Kivelson, Lawler, Eisenstein & Mackenzie
the current along the easy direction. No weak coupling model involving point scattering is likely to
be able to account for this using reasonable parameters. A phase with T ∼ 1K, i.e. a characteristic
condensation energy of 0.1 meV, is likely describable at the weak-coupling end of the nematic
spectrum as a Pomeranchuk distortion of the Fermi surface. The low characteristic energy means
that this distortion would be expected to be small, and, indeed, the absence of any detectable
orthorhombic lattice distortion confirms this expectation. Even if it became Lifshitz-like due to
the proximity of a vHs, it is hard to see how it could explain such a big anisotropy. Moreover,
quantumoscillationmeasurementsindicatetheexistenceofatleasttwoclosedsheetsinthenematic
phase, and an analysis of their amplitudes indicates an unusual length scale of order 500 nm for the
onset of strong scattering [98]. Taken together, the most natural picture to describe the resistive
behavior seems to be strong scattering from domain walls [119] with a characteristic separation of
approximately 500 nm. Whatever the eventual explanation, the central challenge for theory is a
plausible quantitative estimate of the scale of the scattering.
5 Nematic phases in the cuprates and other interesting materials
Untilnow,wehavefocusedourattentiononthecleanest,clearestofexperimentalexamples,andthe
simplestandmostunambiguousoftheoreticalconsiderations. Inthefinaltwosectionsofthisreview,
we verybrieflyaddress morecomplicated, controversial, butinsome waysevenmoreexciting issues
concerning the occurrence of nematic phases in some of the currently most interesting of materials.
Along with this, we will briefly touch on some of the vexing issues associated with identifying
nematic phases in more usual circumstances in strongly correlated systems, where even relatively
weak quenched disorder obscures most macroscopic manifestations of nematicity, and where the
interplay between nematic order and other forms of order leads to bewildering complexities of the
phase diagram.
5.1 Nematic order in YBa Cu O
Variousstripedphases,whichistosayelectronsmecticphases,havebeenclearlyidentifiedincertain
cuprate superconductors, especially those which are close relatives of La Sr CuO . In contrast,
YBa Cu O is thought to be the cleanest of all the cuprate high temperature superconductors,
and hence the place to study the intrinsic clean limit physics; here the evidence of stripe order is
moresubtle,atbest[10]. However,therehasrecentlyaccumulatedincreasinglycompellingevidence
thatnematicorderonsetsinthismaterialatatemperaturewhich,atleastinunderdopedmaterials,
is well above the superconducting T .
YBa Cu O is orthorhombic, which is both good and bad news if we are interested in deter-
mining whether or not it is nematic: The good news is that the orthorhombicity exerts a symmetry
breaking field which tends to align nematic domains, making it possible to observe macroscopic
anisotropy in various dynamical and thermodynamic properties of de-twinned single crystals. The
bad news is that some degree of macroscopic anisotropy is to be expected as a consequence of
the orthorhombicity itself, unrelated to any interesting correlation effects. The subtleties in the
analysis of experiments, therefore, are associated with the need to distinguish anisotropies that
result directly from the crystalline anisotropy, from those that are associated with the occurrence
Nematic Fermi Fluids in Condensed Matter Physics 17
of a broken symmetry electronic state. Two features of YBa Cu O make this possible. First,
there are no discernible structural changes that occur in the relevant range of temperatures, so
any small and weakly T dependent anisotropies seen at high temperatures can be identified as
the direct consequences of the crystal structure, while any large magnitude, strongly T dependent
enhancement of the anisotropy that occurs below a well defined crossover (transition) temperature,
T , can be plausibly associated with the onset of electron nematic order. (This is much the same
logic as was applied in the analysis of the nematic ordering in the 2DES and in Sr Ru O ). Second,
the crystals become increasingly orthorhombic with increasing doping, i.e. with increasing O con-
centration. Thus, any contrary trend, where the low temperature electronic anisotropy increases
withdecreasingdopingisplausiblyassociatedwithanincreasingtendencytonematicorderinmore
underdoped crystals.
Initial evidence for nematic order came from measurements of resistance anisotropy over a wide
range of temperatures and doping concentrations [6]. More recently, a heroic neutron scattering
study [7] of the low-frequency and quasi-static magnetic structure factor of YBa Cu O with
x = 6.45 (T = 35K) revealed order one anisotropy below a well-defined ordering temperature,
T ∼ 150K. Most recently, a large anisotropy in the Nernst coefficient has been detected [120] over
a broad range of doping from slightly overdoped to very underdoped. The Nernst anisotropy onsets
below a doping dependent crossover temperature which follows the same general qualitative trends
as the famous pseudo-gap temperature. Taken together, these experiments offer strong evidence
that electron nematic order underlies much of the pseudo-gap phase in YBa Cu O .
5.2 Nematic order on the surface of Bi Sr CaCu O
Bi Sr CaCu O apparently always has considerably more disordered than YBa Cu O . How-
2 2 2 8+δ 2 3 6+x
ever, it cleaves at a mirror plane to reveal clean surfaces that have proven to be optimal for various
forms of surface probes. Moreover, there are strong reasons to believe that the surface electronic
structure is representative of that in the bulk. In particular, STM studies of the surface elec-
tronic structure have yielded, among other things, vivid real-space pictures of various forms of
local electronic structure.
Initialstudiesidentified[121,10]anematiccomponenttothesurfaceelectronicstructurethatwas
apparently related to a local tendency toward stripe order with a period near 4 lattice constants.
More recent studies of Bi Sr CaCu O [122] have greatly clarified the nature of this ordering:
There is a clear local tendency toward an electronically inhomogeneous state that strongly breaks
the C symmetry of the unit cell. The local pattern is bond-centered, or equivalently is most
apparentattheOsites. Itisstrongerinmoreunderdopedsamples, althoughitisabsentinsamples
that are sufficiently lightly doped that they are not superconducting. It is glassy order, which is
seen most clearly at energy scales comparable to the gap maximum and somewhat above, making
some form of identification between this nematic order and the pseudo-gap natural. Moreover,
similar patterns have been seen [123] in STM studies of Ca Na CuO Cl (which also has good
surfaces for STM), making it clear that this is a generic property of cuprates.
Because of the glassy character of the nematic order, it is not immediately clear how to best
analyze it. Various algorithms have been proposed [124,10,125] for extracting the character of
the underlying nematic and/or stripe correlations from the sort of glassy correlations that have
18 Fradkin, Kivelson, Lawler, Eisenstein & Mackenzie
been measured. Very recently, an optimal approach has been developed for analyzing nematic
correlations [126], and this approach has been applied to data from underdoped Bi Sr CaCu O .
The analysis leads to the conclusion that there is a reasonably long nematic correlation length, in
excess of 100˚A.
5.3 Nematic order in the Fe-pnictide superconductors
Much as in the cuprates, the high temperature superconducting phase in the Fe-pnictides is gen-
erally derived by doping a non-superconducting antiferromagnetic “parent” material. On doping,
the antiferromagnetism is suppressed and eventually gives way to superconductivity, in some cases
with an intermediate region of coexisting order. Associated with the antiferromagnetism, there is
a small structural distortion with nematic symmetry. (In some of these materials, it is associated
with a tetragonal to orthorhombic transition, and in others with an orthorhombic to monoclinic
transition.) That this distortion should be viewed as a consequence of the development of elec-
tronic correlations, not as a structural artifact, follows from the now well established observation
that it always follows similar trends as the antiferromagnetism, and vanishes at a critical doping
concentration which, depending upon the material, either coincides with or lies close to the critical
concentrationatwhichantiferromagnetismdisappears. Indeed, moregenerally, thestructuraltran-
sition temperature always coincides with, or lies just slightly above the antiferromagnetic ordering
temperature. It thus appears that the structural distortion is a consequence of the development of
an underlying electron nematic phase [127,128,129].
6 Some Future Directions
Therearemanyothercorrelatedelectronicsystemsinwhichnematicordercouldplayarole. Inany
system with orbital multiplicity at the Fermi energy, some form of orbital ordering is natural when
interactionsaresufficientlystrong. SincetheWannierfunctionsassociatedwithsuchbandstypically
transformnon-triviallyintoeachotherunderthepointgroupoperations,anyorbitallyorderedstate
necessarilybreaksthepointgroupsymmetryandhencearenematicstates. Often, orbitallyordered
states also break translational symmetry, but where they do not, orbital ordering and nematic
orderingare, fromabrokensymmetryviewpoint, synonymous. Indeed, thefactthattheruthenates
and the Fe pnictides have such orbital multiplicities is probably one of the contributing factors
in their nematic ordering. Other transition metal oxides, such as the colossal magnetoresistive
manganites, undoubtedly support nematic phases somewhere in their complex phase diagrams. For
instance, nematic order has also been see in the manganite material Bi Ca MnO [130]. It has
beensuggested[42]thatthehiddenorderinURu Si mightbeassociatedwithaformofnematicity,
where the very difficulties of detecting nematic order macroscopically may be responsible for its
hidden nature. The study of the many various ways such states can arise, and their differing effects
on the properties of these materials is clearly a fertile area for future research.
The role of orbital degeneracy in nematic order can produce a different type of nematic state in
a quantum Hall device with a valley degeneracy, such as in AlAs [131] or graphene [132]. Here,
spontaneous valley ferromagnetism can produce a state with a nematic pattern of spatial sym-
metry breaking, but with vanishing dissipation and a quantized Hall conductance – a quantized
Nematic Fermi Fluids in Condensed Matter Physics 19
Hall nematic [133]. Theoretical arguments [9,27,134] have also been put forward suggesting the
possibility of a quantum nematic or a quantum hexatic phase in the 2DES at zero magnetic field
(and no disorder), near the border of the Wigner crystal phase. It has recently been proposed
that generalizations of quantum nematic phases may also occur in ultra-cold dipolar Fermi gases
[38,135,136,137] (atoms or molecules).
A major area in which theoretical progress is desperately needed concerns the relation between
transport properties and nematic order. Clearly, much of the information about nematic phases
comes from transport data. Certain statements about the transport measurements follow from
symmetry. However, beyond this, there has been relatively little systematic study of transport in
a nematic phase [25,16,138]. In particular, under circumstances in which the nematic domain size
(whichatlowT isdeterminedbythecharacterofthequencheddisorder)issmallerthanthenormal
state mean-free path, scattering of quasiparticles from the domain walls is likely to dominate the
transport properties in ways that have not begun to be theoretically explored.
As already indicated, the nematic quantum critical point in disorder free systems is particu-
larly interesting, as the critical fluctuations destroy the Fermi liquid character of the quasiparticle
excitations over the entire Fermi surface. Conceptually, this is one of the few places outside one-
dimensional systems in which the breakdown of Fermi liquid theory can be seen in perturbation
theory. The character of the quantum critical state has already received some serious attention
[27,62,63,139,64], but more exploration of these points is warranted. It would be even more
exciting to study nematic quantum criticality in experiment – for instance, there is some indica-
tion of the existence of an accessible nematic quantum critical point in transport experiments on
La Nd Sr CuO [140].
1.6−x 0.4 x 4
There are even more exotic phases that are close relatives of the nematic phase, such as the
nematic-spin-nematic phase, for which some suggestive [141], but by no means conclusive evidence
canbeadduced. Fromtheperspectivethat“whateverisnotforbiddeniscompulsory,”thesephases
have a right to exist, and we look forward to their identification, possibly in unexpected places, in
the near future.
Disclosure Statement
The authors are not aware of any affiliations, memberships, funding, or financial holdings that
might be perceived as affecting the objectivity of this review.
Acknowledgments
We thank E. Berg, H.-Y. Kee, E.-A. Kim, V. Oganesyan, K. Sun, J. Tranquada, and C. Wu for
great discussions. EF, MJL and SAK thank the Kavli Institute for Theoretical Physics (KITP)
of the University of California Santa Barbara for hospitality under the The Physics of Higher
Temperature Superconductivity program. This work was supported in part by the National Sci-
ence Foundation, under grants DMR 0758462 at the University of Illinois (EF), DMR 0531196
at Stanford University (SAK), PHY05-51164 at KITP (EF, MJL, SAK), and DMR-0070890 and
DMR-0242946 at Caltech (JPE), and by the Office of Science, U.S. Department of Energy, under
contracts DE-FG02-07ER46453 through the Frederick Seitz Materials Research Laboratory at the
20 Fradkin, Kivelson, Lawler, Eisenstein & Mackenzie
UniversityofIllinois(EF),DE-FG02-06ER46287throughtheGeballeLaboratoryofAdvancedMa-
terials at Stanford University (SAK), and DE-FG03-99ER45766 at Caltech (JPE), and by the UK
Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council under grant EP/F044704/1 (APM).
Literature Cited
1. de Gennes P G and Prost J 1993 The Physics of Liquid Crystals (Oxford, UK: Oxford
Sci./Clarendon)
2. Chaikin P M and Lubensky T C 1995 Principles of Condensed Matter Physics (Cambridge,
UK: Cambridge Univ. Press)
3. Lilly M P, Cooper K B, Eisenstein J P, Pfeiffer L N and West K W 1999 Phys. Rev. Lett. 82
4. Du R R, Tsui D C, St¨ormer H L, Pfeiffer L N, Baldwin K W and West K W 1999 Solid State
Comm. 109 389
5. Borzi R A, Grigera S A, Farrell J, Perry R S, Lister S J S, Lee S L, Tennant D A, Maeno Y
and Mackenzie A P 2007 Science 315 214–17
6. Ando Y, Segawa K, Komiya S and Lavrov A N 2002 Phys. Rev. Lett. 88 137005
7. HinkovV,HaugD,Fauqu´eB,BourgesP,SidisY,IvanovA,BernhardC,LinCTandKeimer
B 2008 Science 319 597–600
8. Kivelson S A, Fradkin E and Emery V J 1998 Nature 393 550–53
9. Fradkin E and Kivelson S A 1999 Phys. Rev. B 59 8065–79
10. Kivelson S A, Bindloss I, Fradkin E, Oganesyan V, Tranquada J, Kapitulnik A and Howald
C 2003 Rev. Mod. Phys. 75 1201–41
11. Emery V J and Kivelson S A 1993 Physica C 209 597–621
12. Baym G and Pethick C 1991 Landau Fermi Liquid Theory (New York, NY: John Wiley &
13. Ravenhall D G, Pethick C J and Wilson J R 1983 Phys. Rev. Lett. 50 2066–69
14. Lorenz C P, Ravenhall D G and Pethick C J 1993 Phys. Rev. Lett. 70 379–82
15. Tranquada J M, Sternlieb B J, Axe J D, Nakamura Y and Uchida S 1995 Nature 375 561–63
16. Vojta M 2009 Adv. Phys. 58 564–685
17. Berg E, Fradkin E and Kivelson S A 2009 Phys. Rev. B 79 064515
18. Berg E, Fradkin E and Kivelson S A 2009 Nat. Phys. 5 830–33
19. Berg E, Fradkin E, Kivelson S A and Tranquada J M 2009 New J. Phys. 11 115004
20. Wu C and Zhang S C 2004 Phys. Rev. Lett. 93 036403
21. Wu C J, Sun K, Fradkin E and Zhang S C 2007 Phys. Rev. B 75 115103
22. Chakravarty S, Laughlin R B, Morr D K and Nayak C 2001 Phys. Rev. B 63 094503
23. Varma C M 2005 Philos. Mag. 85 1657–66
24. Varma C M and Zhu L 2006 Phys. Rev. Lett. 96 036405
25. Carlson E W, Dahmen K, Fradkin E and Kivelson S A 2006 Phys. Rev. Lett. 96 097003/1–4
26. Caplan D S, Orlyanchik V, Weissman M B, Van Harlingen D J, Fradkin E, Hinton M and
Lemberger T R 2010 Anomalous Noise in the Pseudogap Regime of YBa Cu O (Phys.
Rev. Lett. in press)
27. Oganesyan V, Kivelson S A and Fradkin E 2001 Phys. Rev. B 64 195109
Nematic Fermi Fluids in Condensed Matter Physics 21
28. Halboth C J and Metzner W 2000 Phys. Rev. Lett. 85 5162–65
29. Sun K, Fregoso B M, Lawler M J and Fradkin E 2008 Phys. Rev. B 78 085124
30. Radzihovsky L and Vishwanath A 2009 Phys. Rev. Lett. 103 010404
31. Zaanen J, Nussinov Z and Mukhin S I 2004 Ann. Phys. 310 181–260
32. Nelson D R and Toner J 1981 Phys. Rev. B 24 363–87
33. Wexler C and Dorsey A T 2001 Phys. Rev. B 64 115312
34. Chandra P, Coleman P and Larkin A 1990 Phys. Rev. Lett. 64 88
35. Capriotti L and Sachdev S 2004 Phys. Rev. Lett. 93 257206
36. Read N and Sachdev S 1991 Phys. Rev. Lett. 66 1773
37. Pomeranchuk I I 1958 Sov. Phys. JETP 8 361
38. Fregoso B M, Sun K, Fradkin E and Lev B L 2009 New J. Phys. 11 103003
39. Kee H Y, Doh H and Grzesiak T 2008 J. Phys. Condens. Matter 76 255248
40. Demler E, Hanke W and Zhang S C 2004 Rev. Mod. Phys. 76 909–74
41. Sun K and Fradkin E 2008 Phys. Rev. B 78 245122
42. Varma C M and Zhu L 2007 Phys. Rev. Lett. 98 177004
43. Kivelson S A, Fradkin E and Geballe T H 2004 Phys. Rev. B 69 144505
44. Hankevych V, Grote I and Wegner F 2002 Phys. Rev. B 66 094516
45. Kee H Y, Kim E H and Chung C H 2003 Phys. Rev. B 68 245109
46. Metzner W, Rohe D and Andergassen S 2003 Phys. Rev. Lett. 91 066402
47. Khavkine I, Chung C H, Oganesyan V and Kee H Y 2004 Phys. Rev. B 70 155110
48. Neumayr A and Metzner W 2003 Phys. Rev. B 67 035112
49. Yamase H, Oganesyan V and Metzner W 2005 Phys. Rev. B 72 035114
50. Kee H Y and Kim Y B 2005 Phys. Rev. B 71 184402
51. Raghu S, Paramekanti A, Kim E A, Borzi R A, Grigera S, Mackenzie A P and Kivelson S A
2009 Phys. Rev. B 79 214402
52. Puetter C M, Rau J G and Kee H Y 2009 Microscopic Route to Nematicity in Sr Ru O
(unpublished) (Preprint arXiv:0909.4545v1)
53. Quintanilla J and Schofield A J 2006 Phys. Rev. B 74 115126
54. Lamas C A, Cabra D C and Grandi N 2008 Phys. Rev. B 78 115104
55. Jakubczyk P, Metzner W and Yamase H 2009 Phys. Rev. Lett. 103 220602
56. Zacharias M, W¨olfle P and Garst M 2009 Phys. Rev. B 80 165116
57. Metlitski M A and Sachdev S 2009 Quantum phase transitions of metals in two spatial dimen-
sions: I. Ising-nematic order (unpublished) (Preprint arXiv:1001.1153)
58. Varma C M, Littlewood P B, Schmitt-Rink S, Abrahams E and Ruckenstein A E 1989 Phys.
Rev. Lett. 63 1996–99
59. Millis A J 1993 Phys. Rev. B 48 7183–96
60. Dell’Anna L and Metzner W 2006 Phys. Rev. B 73 45127
61. Dell’Anna L and Metzner W 2007 Phys. Rev. Lett. 98 136402
62. Lawler M J, Barci D G, Fern´andez V, Fradkin E and Oxman L 2006 Phys. Rev. B 73 085101
63. Lawler M J and Fradkin E 2007 Phys. Rev. B 75 033304
64. Chubukov A V 2005 Phys. Rev. B 71 245123
65. Rech J, P´epin C and Chubukov A V 2006 Phys. Rev. B 74 195126
66. Pan W, Du R R, St¨ormer H L, Tsui D C, Pfeiffer L N, Baldwin K W and West K W 1999
22 Fradkin, Kivelson, Lawler, Eisenstein & Mackenzie
Phys. Rev. Lett. 83 820–23
67. Lilly M P, Cooper K B, Eisenstein J P, Pfeiffer L N and West K W 1999 Phys. Rev. Lett. 83
68. Musaelian K and Joynt R 1996 J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 8 L105–10
69. Balents L 1996 Europhys. Lett. 33 291–96
70. Eisenstein J 2001 Solid State Comm. 117 123–31
71. Koulakov A A, Fogler M M and Shklovskii B I 1996 Phys. Rev. Lett. 76 499–502
72. Koulakov A A, Fogler M M and Shklovskii B I 1996 Phys. Rev. B 54 1853–71
73. Moessner R and Chalker J T 1996 Phys. Rev. B 54 5006–15
74. Fradkin E, Kivelson S A, Manousakis E and Nho K 2000 Phys. Rev. Lett. 84 1982
75. MacDonald A H and M P A Fisher 2000 Phys. Rev. B 61 5724
76. von Oppen F, Halperin B and Stern A 2000 Phys. Rev. Lett. 84 2937
77. Zhu J, Pan W, Stormer H L, Pfeiffer L N and West K W 2002 Phys. Rev. Lett. 88 116803
78. Kroemer H 1999 On the magnetoresistance anisotropy of a 2-dimensional electron gas with
large half-integer filling factors (unpublished) (Preprint arXiv:cond-mat/9901016)
79. Jungwirth T, MacDonald A H, Smrcka L and Girvin S M 1999 Phys. Rev. B 60 15574
80. Stanescu T D, Martin I and Phillips P 2000 Phys. Rev. Lett. 84 1288
81. Cooper K B, Eisenstein J P, Pfeiffer L N and West K W 2004 Phys. Rev. Lett. 92 026806
82. Fil D 2000 Low Temp. Phys. 26 581
83. Rashba E and Sherman E Y 1987 Sov. Phys. Semicond. 21 1185
84. Cooper K B, Lilly M P, Eisenstein J P, Pfeiffer L N and West K W 2002 Phys. Rev. B 65
85. Simon S H 1999 Phys. Rev. Lett. 83 4223
86. Allen P, Berger H, Chauvet O, Forro L, Jarlborg T, Junod A, Revaz B and Santi G 1996
Phys. Rev. B 53 4393
87. Crawford M, Harlow R L, Marshall W, Li Z, Cao G, Lindstrom R L, Huang Q and Lynn J W
2002 Phys. Rev. B 65 214412
88. Mackenzie A P and Maeno Y 2003 Rev. Mod. Phys. 75 657–712
89. Ikeda S, Maeno Y, Nakatsuji S, Kosaka M and Uwatoko Y 2000 Phys. Rev. B 62 R6089
90. Tamai A, Allan M, Mercure J, Meevasana W, Dunkel R, Lu D, Perry R, Mackenzie A, Singh
D, Shen Z X and Baumberger F 2008 Phys. Rev. Lett. 101 026407
91. Singh D and Mazin I 2001 Phys. Rev. B 63 165101
92. Mercure J F, Rost A W, O’Farrell E C T, Goh S K, Perry R S, Sutherland M L, Grigera S A,
Borzi R A, Gegenwart P, Gibbs A S and Mackenzie A P 2009 Quantum oscillations near a
quantum critical end point in Sr Ru O (unpublished) (Preprint arXiv:0909.1215)
93. Bergemann C, Mackenzie A P, Julian S R, Forsythe D and Ohmichi E 2003 Adv. Phys. 52
94. RostAW,PerryRS,MercureJF,MackenzieAPandGrigeraSA2009Science 3251360–63
95. Grigera S A, Gegenwart P, Borzi R A, Weickert F, Schofield A J, Perry R S, Tayama T,
Sakakibara T, Maeno Y, Green A G and Mackenzie A P 2004 Science 306 1154–57
96. Perry R S, Galvin L M, Grigera S A, Capogna L, Schofield A J, Mackenzie A P, Chiao M,
Julian S, Ikeda S, Nakatsuji S, Maeno Y and Pfleiderer C 2001 Phys. Rev. Lett. 86 2661–64
97. Perry R S, Kitagawa K, Grigera S A, Borzi R A, Mackenzie A P, Ishida K and Maeno Y 2004
Nematic Fermi Fluids in Condensed Matter Physics 23
Phys. Rev. Lett. 92 166602
98. Mercure J F, Goh S K, O’Farrell E C T, Perry R S, Sutherland M L, Rost A, Grigera S A,
Borzi R A, Gegenwart P and Mackenzie A P 2009 Phys. Rev. Lett. 103 176401
99. Borzi R A, Grigera S A, Perry R S, Kikugawa N, Kitagawa N, Maeno Y and Mackenzie A P
2004 Phys. Rev. Lett. 92 216403
100. Ho A and Schofield A 2008 Europhys. Lett. 84 27007
101. Haverkort M W, Elfimov I S, Tjeng L H, Sawatzky G A and Damascelli A 2008 Phys. Rev.
Lett. 101 026406
102. Liu G Q, Antonov V N, Jepsen O and Andersen O K 2008 Phys. Rev. Lett. 101 026408
103. Grigera S A, Borzi R A, Julian S R, Perry R S, Maeno Y and Mackenzie A P 2003 Phys. Rev.
B 67 214427
104. Green A G, Grigera S A, Borzi R A, Mackenzie A P, Perry R S and Simons B D 2005 Phys.
Rev. Lett. 95 086402
105. Binz B and Sigrist M 2004 Europhys. Lett. 65 816
106. Berridge A, Green A, Grigera S and Simons B 2009 Phys. Rev. Lett. 102 136404
107. Lee W C and Wu C 2009 Phys. Rev. B 80 104438
108. Yamase H 2007 Phys. Rev. B 76 155117
109. Yamase H and Katanin A A 2007 J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 76 073706
110. Puetter C M, Doh H and Kee H Y 2007 Phys. Rev. B 76 235112
111. Farrell J, Perry R S, Rost A, Mercure J F, Kikugawa N, Grigera S A and Mackenzie A P 2008
Phys. Rev. B 78 180409(R)
112. Shen K M, Kikugawa N, Bergemann C, Balicas L, Baumberger F, Meevasana W, Ingle N,
Maeno Y, Shen Z X and Mackenzie A P 2007 Phys. Rev. Lett. 99 187001
113. Grigera S A, Perry R S, Schofield A J, Chiao M, Julian S R, Lonzarich G G, Ikeda S I, Maeno
Y, Millis A J and Mackenzie A P 2001 Science 294 329–32
114. Kitagawa K, Ishida K, Perry R S, Tayama T, Sakakibara T and Maeno Y 2005 Phys. Rev.
Lett. 95 127001
115. Gegenwart P, Weickert F, Garst M, Perry R S and Maeno Y 2006 Phys. Rev. Lett. 96 136402
116. Millis A J, Schofield A J, Lonzarich G G and Grigera S A 2002 Phys. Rev. Lett. 88 217204
117. Kao Y J and Kee H Y 2007 Phys. Rev. B 76 045106
118. Yang Y F, Fisk Z, Lee H O, Thompson J D and Pines D 2008 Nature 454 611–13
119. Doh H, Kim Y B and Ahn K H 2007 Phys. Rev. Lett. 98 126407
120. Daou R, Chang J, LeBoeuf D, Cyr-Choini`ere O, Lalibert´e F, Doiron-Leyraud N, Ramshaw
B J, Liang R, Bonn D A, Hardy W N and Taillefer L 2010 Nature 463 519–22
121. Howald C, Eisaki H, Kaneko N and Kapitulnik A 2003 Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 100
122. Kohsaka Y, Taylor C, Fujita K, Schmidt A, Lupien C, Hanaguri T, Azuma M, Takano M,
Eisaki H, Takagi H, Uchida S and Davis J C 2007 Science 315 1380–85
123. Hanaguri T, Lupien C, Kohsaka Y, Lee D H, Azuma M, Takano M, Takagi H and Davis J C
2004 Nature 430 1001–5
124. Robertson J A, Kivelson S A, Fradkin E, Fang A C and Kapitulnik A 2006 Phys. Rev. B 74
125. Del Maestro A, Rosenow B and Sachdev S 2006 Phys. Rev. B 74 024520
24 Fradkin, Kivelson, Lawler, Eisenstein & Mackenzie
126. Lawler M J, Fujita K, Lee J W, Schmidt A R, Kohsaka Y, Kim C K, Eisaki H, Uchida S,
Davis J C, Sethna J P and Kim E A 2009 Electronic Nematic Ordering of the Intra-unit-cell
Pseudogap States in Underdoped Bi Sr CaCu O (unpublished)
127. Fang C, Yao H, Tsai W F, Hu J P and Kivelson S A 2008 Phys. Rev. B 77 224509
128. Xu C, Mu¨ller M and Sachdev S 2008 Phys. Rev. B 78 020501(R)
129. Mazin I and Johannes M 2009 Nat. Phys. 5 141–45
130. Ru¨bhausenM,YoonS,CooperSL,KimKHandCheongSW2000Phys.Rev.B 62R4782–85
131. Padmanabhan M, Gokmen T and Shayegan M 2008 Phys. Rev. B 78 161301
132. Castro Neto A H, Guinea F, N M R Peres, Novoselov K S and Geim A K 2009 Rev. Mod.
Phys. 81 109–62
133. Parameswaran S A, Abanin D A, Kivelson S A and Sondhi S L 2009 Nematicity and Random
Field Paramagnetism in a Quantum Hall System (unpublished)
134. Spivak B and Kivelson S A 2004 Phys. Rev. B 70 155114
135. Fregoso B M and Fradkin E 2009 Phys. Rev. Lett. 103 205301
136. Quintanilla J, Carr S T and Betouras J J 2009 Phys. Rev. A 79 031601(R)
137. Chan C K, Wu C, Lee W C and Das Sarma S 2010 Phys. Rev. A 81 023602
138. Fernandes R M, Schmalian J and Westfahl Jr H 2008 Phys. Rev. B 78 184201
139. Chubukov A V, P´epin C and Rech J 2004 Phys. Rev. Lett. 92 147003
140. Daou R, Cyr-Choini`ere O, Lalibert´e F, LeBoeuf D, Doiron-Leyraud N, Yan J Q, Zhou J S,
Goodenough J B and Taillefer L 2008 Phys. Rev. B 79 180505(RC)
141. Fauqu´e B, Sidis Y, Hinkov V, Pailh´es S, Lin C T, Chaud X and Bourges P 2006 Phys. Rev.
Lett. 96 197001
Nematic Fermi Fluids in Condensed Matter Physics 25
Figure 1: Two different mechanisms for producing a nematic phase with point-particles: The
gentle melting of a stripe phase can restore long range translational symmetry while preserving
orientational order [8]. Alternatively, a nematic Fermi fluid can arise through the distortion of the
Fermi surface of a metal via a Pomeranchuk instability [27,28]. (After, in part, from Reference [8].)
26 Fradkin, Kivelson, Lawler, Eisenstein & Mackenzie
Figure 2: Longitudinal resistances in a high mobility 2D electron system at T = 25 mK in a
perpendicular magnetic field. Dashed gray line: current flow along (cid:104)110(cid:105). Solid blue line: current
flow along (cid:104)110(cid:105). Strongly anisotropic transport is observed at Landau level filling factors ν = 9/2,
11/2, 13/2, etc. No analogous anisotropy is present at very low magnetic fields or at fields above
B ≈ 2.7 T where the Fermi level falls into the N = 1 Landau level. [After Lilly et al. [3].]
Nematic Fermi Fluids in Condensed Matter Physics 27
Figure 3: Temperature dependence of resistances along (cid:104)110(cid:105) (blue line) and (cid:104)110(cid:105) (red line) at
ν = 9/2 in two different samples. The 2DES density of sample A is n = 2.67×1011 cm−2 whereas
in sample B it is n = 1.5×1011 cm−2. [After Eisenstein at al. [70]]
28 Fradkin, Kivelson, Lawler, Eisenstein & Mackenzie
Figure 4: (a) Temperature dependence of ρ at ν = 9/2 for the various in-plane magnetic fields
B indicated in the legend. (b) Temperature dependence of the order parameter of the 2D XY
modelforvarioussymmetrybreakingpotentialsh/J. ArrowdenotesKosterlitz-Thoulesstransition
temperature for h = 0. [After Cooper et al. [84]]
Figure 5: The two diagonal components ρ and ρ of the in-plane magnetoresistivity tensor of a
highpuritysinglecrystalofSr Ru O . (a)Foranappliedfieldparalleltothecrystallinecaxis(with
an alignment accuracy of better than 2◦), ρ (blue line) and ρ (red line) are almost identical. (b)
With the crystal tilted such that the field is 13◦ from c, giving an in-plane component along a, a
pronounced anisotropy is seen, with the easy direction for current flow being along b, perpendicular
to the in-plane field component. If the in-plane field component is aligned along b instead, the easy
direction switches to being for current flow along a. c) The temperature dependence of the nematic
order parameter defined by the resistive anisotropy for a tilt angle of 18◦. [After Borzi et al. [5]]
Nematic Fermi Fluids in Condensed Matter Physics 29
Figure 6: a) Magnetization of Sr Ru O as a function of magnetic field. Three metamagnetic steps
are seen. The first, at 7.5 T, is a crossover, while the latter two are first-order phase transitions.
[After Rost et al. [94]]. b) Low temperature phase defined from measurements of susceptibility,
magnetostriction, thermal expansion and transport measurements. [After Grigera et al. [95]].
Subsequent work established nematic transport properties within it [5] and the order of the phase
transitions that define its boundaries [94].
30 Fradkin, Kivelson, Lawler, Eisenstein & Mackenzie
Figure 7: a) Entropy divided by temperature as a function of applied field and temperature for
. b) Both ∆S/T (blue line) and the specific heat ∆C/T (red line) diverge as (cid:12)(H −
(cid:12)−1
H c )/H c(cid:12) outside the cut off region (grey lines). ∆C/T is fixed relative to ∆S/T at 5.5 T on the
low-field side and 9.5 T on the high-field side. [After Rost et al. [94]]