New Discoveries in Cosmology and Fundamental Physics through Advances in
Laboratory Astrophysics
Submitted by the
American Astronomical Society Working Group on Laboratory Astrophysics
Nancy Brickhouse - Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics
nbrickhouse@cfa.harvard.edu, 617-495-7438
John Cowan - University of Oklahoma
cowan@nhn.ou.edu, 405-325-3961
Paul Drake - University of Michigan
rpdrake@umich.edu, 734-763-4072
Steven Federman - University of Toledo
steven.federman@utoledo.edu, 419-530-2652
Gary Ferland - University of Kentucky
gary@pa.uky.edu, 859-257-879
Adam Frank - University of Rochester
afrank@pas.rochester.edu, 585-275-1717
Eric Herbst - Ohio State University
herbst@mps.ohio-state.edu, 614-292-6951
Keith Olive* - University of Minnesota
olive@physics.umn.edu, 612-624-7375
Farid Salama - NASA/Ames Research Center
Farid.Salama@nasa.gov, 650-604-3384
Daniel Wolf Savin* - Columbia University
savin@astro.columbia.edu, 1-212-854-4124,
Lucy Ziurys – University of Arizona
lziurys@as.arizona.edu, 520-621-6525
* Co-Editors
1. Introduction
As the Cosmology and Fundamental Physics (CFP) panel is fully aware, the next
decade will see major advances in our understanding of these areas of research. To quote
from their charge, these advances will occur in studies of “the early universe, the
microwave background, the reionization and galaxy formation up to virialization of
protogalaxies, large scale structure, the intergalactic medium, the determination of
cosmological parameters, dark matter, dark energy, tests of gravity, astronomically
determined physical constants, and high energy physics using astronomical messengers.”
Central to the progress in these areas are the corresponding advances in laboratory
astrophysics which are required for fully realizing the CFP scientific opportunities within
the decade 2010-2020. Laboratory astrophysics comprises both theoretical and
experimental studies of the underlying physics which produce the observed astrophysical
processes. The 5 areas of laboratory astrophysics which we have identified as relevant to
the CFP panel are atomic, molecular, plasma, nuclear, and particle physics.
Here, Section 2 describes some of the new scientific opportunities and compelling
scientific themes which will be enabled by advances in laboratory astrophysics. In
Section 3, we provide the scientific context for these opportunities. Section 4 briefly
discusses some of the experimental and theoretical advances in laboratory astrophysics
required to realize the CFP scientific opportunities of the next decade. As requested in
the Call for White Papers, Section 5 presents four central questions and one area with
unusual discovery potential. Lastly, we give a short postlude in Section 6.
2. New scientific opportunities and compelling scientific themes
Some attempts to unify gravity with the strong and electroweak forces suggests the
possibility for temporal and spatial variations of the fundamental “constants” such as the
fine-structure constant α=e2/ħc and the electron/proton mass ratio μ=m /m (Uzan 2003).
Astrophysical research is uniquely situated to address the question of whether these
constants are so or if they vary over the lifetime of the universe.
Measuring cosmological parameters has reached amazing levels of precision. Data
from the angular power spectrum of the CMB can be used to determine several key
cosmological parameters including relative densities of baryonic matter, dark matter, and
dark energy as well as test models of inflation (Wong et al. 2008). Observations can also
constrain the specific entropy of the universe (Sunyaev & Chluba 2008), the primordial
helium abundance (Peimbert et al. 2008), and the CMB monopole temperature (Hamann
& Wang. 2008). Studies in these areas lie on the cutting edge of cosmology.
Cosmologists want to probe the structure and reionization of the universe during the
dark ages, the period between recombination and the formation of the first stars
(Pritchard & Loeb 2008). Such observations are expected to begin in the next decade.
There is now a multitude of evidence for the existence of non-baryonic dark matter.
In addition to the above mentioned CMB measurements, there is a host of astronomical
observations including the measurement of galactic rotation curves, X-ray emission from
clusters of galaxies, and gravitational lensing. All observations are consistent with dark
matter comprising roughly 20% of the total energy density in the Universe. Numerous
laboratory experiments are currently actively searching for the direct detection of dark
matter. A positive detection from these experiments coupled with future data from the
Large Hadron Collider (LHC) at CERN may determine the identity of the dark matter in
addition to firmly establishing its existence.
Studies of the IGM and the Lyman α forest can be used to constrain the spectral shape
and history of the metagalactic radiation field, the chemical evolution of the universe, and
the initial mass function of the earliest generation of stars.
3. Scientific context
In the standard model of electroweak interactions, fermion masses as well as the weak
gauge boson masses are generated through the Higgs mechanism. The standard model
contains a fundamental scalar field, the Higgs boson, with self-interactions which allow
for the dynamical generation of a non-zero vacuum expectation value. As a consequence,
all particles, interacting with the Higgs boson, acquire mass. In an analogous manner,
unified theories such as string theory contain additional scalar fields for which there is no
fixed background value. If these fields couple to electric and magnetic fields, their
background value, which may evolve in an expanding universe, determine the gauge
coupling constants, such as the fine structure constant. In these unified theories,
variations of the gauge couplings may lead to variations of Yukawa couplings (the
couplings of the Higgs bosons to fermions) as well as the variation of the scale at which
strong interactions become non-perturbative Λ . As a result, in addition to variations in
α, variations in the ratios of particle masses such as m /m may occur.
Quasar absorption spectral observations have been used to probe for variations in
fundamental constants (King et al. 2008, Murphy et al. 2008). Variations in α can be
determined from detailed atomic and molecular absorption features. One particularly
sensitive test is the many-multiplet method based on the relativistic corrections to atomic
transitions using several lines from various elemental species and allows for sensitivities
which approach the level of 10-6. Similarly, measurements for the variability of μ rely on
Lyman and Werner transitions of the H molecule.
While the standard model of cosmology can be simply formulated in the context of
general relativity, a precise description relies on several key parameters which include the
relative densities of baryonic and dark matter, as well, as the dark energy, the rate of
expansion of the universe characterized by the Hubble parameter, the shape of the
angular power spectrum, the optical depth to the last scattering of the CMB, as well as
others. WMAP has achieved an enormous leap in the accuracy of these parameters and
with the launching of Planck, the third generation CMB satellite, a new level of precision
will be achieved for CMB temperature and polarization anisotropies (Wong et al. 2008).
These measurements can be used to constrain various models for inflation.
CMB observations at decimeter wavelengths are planned for the near future. Any
detected CMB distortions will provide an additional means to determine some of the key
parameters of the universe such as the specific entropy of the universe, the CMB
monopole temperature, and the primordial helium abundance (Sunyaev & Chluba 2008).
Plans have been made to probe the dark ages through observations of the redshifted
21-cm hyperfine line in neutral hydrogen (Bowman et al. 2007). The first generation
experiments to carry out these observations are currently under construction.
The first indication for dark matter came from the observations of high velocities of
galaxies within clusters of galaxies and required an additional source of gravity beyond
that which could be accounted for from light-producing galaxies in the cluster. Similarly,
the rotation of stars and gas in spiral galaxies also pointed to the notion that galaxies were
embedded in a large and massive halo of dark gravitating matter. The presence of hot X-
ray emitting gas also requires a significant amount of gravity to prevent the hot gas from
flying off into space. Observations of distant galaxies along the line of sight of a large
cluster of galaxies show clear signs of the gravitational lensing of the light. Indeed,
recent claims to direct evidence for dark matter came from observations of a collision of
clusters of galaxies showing lensing which is directly associated with (non-dissipative)
dark matter in tact with the two clusters whereas the (dissipative) hot gas has been
stripped from the cluster by the collision (Clowe 2006).
The standard model of strong and electroweak interactions has been very well
established by precision measurements at LEP and SLAC. At the energies achieved so
far, there are precious few discrepancies which can be taken as a sign of new physics
beyond the standard model. Of course a key missing constituent of the standard model is
the Higgs boson. Its discovery is the primary goal for the LHC which will begin
operations this year. Nevertheless, particle physics models beyond the standard model are
known to possess particle candidates for the dark matter. For example, axions are
particles which appear in models which attempt to solve the so-called strong CP problem
associated with the strong nuclear force.
One problem associated with the presence of fundamental scalar particles in the
standard model is known as the hierarchy problem. Put simply, in the context of a
unified theory with physics at a very high energy scale, it is very difficult to maintain the
scale of the breakdown of the electroweak theory to energies as low as 100 GeV. An
elegant solution to this problem is known as supersymmetry which is a theory relating
particles which differ in their spin statistics by a ½ integer (in units of ħ). Each known
particle in the standard model is associated with a superpartner, yet to be discovered. The
discovery of superpartners is also one of the main goals for the LHC. The unification of
running gauge couplings at high energy in unified theories also requires an extension of
the standard model similar to the supersymmetric extension. The lightest of all the new
supersymmetric particles is expected to be stable as its decay is protected by the
conservation of a new quantum number in much the same way that the proton is
protected by the conservation of baryon number or the electron by the conservation of
electric charge. This new massive particle is an ideal candidate for dark matter.
The planned dramatic increase in collecting area for the next generation of ground-
based observatories, going from 10 m to 30 m telescopes, is expected to revolutionize
observational and theoretical studies of the IGM and the Lyman α forest. Such studies
will dramatically improve our ability to constrain the spectral shape and history of the
metagalactic radiation field, the chemical evolution of the universe, and the initial mass
function of the earliest generation of stars.
4. Required advances in Laboratory Astrophysics
Advances particularly in the areas of atomic, molecular, plasma, nuclear, and particle
physics will be required for the scientific opportunities described above. Here we briefly
discuss some of the relevant research in each of these 5 areas of laboratory astrophysics.
Experimental and theoretical advances are required in all these areas to fully realize the
CFP scientific opportunities of the next decade.
4.1. Atomic Physics
Spectroscopic observations of quasar absorption systems to search for variations in
the fundamental constants require accurate transition frequencies and their dependence on
these constants for many different atomic systems. Strong systematic uncertainties arise
from inaccurate laboratory measurements and some systems of particular importance
include ions of Ti, Mn, Na, C, and O (Berengut et al. 2004). Atomic clocks and
laboratory transition frequency determinations can also be used to constrain variations in
the fundamental constants (Lea 2007).
Interpreting observations from Planck will require a precise knowledge of the
cosmological recombination history. The complete lack of understanding of the profile
of the CMB last-scatter surface dominates the error budget for calculating the
cosmological power spectrum. Reducing these uncertainties requires high precision
calculations for the cosmological recombination process which in turn rely on accurate
data for hydrogen and helium recombination and related processes (Wong et al. 2008).
Observations of the cosmological recombination spectrum can in principle be used to
measure the specific entropy of the universe, the primordial He abundance, and the CMB
monopole temperature. Interpreting these observations will also require accurate atomic
data for recombination spectra in hydrogen and helium and particularly for two photon
processes (Sunyaev & Chluba 2008).
Interpreting the planned red-shifted 21-cm observations will require a detailed model
of the underlying atomic processes affecting the population of the hyperfine levels.
These include resonant scattering of Lyman-alpha photons, spin changing collisions of
the hyperfine levels, and related processes (Pritchard & Loeb 2008).
Observations of H II regions are used to infer primordial helium abundances to test
the standard model for big bang nucleosynthesis (BBN). Reliable recombination rate
coefficients are needed for the observed H I and He I lines as well as for ions of O, Ne,
Si, and S (Peimbert et al. 2007).
Interpreting spectra of the IGM Lyman α forest is carried out using both single-phase
models and cosmological models of the IGM employing semianalytical approximations
for hydrodynamical simulations. These various models used different approximations
and assumptions. However, one thing they all have in common is the need to calculate
the ionization structure of the photoionized IGM. This is typically carried out using
plasma codes written specifically for modeling the ionization structure of photoionized
gas. One of the most commonly used codes for this purpose is CLOUDY (Ferland et al.
1998). Fundamental to the accuracy of such plasma codes and any inferred astrophysical
conclusions is calculating the correct ionization balance. This requires reliable
photoionization, radiative recombination, dielectronic recombination, and charge transfer
data (Savin 2000). Accurate data are also needed for photoabsorption (photoexcitation),
electron impact excitation, and radiative lifetimes to generate accurate model spectra.
4.2. Molecular Physics
Quasar observations of molecular absorption lines can be used to constrain temporal
and spatial variations in fundamental constants. For this accurate transition frequencies
and their dependence on these constants for many different molecular systems are
needed. Some of the more important systems include H (King et al. 2008) and OH
(Kanekar et al. 2005). Molecular clocks and laboratory transition frequency studies can
also be used to constrain variations in the fundamental constants (Lea 2007).
4.3. Plasma Physics
Plasma physics at high energy density can produce photoionized plasmas that can
benchmark models of the IGM and the reionization of the universe. This is accomplished
by producing an intense x-ray source that can irradiate a plasma volume containing
relevant species, and measuring the ionization balance and other properties that result.
Work in this direction has begun (Foord et al. 2006; Wang et al. 2008). Much more will
be possible in the coming decade as higher-energy facilities come online.
4.4. Nuclear Physics
A critical intersection between cosmology and laboratory nuclear astrophysics comes
from the role of neutrino mass. Neutrinos are the one identified component of the dark
matter, though laboratory bounds and cosmological observations rule out neutrinos as the
principal component. Their effect on cosmological evolution, however, is not neglible
and oscillation experiments place a lower bound on the contribution. This is important
because cosmology can determine the sum of the neutrino mases, a quantity that cannot
be extracted from oscillation experiments, which test only m2 differences. The mass
scale, in cosmological analyses, is correlated with the parameters of the dark energy
equation of state and other neutrino-physics inputs, such as the possibility of additional
sterile neutrinos. Thus an independent determination of this scale would be significant.
The best laboratory limit on the sums of the neutrino masses comes from tritium beta
decay in combination with oscillations, yielding a bound of 6.6 eV. The inadequacy of
this limit is apparent from the more model dependent, but more stringent, result from
cosmological analyses of about 0.7 eV. A new tritium endpoint experiment is underway
(KATRIN) that is expected to improve this laboratory limit by an order of magnitude,
thus providing a check on the current cosmological bound. There are also ambitious new
double beta decay experiments that probe, somewhat less directly, the neutrino mass
scale. These experiments - carried out by groups in both nuclear and particle physics -
have much greater reach and could potentially establishing bounds on the order of 0.05
eV, if mounted at the requested one-to-ten-ton scale. It is anticipated that the
cosmological bound will also improve rapidly: analyses based on PLANCK plus SDSS
and on CMBpol plus SDSS may be able to reach 0.21 and 0.13 eV, respectively. With
future data from weak lensing surveys, this bound could move below 0.1 eV.
The concordance between laboratory and cosmological neutrino mass determinations
could be of great importance. One can envision a cosmological mass determination and
measurement of the currently unknown third mixing angle (the subject of current reactor
and long-baseline programs) in the next decade. In total there would be six constraints
(two mass differences, three mixing angles, the mass scale) imposed on the double beta
decay Majorana mass. A lack of concordance would yield new physics, e.g.,
constraining the relative CP of the mass eigenstates and/or their Majorana phases.
The detection of neutrinoless double beta decay would have another important
implication for cosmology: it is the only practical low-energy tool for establishing lepton
number violation and Majorana masses, ingredients in theories that invoke leptogenesis
as a mechanism for generating the cosmological baryon number asymmetry.
The first stars are thought to have formed ~ 100 Myr after the Big Bang: dark matter
halos of 105-6 solar masses at redshift z ~ 30 attract enough primordial gas to produce
significant baryon densities and temperatures. By z ~ 20 sufficient cooling has occurred
to produce gravitational instability. The first stars played an important role in the
evolution of the early universe. Prior to their formation the universe consisted mostly of
neutral hydrogen and helium, and was dark due to the absorption of light by these atoms.
The ultraviolet photons from these early stars helped reionize the early universe, ending
the “cosmic dark age”. These stars thus influenced conditions for early galaxy formation
(e.g., the first 1 Gyr), through their radiation, heavy element production, kinetic energy
input, and generation of shock waves and electromagnetic fields. This epoch is
interesting cosmologically because it is accessible: WMAP and studies of distance
quasars by SDSS have provided some information on the universe’s reionization history,
while VLT, Subaru, and Keck have helped us understand the early evolution of metals.
Nuclear physicists are involved in this interdisciplinary field through their efforts to
understand the structure, very rapid evolution, and death of these massive, extremely low
metalicity stars - and how this evolution affects the interstellar medium. The work
includes the evolution of progenitor models and large-scale numerical simulations to
understand the mechanisms for their deaths (e.g., pair instability supernovae vs. collapse
to a black hole). They are also very interested in understanding the patterns of the metals
that might emerge from the ejecta - a problem that connects observations of metal-poor
stars to laboratory measurements of nuclear masses and decays.
Nuclear transitions are possible candidates for measuring the time variation in α. One
system of particular interest is 229Th (Litvinova et al. 2009). Such studies will require
highly accurate nuclear model calculations.
4.5 Particle Physics
The search for dark matter has become a multi-faceted research enterprise. The search
for candidates associated with supersymmetric theories exists on three fronts: accelerator
searches, direct detection searches and indirect detection searchs. Accelerator searches
are geared towards new particle discoveries. Supersymmetry predicts many new massive
particles and the discovery of any of these particles would go a long way in our
understanding of the possible nature and identity of dark matter. However, as it is
expected that the dark matter is neutral under strong and electromagnetic interactions, it
is not likely that the LHC will detect the dark matter; rather this new particle would be
expected to escape the detectors and appear as missing energy much like neutrinos.
Similarly, indirect detection experiments look at by products of interactions of dark
matter. For example, dark matter annihilation in the galactic halo could provide unique
signatures found in the gamma ray, positron, or antiproton backgrounds. Many
experiments are currently running looking for these signatures. Most notable perhaps is
Fermi, mapping out the gamma ray sky. Another potential signature comes from the
scattering and eventual trapping of dark matter particles in the sun. Annihilations in the
sun, would produce high energy neutrinos from the sun and provide a unique signature
for dark matter. The Amanda and IceCube detectors active at the South Pole are geared
for the indirect detection of dark matter.
In contrast to accelerator and indirect detection searches, direct detection experiments
are key to the actual discovery of dark matter. These laboratory experiments look for the
elastic scattering of dark matter particles with nuclei in low background environments
located deep underground. There has been dramatic improvement in the sensitivity of
these detectors over the last several years. These detectors are designed to look for
weakly interacting massive particles (WIMPS) with masses between 10 GeV and 10 TeV
through the nuclear recoil (with energies between 1 and 100 keV) of an elastic scattering
event. There are several running experiments with detectors consisting of a wide range of
nuclear targets. The best limits on the elastic scattering cross section come from two
experiments, CDMS and XENON10. CDMS, currently located in the Soudan mine in
Minnesota, uses cryogenic Ge and Si detectors. XENON10 , located at Grand Sasso,
uses liquid Xe as its active component. Current limits are at the level of a few times 10-8
pb. Both experiments have planned upgrades.
Terrestrial experiments search for axions by looking for their conversion to photons
in a strong magnetic field (Sikivie 1983). Two high “Q” cavities are currently running.
The ADMX experiment at LLNL uses electronic amplifiers with low noise temperature
to enhance the conversion signal. Currently this experiment has set limits on the axion
mass, excluding masses between 1.9 and 3.3 µeV if the axion constitutes the dark matter.
This experiment is being upgraded with the use of SQUID amplifiers. A second
experiment CARRACK in Kyoto uses highly excited atoms to detect microwave photons
resulting from the axion conversion. This experiment excludes masses around 10 µeV
and is being upgraded to a sensitivity capable of probing masses between 2 and 50 µeV.
5. Four central questions and one area with unusual discovery potential
5.1 Four central questions
• Are the fundamental “constants” truly constant?
• How accurately can we measure the cosmological parameters?
• What is the nature and identity of the dark matter?
• What is the shape and history of the metagalatic radiation field, the
chemical evolution of the universe, and the initial mass function for the
first stars?
5.2 One area with unusual discovery potential
• What is the history and structure of the universe during the dark ages?
6. Postlude
Laboratory astrophysics and complementary theoretical calculations are the part of
the foundation for our understanding of CFP and will remain so for many generations to
come. From the level of scientific conception to that of the scientific return, it is our
understanding of the underlying processes that allows us to address fundamental
questions in these areas. In this regard, laboratory astrophysics is much like detector and
instrument development; these efforts are necessary to maximize the scientific return
from astronomical observations.