NEW DISCOVERIES IN THE GALACTIC NEIGHBORHOOD THROUGH ADVANCES IN
LABORATORY ASTROPHYSICS
Submitted by the
American Astronomical Society Working Group on Laboratory Astrophysics (WGLA)
Nancy Brickhouse - Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics
nbrickhouse@cfa.harvard.edu, 617-495-7438
John Cowan - University of Oklahoma
cowan@nhn.ou.edu, 405-325-3961
Paul Drake - University of Michigan
rpdrake@umich.edu, 734-763-4072
Steven Federman* - University of Toledo
steven.federman@utoledo.edu, 419-530-2652
Gary Ferland - University of Kentucky
gary@pa.uky.edu, 859-257-879
Adam Frank - University of Rochester
afrank@pas.rochester.edu, 585-275-1717
Eric Herbst - Ohio State University
herbst@mps.ohio-state.edu, 614-292-6951
Keith Olive - University of Minnesota
olive@physics.umn.edu, 612-624-7375
Farid Salama* - NASA/Ames Research Center
Farid.Salama@mail.arc.nasa.gov, 650-604-3384
Daniel Wolf Savin - Columbia University
savin@astro.columbia.edu, 1-212-854-4124,
Lucy Ziurys – University of Arizona
lziurys@as.arizona.edu, 520-621-6525
*Co-Editors
1. Introduction
As the Galactic Neighborhood (GAN) panel is fully aware, the next decade will see major
advances in our understanding of this area of research. To quote from their charge, these
advances will occur in studies of “the galactic neighborhood, including the structure and
properties of the Milky Way and nearby galaxies, and their stellar populations and evolution,
as well as interstellar media and star clusters”.
Central to the progress in these areas are the corresponding advances in laboratory
astrophysics that are required for fully realizing the GAN scientific opportunities within the
decade 2010-2020. Laboratory astrophysics comprises both theoretical and experimental
studies of the underlying physics and chemistry that produces the observed astrophysical
processes. The 5 areas of laboratory astrophysics that we have identified as relevant to the
GAN panel are atomic, molecular, solid matter, plasma, and nuclear physics.
In this white paper, we describe in Section 2 some of the new scientific opportunities and
compelling scientific themes that will be enabled by advances in laboratory astrophysics. In
Section 3, we provide the scientific context for these opportunities. Section 4 briefly
discusses some of the experimental and theoretical advances in laboratory astrophysics
required to realize the GAN scientific opportunities of the next decade. As requested in the
Call for White Papers, Section 5 presents four central questions and one area with unusual
discovery potential. Lastly, we give a short postlude in Section 6.
2. New scientific opportunities and compelling scientific themes
The significant progress in our understanding of the Galactic neighborhood over the past
decade has led to fundamental questions that offer scientific opportunities for the next one.
Spectroscopic measurements at millimeter, sub-millimeter, infrared, visible, and ultraviolet
wavelengths with high signal to noise and analyses based on new precise atomic, molecular,
and nuclear data are providing new insights into chemical evolution. Computer simulations in
combination with interferometric observations are indicating the need to describe the
interstellar medium (ISM) as a very dynamic entity. Observations in the ultraviolet and x-ray
portions of the spectrum are revealing the physical conditions in gas within the halo, the
connections between the dynamic ISM in the disk and flows in the halo, and the relationship
with extra-planar gas in other galaxies. Improved data of high quality are also probing the
dynamic phenomena occurring at the Galactic Center and how the magnetic fields there are
playing a role. Observations in the millimeter and infrared are probing the evolution of
molecules in interstellar clouds into solid dust grains, leading to key information on the
evolution of the ISM. Probably the most exciting opportunity lies in the field of astrobiology,
where interdisciplinary efforts are seeking answers to fundamental chemical and biological
questions.
3. Scientific context
The origin of the elements is one of the central problems of nuclear astrophysics. For
elements lighter than iron, the combination of improved atomic data and refined models of
stellar atmospheres has yielded precise abundances with improved accuracy (e.g., Scott et al.
2009). Approximately half of the elements heavier than iron were synthesized in billion-
degree explosions characteristic of core-collapse supernova, in the process of rapid neutron
capture. Observations of old, metal-poor stars have found r-process distributions remarkably
similar to that of our Sun, suggesting that the r-process mechanism is a unique event,
operating in the first stars as it does now, producing a characteristic nucleosynthetic signature.
Recent progress came about as a result of new laboratory measurements on transition
probabilities (e.g., Den Hartog et al. 2006; Lawler et al. 2008). Many of the other heavy
elements were produced by slow neutron capture in low mass AGB stars and in the He- and
C-burning shells of massive stars. Nuclear data acquired at stellar temperatures (Heil et al.
2008) and modeling of stellar interiors (The et al. 2007; Heil et al. 2008) have greatly
improved our understanding of the s-process. Stellar models are usually developed to
reproduce meteoritic abundances (Lodders 2003). The next level of our understanding of
chemical evolution will come from a combination of high quality astronomical spectra and
more precise atomic and nuclear data that will be needed to interpret the observations.
Dynamical phenomena control many facets of the ISM, from the formation and
destruction of interstellar clouds to the onset of star formation to flows in the Galactic halo.
Supernova blast waves and winds from massive stars provide the necessary energy input.
Numerical modeling has reached a stage where direct comparison with astronomical
observations is providing keen insight into the processes taking place (e.g., de Avillez &
Breitschwerdt 2004). Observations from radio (Gaensler & Slane 2006) to x-rays (Hwang et
al. 2004) are beginning to reveal the dynamics of supernova remnants and of their interactions
with the ISM. Ions seen in ultraviolet and x-ray spectra of the Galactic halo (e.g., Ganguly et
al. 2005; Williams et al. 2007) are providing key information on the processes creating the
distribution of charge states. The Galactic fountain is a popular model describing such
phenomena (Shapiro & Field 1976; Bregman 1980). Controversy, however, surrounds the
interpretation of the x-ray measurements. Are the measurements really probing the halo, or
instead the intergalactic medium? Similar phenomena appear to be present in the halos of
edge-on spiral galaxies (e.g., Tüllman et al. 2006). Further analyses involving observations
and simulations will provide insight into this facet of galactic evolution.
The Galactic Center harbors a supermassive black hole, but it appears to be
underluminous compared to active galactic nuclei. Studies of flaring events at x-ray
wavelengths are likely to provide insight into this difference (e.g., Porquet et al. 2008). Radio
observations reveal the presence of non-thermal emission associated with the filamentary
nature of the magnetic field there. Such measurements also provide evidence for massive star
formation (e.g., Yusef-Zadeh et al. 2008). Our understanding of the nearest active galactic
nucleus requires improvements in our knowledge of atomic and molecular plasmas in extreme
conditions.
Over the past 30 years, space-based and ground-based astronomy have shown that the
Universe is highly molecular in nature. The discovery of over 140 different chemical
compounds in interstellar gas, with the vast majority organic molecules, and the realization
that obscuring dust pervades vast regions of the interstellar medium have revealed the
complexity of interstellar chemistry. Protogalaxies and the first stars are predicted to have
formed from primordial clouds where H and HD controlled the cooling and collapse of these
clouds. Subsequent stars and planetary systems are known to form out of the most complex
molecular environments deep inside cold gas and dust clouds, often obscured by hundreds of
visual magnitudes of extinction; therefore, it is inevitable that interstellar chemistry is
intimately connected to the origins of life. An understanding of the molecular component of
the Universe requires a two-fold approach. First, the chemical compounds, their abundances,
and how they are distributed in astronomical sources need to be determined. Second,
molecular formation mechanisms including reaction pathways and dynamics need to be
understood. Attaining these goals is crucial in guiding future astronomical observatories
designed to provide new insight into galactic evolution.
4. Required advances in Laboratory Astrophysics
Advances particularly in the areas of atomic, molecular, solid matter, plasma, and nuclear
physics will be required for the scientific opportunities described above. Here we briefly
discuss some of the relevant research in each of these 5 areas of laboratory astrophysics.
Experimental and theoretical advances are required in all these areas for fully realizing the
GAN scientific opportunities of the next decade.
4.1. Atomic Physics
Analyzing and modeling spectra begin with identifying the observed lines that may be seen in
emission or absorption. This requires accurate and complete wavelengths across the
electromagnetic spectrum. The next step toward understanding the properties of an observed
cosmic source depends on accurate knowledge of the underlying atomic processes producing
the observed lines. Oscillator strengths and transition probabilities are critical to a wide
variety of temperature and abundance studies from infrared to X-ray wavelengths. Many
existing data for the heavier elements are still notoriously unreliable. The current limitations
on the atomic data available for mid-Z elements make it difficult to determine the nature of
the r-process.
Modeling ionization structure requires accurate data on many processes. Photoionized gas
requires reliable low temperature dielectronic recombination (DR) and electron ionized gas
high temperature DR. Calculating low temperature DR is theoretically challenging and for
some systems laboratory measurements are the only way to produce reliable data. For high
temperature DR, few benchmark measurements exist for L-shell and M-shell ions. Density-
dependent DR rate coefficients are needed for dense plasmas. For decades astrophysicists
have had to rely on theoretical photoionization calculations of varying degrees of
sophistication. The development of third generation synchrotron light sources has opened up
the possibility of measuring photoionization cross sections for many important ions. Charge
exchange (CX) recombination with H and He and CX ionization with H+ and He+have been
shown to be important for many systems, but few modern calculations or laboratory
measurements exist at the relevant temperatures. Data are also needed for low charge states of
elements such as Se and Kr in order to study nucleosynthesis in stars that are the progenitors
of planetary nebulae.
Line ratios, a key diagnostic, involve knowledge of collision strengths and related
phenomena. Rate coefficients for electron impact excitation approaching 10% accuracy are
necessary for the most important line ratio diagnostics yielding temperature, optical depth,
density, and abundance. Proton impact excitation is important because ions in hot post-shock
material decouple from radiatively cooling electrons and may remain hot enough to produce
line emission through collisional impact. Furthermore, electron impact ionization (EII) data
are highly suspect. Recommended data derived from the same scant set of measurements and
calculations can differ by factors of 2 to 3. Much of the published experimental data include
contributions from an unknown metastable fraction in the ion beams used. The recommended
EII data have not undergone any significant revision or laboratory benchmarking since around
1990. Little data also exist for three-body recombination, the time reverse of EII, which is
important in high density plasmas.
4.2. Molecular Physics
High-resolution laboratory spectroscopy is absolutely essential in establishing the identity and
abundances of molecules observed in astronomical data. Given the advancements in detector
technologies, laboratory measurements need to have a resolving power higher than the
astronomical instruments. This is essential to interpret ubiquitous interstellar spectral features
such as the IR emission bands (“PAH bands”) and the diffuse interstellar bands (DIBs) that
represent a reservoir of cosmic organic material and hold the key to our understanding of the
molecular universe (Salama 1999). Furthermore, all the main functional groups known to
organic chemists have now been observed in interstellar molecules, suggesting that the origin
of life may have begun in the gas phase chemistry of interstellar clouds. Laboratory
spectroscopy is crucial in making the link between interstellar molecules and simple
biological compounds that could seed life. It is also crucial in making the link between
interstellar molecules in the gas phase and dust grains in the solid phase, a key phase in our
understanding of the evolution of interstellar clouds and of circumstellar mass loss. For
molecular data obtained from astronomical observations to be of practical use, accurate
assignments of observed spectral features are essential. The problem here is two-fold. First,
the transitions of known molecules need to be assigned in these spectra, including higher
energy levels and new isotopic species. Second, the spectra of undiscovered species that
promise to serve as important new probes of astronomical sources need to be identified.
The spectroscopic study of interstellar molecules, many of which are complex structures
that cannot be produced in large abundance in the laboratory, requires the development and
application of state-of-the-art ultra-sensitive spectroscopic instruments. Detecting the
possible presence of a species, however, is not sufficient since it must be reconciled with
other physical properties of the medium. To understand the chemical composition of these
environments and to direct future molecular searches in the framework of future astronomical
observatories, it is important to untangle the detailed chemical reactions and processes leading
to the formation of new molecules in extraterrestrial environments. These data, together with
quantum chemical calculations, will establish credible chemical models of interstellar,
planetary, and stellar environments that are imperative to predict the existence of distinct
molecules in extraterrestrial environments, thus guiding future astronomical searches of
hitherto unobserved molecular species.
4.3. Solid Materials
In order to properly decipher the mechanisms that occur in interstellar cloud environments,
laboratory studies of dust and ices are required (Tielens 2005). Studies of silicate and
carbonaceous dust precursor molecules and grains are needed as are studies of the dynamical
interaction between dust and its environment (including radiation and gas). Studies of dust
and ice provide a clear connection between astronomy within and beyond the solar system.
Astronomical observations and supporting laboratory experiments from the X-ray domain to
the sub-millimeter regions are of paramount importance for studies of the molecular and dusty
universe. Observations at infrared and sub-millimeter wavelengths penetrate the dusty
regions and probe the processes occurring deep within them. These wavelengths provide
detailed profiles of molecular transitions associated with dust. Because of its importance,
astronomical observations centered on this wavelength region will chart star and planet
formation in the Milky Way, the galactic life cycle of the elements, and the molecular and
dusty universe.
Mid-IR spectra of individual objects such as H II regions, reflection nebulae, and
planetary nebulae as well as the general interstellar medium are dominated by a set of
emission features due to large aromatic molecules (a.k.a “PAH bands”). Studies of the
spectral characteristics of such molecules and their dependence on molecular structure and
charge state are of key importance for our understanding of this ubiquitous molecular
component of the ISM. At long wavelengths, the continuum dust opacity is uncertain by an
order of magnitude. IR spectral features of interstellar dust grains are used to determine their
specific mineral composition, hence their opacities, which determine inferred grain
temperatures and the masses of dusty objects, including the interstellar medium of entire
galaxies. Emission bands from warm astronomical environments such as circumstellar
regions, planetary nebulae, and star-forming clouds lead to the determination of the
composition and physical conditions in regions where stars and planets form. The laboratory
data essential for investigations of dust include measurements of the optical properties of
candidate grain materials (including carbonaceous and silicate materials, as well as metallic
carbides, sulfides, and oxides) as a function of temperature. For abundant materials (e.g.,
forms of carbon such as PAHs), the measurements should range from gas-phase molecules to
nanoparticles to bulk materials. The IR spectral region is critical for the identification of grain
composition, but results are also required for shorter wavelengths (i.e., UV), which heat the
grains. The UV spectral region contains features of important large interstellar molecules,
such as organic species which carry the IR emission bands and diffuse interstellar bands
(DIBs) and that may be related to the origin of life. Studies of the UV characteristics of such
molecules and their dependence on molecular structure and charge state are of importance for
our understanding of this molecular component of the ISM. The lack of experimental data in
this spectral region has hampered progress in theoretical studies as well as the interpretation
of astronomical data. UV spectra are uniquely capable of identifying specific molecules, in
contrast with the less specific transitions observed in the IR. Laboratory studies provide
spectroscopy of large organic molecules and their ions. This work must be complemented by
quantum theory calculations so that the laboratory data are properly interpreted.
4.4. Plasma Physics
Much of the Galactic neighborhood is in the plasma state. Modeling of plasma systems is
beset with difficulties - none of turbulence, radiative energy transfer, collisionless shocks, and
complex magnetic geometries can now be accurately modeled over scales of interest. As a
result, laboratory plasma physics has much to contribute to our understanding of the
corresponding dynamics.
Plasma hydrodynamic experiments can explore well-scaled dynamics of systems of
interest, building on recent experience in which an experiment (Klein et al. 2003) has been
used (Hwang et al. 2005) to directly interpret Chandra results observing a clump being
destroyed by an SNR blast wave. This will contribute to the interpretation of data on the
interactions of blast waves, shocks, and winds with interstellar structure from future
observatories. Laboratory environments can produce radiating systems having dimensionless
parameters in regimes relevant for example to shock breakout from supernovae, which will be
relevant to the anticipated great increase in such data and to the simulation codes used to
interpret it. To benchmark the models that are needed to interpret data from the photoionized
regions mentioned above, one can irradiate a plasma volume containing relevant species with
an intense x-ray source (e.g., Foord et al. 2006). In accretion disks, the magnetorotational
instability (MRI) may provide the needed angular momentum transport. The MRI will be
produced and studied in the laboratory during the next decade. This will prove to be of value
in benchmarking the newly complex MHD codes needed to better understand phenomena
such as stellar outflows, supernovae, and accretion disks. Other experiments that will
contribute to such understanding include those on magnetic reconnection, which is already
very active (e.g., Ren et al. 2005), on turbulent dynamos, which is poised to become active,
and on collisionless shocks, which is feasible but requires progress with experimental
facilities.
4.5. Nuclear Physics
Major uncertainties remain in our understanding of the nuclear physics governing massive-
star evolution. The most critical parameter in the hydrostatic evolution of supernova
progenitors is the 12C(α,γ) cross section, which determines the relative masses of the C and O
shells, and thus has a major influence on supernova nucleosynthesis. There are several
experimental efforts underway to further constrain this cross section, which is complicated
due to the contributions of sub-threshold resonances.
The path of the r-process is through heavy, neutron-rich nuclei unknown on Earth, but
which form the equilibrium state of nuclear matter in such astrophysical explosions. One of
the main goals of the Facility for Rare Ion Beams (FRIB), a planned new Department of
Energy accelerator, will be to produce these isotopes for the first time, so that their masses
and beta decay lifetimes can be measured. The goal will be to characterize the nuclear
physics well enough that the nucleosynthetic output of supernovae can then be used to
constrain aspects of the explosion, such as the dynamic timescale for the ejecta and the freeze-
out radius – just as Big Bang nucleosynthesis has been used to constrain conditions in the
early Universe. These studies will also provide clues to the nature of the first stars in the
Galaxy. As for the s-process, there are uncertainties associated with long-lived, but unstable
nuclei. Current plans involve harvesting isotopes with FRIB and providing these targets for
use at other facilities. Additional progress is anticipated with the Spallation Neutron Source
at Oak Ridge National Laboratory.
5. Four central questions and one area with unusual discovery potential
5.1 Four central questions
• How have the abundances of chemical elements evolved over cosmic time?
• How are the Galactic disk and halo coupled through a dynamic interstellar
medium?
• What is the relationship between the Galactic Center and active galactic nuclei
throughout cosmic time?
• What is the life cycle of cosmic carbon and what are the chemical steps leading
to life on Earth?
5.2 One area with unusual discovery potential
• The field of astrobiology holds the promise of discovering how life arose on
Earth and how likely it is elsewhere in our Galactic neighborhood.
6. Postlude
Laboratory astrophysics and complementary theoretical calculations are part of the foundation
for our understanding of GAN and will remain so for many generations to come. From the
level of scientific conception to that of the scientific return, it is our understanding of the
underlying processes that allows us to address fundamental questions in these areas. In this
regard, laboratory astrophysics is much like detector and instrument development; these
efforts are constantly necessary to maximize the scientific return from astronomical
observations.