1v8205020/sc:viXra
NLTK: The Natural Language Toolkit
Edward Loper and Steven Bird
Department of Computer and Information Science
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104-6389, USA
Abstract An unfortunate consequence is that a
significant part of such courses must be devoted
NLTK, the Natural Language Toolkit, to teaching programming languages. Further,
is a suite of open source program many interesting projects span a variety of
modules, tutorials and problem sets, domains, and would require that multiple
providing ready-to-use computational languages be bridged. For example, a student
linguistics courseware. NLTK covers projectthatinvolved syntactic parsingofcorpus
symbolic and statistical natural lan- datafromamorphologicallyrichlanguagemight
guage processing, and is interfaced to involve all three of the languages mentioned
annotated corpora. Students augment above: Perl for string processing; a finite state
and replace existing components, learn toolkit for morphological analysis; and Prolog
structured programming by example, for parsing. It is clear that these considerable
and manipulate sophisticated models overheads and shortcomings warrant a fresh
from the outset. approach.
Apart from the practical component, compu-
tational linguistics courses may also depend on
1 Introduction
software for in-class demonstrations. This con-
Teachers of introductory courses on compu- text calls for highly interactive graphical user
tational linguistics are often faced with the interfaces, making it possible to view program
challenge of setting up a practical programming state (e.g. the chart of a chart parser), observe
component for student assignments and program execution step-by-step (e.g. execu-
projects. This is a difficult task because tion of a finite-state machine), and even make
different computational linguistics domains minor modifications to programs in response to
require a variety of different data structures “what if” questions from the class. Because
and functions, and because a diverse range of of these difficulties it is common to avoid live
topics may need to be included in the syllabus. demonstrations, and keep classes for theoreti-
A widespread practice is to employ multiple cal presentations only. Apart from being dull,
programming languages, where each language thisapproach leaves students tosolve important
provides native data structures and functions practical problems on their own, or to deal with
that are a good fit for the task at hand. For them less efficiently in office hours.
example, a course might use Prolog for pars- In this paper we introduce a new approach to
ing,Perlforcorpusprocessing,andafinite-state the above challenges, a streamlined and flexible
toolkit for morphological analysis. By relying way of organizing the practical component
on thebuilt-in features of variouslanguages, the of an introductory computational linguistics
teacheravoidshavingtodevelopalotofsoftware course. We describe NLTK, the Natural
infrastructure. Language Toolkit, which we have developed in
conjunction with a course we have taught at criteria are listed in the order of their impor-
the University of Pennsylvania. tance. It was also important to decide what
The Natural Language Toolkit is avail- goals the toolkit would not attempt to accom-
able under an open source license from plish; wethereforeincludeanexplicitsetofnon-
platforms supported by Python, including to satisfy.
Windows, OS X, Linux, and Unix.
3.1 Requirements
2 Choice of Programming Language
Ease of Use. The primary purpose of the
The most basic step in setting up a practical
toolkit is to allow students to concentrate on
component is choosing a suitable programming
buildingnaturallanguageprocessing(NLP)sys-
language. A number of considerations
tems. Themoretimestudentsmustspendlearn-
influenced our choice. First, the language must
ing to use the toolkit, the less useful it is.
have a shallow learning curve, so that novice
programmers get immediate rewards for their Consistency. The toolkit should use consis-
efforts. Second, the language must support tent data structures and interfaces.
rapid prototyping and a short develop/test
Extensibility. The toolkit should easily
cycle; an obligatory compilation step is a
accommodate new components, whether those
serious detraction. Third, the code should be
components replicate or extend the toolkit’s
self-documenting,withatransparentsyntaxand
existing functionality. The toolkit should
semantics. Fourth, it should be easy to write
be structured in such a way that it is obvious
structuredprograms,ideallyobject-oriented but
wherenewextensions wouldfitintothetoolkit’s
without the burden associated with languages
infrastructure.
like C++. Finally, the language must have
an easy-to-use graphics library to support the
Documentation. The toolkit, its data
development of graphical user interfaces.
structures, and its implementation all need to
In surveying the available languages, we
be carefully and thoroughly documented. All
believe that Python offers an especially good
nomenclature must be carefully chosen and
fit to the above requirements. Python is an
consistently used.
object-oriented scripting language developed
by Guido van Rossum and available on all Simplicity. The toolkit should structure the
platforms (www.python.org). Python offers
complexities of building NLP systems, not hide
a shallow learning curve; it was designed to
them. Therefore, each class defined by the
be easily learnt by children (van Rossum,
toolkit should be simple enough that a student
1999). As an interpreted language, Python is
could implement it by the time they finish an
suitable for rapid prototyping. Python code is
introductory course in computational linguis-
exceptionally readable, and it has been praised
tics.
as “executable pseudocode.” Python is an
object-oriented language, but not punitively Modularity. The interaction between differ-
so, and it is easy to encapsulate data and ent components of the toolkit should be kept
methods inside Python classes. Finally, Python to a minimum, using simple, well-defined inter-
has an interface to the Tk graphics toolkit faces. In particular, it should be possible to
(Lundh, 1999), and writing graphical interfaces complete individual projects using small parts
is straightforward. of the toolkit, without worrying about how they
interact with the rest of the toolkit. This allows
3 Design Criteria
students to learn how to use the toolkit incre-
Several criteria were considered in the design mentally throughout a course. Modularity also
andimplementation ofthetoolkit. Thesedesign makesiteasier tochangeandextendthetoolkit.
3.2 Non-Requirements hypotheses about syntactic constituents. The
pcfgparser module provides a variety of
Comprehensiveness. The toolkit is not
different parsers for probabilistic grammars.
intended to provide a comprehensive set of
And the rechunkparser module defines a
tools. Indeed, there should be a wide variety of
transformational regular-expression based
ways in which students can extend the toolkit.
implementation of the chunk parser interface.
Efficiency. The toolkit does not need to
be highly optimized for runtime performance. Tagging Modules
However, it should be efficient enough that Thetagger moduledefines a standard interface
students can use their NLP systems to perform foraugmentingeach token ofatextwithsupple-
real tasks. mentary information, such as its part of speech
or its WordNet synset tag; and provides several
Cleverness. Clear designs and implementa-
different implementations for this interface.
tions are far preferable to ingenious yet inde-
cipherable ones.
Finite State Automata
The fsa module defines a data type for encod-
The toolkit is implemented as a collection of ing finite state automata; and an interface for
independent modules, each of which defines a creating automata from regular expressions.
specific data structure or task.
Type Checking
A set of core modules defines basic data
types and processing systems that are used Debugging time is an important factor in the
throughout the toolkit. The token module toolkit’s ease of use. To reduce the amount of
provides basic classes for processing individual time students must spend debugging their code,
elements of text, such as words or sentences. we provide a type checking module, which can
The tree module defines data structures for be used to ensure that functions are given valid
representing tree structures over text, such arguments. The type checking module is used
as syntax trees and morphological trees. The by all of the basic data types and processing
probability module implements classes that classes.
encode frequency distributions and probability Since type checking is done explicitly, it can
distributions, including a variety of statistical slow the toolkit down. However, when efficiency
smoothing techniques. is an issue, type checking can be easily turned
Theremainingmodulesdefinedatastructures off; and with type checking is disabled, there is
andinterfacesforperformingspecificNLPtasks. no performance penalty.
This list of modules will grow over time, as we
Visualization
add new tasks and algorithms to the toolkit.
Visualization modules define graphical
Parsing Modules
interfaces for viewing and manipulating
The parser module defines a high-level inter- data structures, and graphical tools for
faceforproducingtreesthatrepresentthestruc- experimenting with NLP tasks. The draw.tree
turesoftexts. Thechunkparsermoduledefines module provides a simple graphical inter-
a sub-interface for parsers that identify non- face for displaying tree structures. The
overlapping linguistic groups (such as basenoun draw.tree edit module provides an interface
phrases) in unrestricted text. for building and modifying tree structures.
Four modules provide implementations The draw.plot graph module can be used to
for these abstract interfaces. The srparser graph mathematical functions. The draw.fsa
module implements a simple shift-reduce module provides a graphical tool for displaying
parser. The chartparser module defines a and simulating finite state automata. The
flexible parser that uses a chart to record draw.chart module provides an interactive
graphical tool for experimenting with chart Reference Documentation providesprecise
parsers. definitions for every module, interface, class,
The visualization modules provide interfaces method, function, and variable in the toolkit. It
for interaction and experimentation; they do is automatically extracted from docstring com-
not directly implement NLP data structures or ments in the Python source code, using Epydoc
tasks. Simplicity of implementation is therefore (Loper, 2002).
less of an issue for the visualization modules
Technical Reports explain and justify the
than it is for the rest of the toolkit.
toolkit’s design and implementation. They are
Text Classification used by the developers of the toolkit to guide
The classifier module defines a standard and document the toolkit’s construction. Stu-
interface for classifying texts into categories. dentscanalsoconsultthesereportsiftheywould
This interface is currently implemented by two like furtherinformation abouthow thetoolkit is
modules. Theclassifier.naivebayesmodule designed, and why it is designed that way.
definesatextclassifierbasedontheNaiveBayes 6 Uses of NLTK
assumption. The classifier.maxent module
defines the maximum entropy model for text 6.1 Assignments
classification, and implements two algorithms
NLTK can be used to create student assign-
for training the model: Generalized Iterative
ments of varying difficulty and scope. In the
Scaling and Improved Iterative Scaling.
simplest assignments, students experiment with
The classifier.feature module provides
anexisting module. Thewidevariety of existing
a standard encoding for the information that
modules provide many opportunities for creat-
is used to make decisions for a particular
ing these simple assignments. Once students
classification task. This standard encoding
become more familiar with the toolkit, they can
allows students to experiment with the
beaskedtomakeminorchangesorextensionsto
differences between different text classification
an existing module. A more challenging task is
algorithms, using identical feature sets.
to develop a new module. Here, NLTK provides
The classifier.featureselection module
some useful starting points: predefined inter-
defines a standard interface for choosing which
faces and data structures, and existing modules
features are relevant for a particular classifica-
that implement the same interface.
tion task. Good feature selection can signifi-
cantly improve classification performance. Example: Chunk Parsing
5 Documentation As an example of a moderately difficult
assignment, we asked students to construct
The toolkit is accompanied by extensive
a chunk parser that correctly identifies base
documentation that explains the toolkit, and
noun phrase chunks in a given text, by
describes how to use and extend it. This
defining a cascade of transformational chunking
documentation is divided into three primary
rules. The NLTK rechunkparser module
categories:
provides a variety of regular-expression
Tutorials teach students how to use the based rule types, which the students can
toolkit, in the context of performing specific instantiate to construct complete rules.
tasks. Each tutorial focuses on a single domain, For example, ChunkRule(’<NN.*>’) builds
such as tagging, probabilistic systems, or text chunks from sequences of consecutive nouns;
classification. The tutorials include a high-level ChinkRule(’<VB.>’) excises verbs from
discussion that explains and motivates the existing chunks; SplitRule(’<NN>’, ’<DT>’)
domain, followed by a detailed walk-through splits any existing chunk that contains a
that uses examples to show how NLTK can be singular noun followed by determiner into
used to perform specific tasks. two pieces; and MergeRule(’<JJ>’, ’<JJ>’)
combines two adjacent chunks where the first algorithms. Both data structures and control
chunk ends and the second chunk starts with flow can be easily modified during the demon-
adjectives. stration, in responseto questions from theclass.
The chunking tutorial motivates chunk pars- Since these graphical tools are included with
ing, describes each rule type, and provides all the toolkit, they can also be used by students.
the necessary code for the assignment. Thepro- Thisallowsstudentstoexperimentathomewith
vided code is responsible for loading the chun- the algorithms that they have seen presented in
ked,part-of-speechtaggedtextusinganexisting class.
tokenizer, creating an unchunked version of the
text, applying the chunk rules to the unchunked Example: The Chart Parsing Tool
text, and scoring the result. Students focus on
The chart parsing tool is an example of a
the NLP task only – providing a rule set with
graphical tool provided by NLTK. This tool can
the best coverage.
be used to explain the basic concepts behind
In the remainder of this section we reproduce
chart parsing, and to show how the algorithm
some of the cascades created by the students.
works. Chart parsing is a flexible parsing algo-
The first example illustrates a combination of
rithmthatusesadatastructurecalledachart to
several rule types:
record hypotheses about syntactic constituents.
cascade = [
ChunkRule(’<DT><NN.*><VB.><NN.*>’), Each hypothesis is represented by a single edge
ChunkRule(’<DT><VB.><NN.*>’), onthechart. Asetofrules determinewhennew
edgescanbeaddedtothechart. Thissetofrules
UnChunkRule("<,|\\.|‘‘|’’>"), controls the overall behavior of the parser (e.g.,
MergeRule(’<NN.*|DT|JJ.*|CD>’, whether it parses top-down or bottom-up).
SplitRule(’<NN.*>’, ’<DT|JJ>’) The chart parsing tool demonstrates the pro-
] cess of parsing a single sentence, with a given
Thenextexampleillustratesabrute-forcesta- grammar and lexicon. Its display is divided into
tistical approach. The student calculated how three sections: the bottom section displays the
often each part-of-speech tag was included in chart; the middle section displays the sentence;
a noun phrase. They then constructed chunks and the top section displays the partial syntax
from any sequence of tags that occurred in a tree corresponding to the selected edge. But-
noun phrase more than 50% of the time. tons along the bottom of the window are used
cascade = [ to control the execution of the algorithm. The
ChunkRule(’<\\$|CD|DT|EX|PDT main display window for the chart parsing tool
is shown in Figure 1.
] This tool can be used to explain several dif-
In the third example, the student constructed ferent aspects of chart parsing. First, it can be
a single chunk containing the entire text, and used to explain the basic chart data structure,
then excised all elements that did not belong. and to show how edges can represent hypothe-
cascade = [ ses about syntactic constituents. It can then
ChunkRule(’<.*>+’) be used to demonstrate and explain the indi-
vidual rules that the chart parser uses to create
new edges. Finally, it can be used to show how
6.2 Class demonstrations theseindividualrulescombinetofindacomplete
NLTK provides graphical tools that can beused parse for a given sentence.
in class demonstrations to help explain basic To reduce the overhead of setting up demon-
NLPconceptsandalgorithms. Theseinteractive strations during lecture, the user can define a
tools can be used to display relevant data struc- list of preset charts. The tool can then be reset
tures and to show the step-by-step execution of to any one of these charts at any time.
students with the basic data structures, tools,
and interfaces that they need. This allows the
students to concentrate on the problems that
interest them.
The collaborative, open-source nature of the
toolkit can provide students with a sense that
their projects are meaningful contributions, and
not just exercises. Several of the students in our
course have expressed interest in incorporating
their projects into the toolkit.
Finally, many of the modules included in the
toolkit provide students with good examples
of what projects should look like, with well
thought-outinterfaces,cleancodestructure,and
thorough documentation.
Figure 1: Chart Parsing Tool Example: Probabilistic Parsing
The probabilistic parsing module was created
as a class project for a statistical NLP course.
The chart parsing tool allows for flexible con- The toolkit provided the basic data types and
trol of the parsing algorithm. At each step of interfaces for parsing. The project extended
the algorithm, the user can select which rule or these, adding a new probabilistic parsing inter-
strategytheywishtoapply. Thisallowstheuser face, and using subclasses to create a prob-
to experiment with mixing different strategies abilistic version of the context free grammar
(e.g., top-down and bottom-up). The user can data structure. These new components were
exercise fine-grained control over the algorithm usedinconjunctionwithseveralexistingcompo-
byselectingwhichedgetheywishtoapplyarule nents,suchasthechartdatastructure,todefine
to. This flexibility allows lecturers to use the twoimplementations oftheprobabilisticparsing
tool to respond to a wide variety of questions; interface. Finally, a tutorial was written that
andallows studentstoexperimentwithdifferent explained the basic motivations and concepts
variations on the chart parsing algorithm. behind probabilistic parsing, and described the
new interfaces, data structures, and parsers.
6.3 Advanced Projects
7 Evaluation
NLTK provides students with a flexible frame-
work for advanced projects. Typical projects We used NLTK as a basis for the assignments
involve the development of entirely new func- and student projects in CIS-530, an introduc-
tionalityforapreviouslyunsupportedNLPtask, tory computational linguistics class taught at
or the development of a complete system out of the University of Pennsylvania. CIS-530 is a
existing and new modules. graduate level class, although some advanced
The toolkit’s broad coverage allows students undergraduates were also enrolled. Most stu-
to explore a wide variety of topics. In our intro- dents had a background in either computer sci-
ductory computational linguistics course, topics ence or linguistics (and occasionally both). Stu-
for student projects included text generation, dents were required to complete five assign-
wordsensedisambiguation, collocation analysis, ments, two exams, and a final project. All class
and morphological analysis. materials are available from the course website
building that is typically associated with The experience of using NLTK was very pos-
advanced student projects by providing itive, both for us and for the students. The
students liked the fact that they could do inter- 2000; Baldridge et al., 2002a). A concurrent
esting projects from the outset. They also liked development has been the finite state toolkits,
being able to run everything on their computer such as the Xerox toolkit (Beesley and
at home. The students found the extensive doc- Karttunen, 2002). This work has found
umentation very helpful for learning to use the widespread pedagogical application.
toolkit. They found the interfaces defined by Other Researchers and Developers.
NLTK intuitive, and appreciated the ease with A variety of toolkits have been created for
which they could combine different components research or R&D purposes. Examples include
to create complete NLP systems. the CMU-Cambridge Statistical Language
We did encounter a few difficulties during the Modeling Toolkit (Clarkson and Rosenfeld,
semester. One problem was finding large clean 1997), the EMU Speech Database System
corpora that the students could use for their (Harrington and Cassidy, 1999), the General
assignments. Several of the students needed Architecture for Text Engineering (Bontcheva
assistance finding suitable corpora for their et al., 2002), the Maxent Package for Maximum
final projects. Another issue was the fact that Entropy Models (Baldridge et al., 2002b), and
we were actively developing NLTK during the the Annotation Graph Toolkit (Maeda et al.,
semester; some modules were only completed 2002). Although not originally motivated by
one or two weeks before the students used pedagogical needs, all of these toolkits have
them. As a result, students who worked at pedagogical applications andmanyhavealready
home needed to download new versions of the been used in teaching.
toolkit several times throughout the semester.
9 Conclusions and Future Work
Luckily, Python has extensive support for
installation scripts, which made these upgrades NLTK provides a simple, extensible, uniform
simple. The students encountered a couple of framework for assignments, projects, and class
bugs in the toolkit, but none were serious, and demonstrations. It is well documented, easy to
all were quickly corrected. learn, and simple to use. We hope that NLTK
will allow computational linguistics classes to
8 Other Approaches
include more hands-on experience with using
Thecomputationalcomponentofcomputational and building NLP components and systems.
linguisticscoursestakesmanyforms. Inthissec- NLTK is unique in its combination of three
tion we briefly review a selection of approaches, factors. First, it was deliberately designed as
classified accordingtothe(original) target audi- courseware and gives pedagogical goals primary
ence. status. Second, its target audience consists of
Linguistics Students. Various books intro- both linguists and computer scientists, and it
duce programming or computing to linguists. is accessible and challenging at many levels of
Theseareelementaryonthecomputationalside, prior computational skill. Finally, it is based on
providing a gentle introduction to students hav- an object-oriented scripting language support-
ing no prior experience in computer science. ingrapidprototypingandliterateprogramming.
Examples of such books are: Using Computers We plan to continue extending the breadth
in Linguistics (Lawler and Dry, 1998), and Pro- of materials covered by the toolkit. We are
gramming for Linguistics: Java Technology for currently workingonNLTKmodulesfor Hidden
Language Researchers (Hammond, 2002). Markov Models, language modeling, and tree
Grammar Developers. Infrastructure adjoining grammars. We also plan to increase
for grammar development has a long history the number of algorithms implemented by some
in unification-based (or constraint-based) existing modules, such as the text classification
grammar frameworks, from DCG (Pereira module.
and Warren, 1980) to HPSG (Pollard and Finding suitable corpora is a prerequisite for
Sag, 1994). Recent work includes (Copestake, many studentassignments and projects. We are
containing data appropriate for every module cam.ac.uk/~prc14/eurospeech97.ps.
defined by the toolkit.
[Copestake2000] Ann Copestake. 2000. The (new)
NLTK is an open source project, and we wel- LKB system.
pdf.
ested in contributing to NLTK, or who have
suggestionsforimprovements,areencouragedto
[Hammond2002] MichaelHammond. 2002. Program-
contact the authors. ming for Linguistics: Java Technology for Lan-
guage Researchers. Oxford: Blackwell. In press.
10 Acknowledgments
[Harrington and Cassidy1999] Jonathan Harrington
We are indebted to our students for feedback
and Steve Cassidy. 1999. Techniques in Speech
on the toolkit, and to anonymous reviewers, Jee Acoustics. Kluwer.
Bang, and the workshop organizers for com-
[Lawler and Dry1998] John M. Lawler and
mentsonanearlierversionofthispaper. Weare
Helen Aristar Dry, editors. 1998. Using
gratefultoMitchMarcusandtheDepartmentof Computers in Linguistics. London: Routledge.
Computer and Information Science at the Uni-
[Loper2002] Edward Loper. 2002. Epydoc.
versity of Pennsylvania for sponsoring the work
reported here.
[Lundh1999] Fredrik Lundh. 1999. An introduction
to tkinter.
tkinter/introduction/index.htm.
[Baldridge et al.2002a] Jason Baldridge, John
Dowding, and Susana Early. 2002a. Leo: [Maeda et al.2002] Kazuaki Maeda, Steven Bird,
an architecture for sharing resources for Xiaoyi Ma, and Haejoong Lee. 2002. Creat-
unification-based grammars. In Proceedings ing annotation tools with the annotation graph
of the Third Language Resources and Evaluation toolkit. In Proceedings of the Third International
Conference. Paris: EuropeanLanguage Resources Conference on Language Resources and Evalua-
~jmb/leo-lrec.ps.gz. [Pereira and Warren1980] Fernando C. N. Pereira
and David H. D. Warren. 1980. Definite clause
[Baldridge et al.2002b] Jason Baldridge, Thomas grammars for language analysis – a survey of the
Morton, and Gann Bierner. 2002b. The MaxEnt formalismandacomparisonwithaugmentedtran-
project. sition grammars. Artificial Intelligence, 13:231–
[Beesley and Karttunen2002] Kenneth R. Beesley [Pollard and Sag1994] Carl Pollard and Ivan A. Sag.
and Lauri Karttunen. 2002. Finite-State 1994. Head-Driven Phrase Structure Grammar.
Morphology: XeroxTools andTechniques. Studies Chicago University Press.
in Natural Language Processing. Cambridge
University Press. [van Rossum1999] Guido van Rossum. 1999. Com-
puter programming for everybody. Technical
[Bontcheva et al.2002] Kalina Bontcheva, Hamish report, Corporation for National Research Ini-
and Oana Hamza. 2002. Using GATE as an cp4e.html.
environment for teaching NLP. In Proceedings of
theACLWorkshoponEffectiveToolsandMethod-
ologies for Teaching NLP and CL. Somerset, NJ:
Association for Computational Linguistics.
[Clarkson and Rosenfeld1997] PhilipR.Clarksonand
Ronald Rosenfeld. 1997. Statistical language
modeling using the CMU-Cambridge Toolkit.
In Proceedings of the 5th European Confer-
ence on Speech Communication and Technology