]hp-tsih.scisyhp[
2v4236.1131:viXra
Non-standard Models and the Sociology of Cosmology1
Mart´ın Lo´pez-Corredoira
Instituto de Astrof´ısica de Canarias, E-38200, La Laguna, Tenerife, Spain
Departamento de Astrof´ısica, Univ. La Laguna, E-38206 La Laguna, Tenerife, Spain
I review some theoretical ideas in cosmology different fromthe standard “Big
Bang”: the quasi-steady state model, the plasma cosmology model, non-
cosmological redshifts, alternatives to non-baryonic dark matter and/or dark
energy, and others. Cosmologists do not usually work within the framework
of alternative cosmologies because they feel that these are not at present as
competitive asthestandard model. Certainly, they arenot so developed, and
they are not so developed because cosmologists do not work on them. It is a
vicious circle. The fact that most cosmologists do not pay them any atten-
tion and only dedicate their research time to the standard model is to a great
extent due to a sociological phenomenon (the “snowball effect” or “group-
think”). We might well wonder whether cosmology, our knowledge of the
Universe as a whole, is a science like other fields of physics or a predominant
ideology.
Keywords: Cosmology – Astrophysics – Sociology – Philosophy
1. Introduction
The present-day standard model of cosmology (the “Big Bang”) gives us
a representation of a cosmos whose dynamics is dominated by gravity (from
1PaperacceptedforpublicationinStudiesinHistoryandPhilosophyofModernPhysics
(SPHMP) for the special issue on “Philosophy of Cosmology”(2014). Sentences in italics
[apartfromthetitlesofbooksorjournalsortitlesofsubsections,whicharealwaysinitalics]
arepublishedonly inthis arXiv.org versionandthey havebeenremovedor substitutedin
theversionofthejournalSPHMP,sincetheeditorsandrefereesofthispaperaskedmeto
dothis inorderto the article be acceptedinthe journal. Here,I keepsomeofthe original
sentences and paragraphs because I prefer this version rather than the filtered one.
Preprint submitted to Studies in Hist. Philos. Mod. Phys. July 24, 2018
general relativity), with a finite lifetime, large scales homogeneity, expansion
andahotinitialstate, togetherwithotherelementsnecessarytoavoidcertain
inconsistencies with the observations (inflation, non-baryonic dark matter,
dark energy, etc.). Although the Big Bang is the most commonly accepted
theory, it is not the only possible representation of the Cosmos. In the
last ∼90 years —such is the brief history of the branch of science called
cosmology— there have been plenty of other proposals. I describe them in
§2 of this paper.
Cosmologists do not usually work within the framework of alternative
cosmologies because they feel these are not at present as competitive as the
standard model. Certainly, they are not so developed, and they are not so
developed because cosmologists do not work on them. It is a vicious circle.
The fact that most cosmologists do not pay them any attention and only
dedicate their research time to the standard model is to a great extent due
to a sociological phenomenon. In a second part of the paper, §3 and §4, I
will discuss the sociological aspects related to cosmology and the debate on
the different theories.
2. Alternative models
Although the standard model (“Big Bang”) is the most well known and
commonly accepted theory of cosmology, it is not the only possible repre-
sentation of the Cosmos, and it is not clear that it is the right one, not
even in an approximate way (for a discussion of some of its problems see
Lo´pez-Corredoira, 2003, and see also below in §2.5). There were and there
are many other alternative approaches to our understanding of the Universe
as a whole. Among them, because of its historical importance and impact,
the quasi-steady state model and plasma cosmology are significant examples.
There are many other examples too. I will give a brief description of them in
this section. I will not give a complete list of models, but this sample is large
enough to give an idea of what theoretical approaches are being discussed in
cosmology from heterodox standpoints: either from dissidence with respect
to the standard model, or dissidence with respect to the dominant dissident
theories.
2.1. Quasi-Steady State Cosmology
The theory (better call it a hypothesis) which is called nowadays the
“quasi-steady state cosmology” (QSSC) was indeed first called the “steady
state theory”. Hoyle (1948), and independently Bondi & Gold (1948), pro-
posed the hypothesis of the steady state in which, contrary to the Big Bang
approach, there was no beginning of the Universe. The Universe is expand-
ing, it is eternal and the homogeneous distribution of matter is being created
at a rate of 10 −24 baryon/cm3/s, instead of the unique moment of creation
in the Big Bang. The perfect cosmological principle of a Universe which is
observed to be the same from anywhere and at any time is followed in this
model, whereas the standard model only gives a cosmological principle in
space but not in time. There is no evolution. The Universe remains always
the same. Newly created matter forms new galaxies which substitute those
that are swept away by the expansion.
Fred Hoyle (1915–2001) inadvertently baptised the rival theory: he dub-
bed the primaeval atom theory of Gamow and coworkers2 the “Big Bang”
in order to ridicule it. However, the name caught on. During the ’50s, both
theories held their ground. While there were attempts to explain the abun-
dances of thechemical elements with Gamowet al.’s theory, the Steady State
Theory also provided plausible explanations. E. M. Burbidge et al. (1957)
explained the abundances of the light elements (helium, lithium, deuterium
[an isotope of hydrogen] and others) in terms of stellar nucleosynthesis and
collision with cosmic rays in the remote past of the Universe. The heaviest
elements could also be explained in terms of stellar rather than primordial
nucleosynthesis, and the defenders of Big Bang in the end also had to adopt
the stellar nucleosynthesis of Burbidge et al. for the heavy elements.
Nonetheless, the steady state theory would lose competitiveness by the
mid-sixties, because it could not explain certain observational facts. It could
not explain why the galaxies were younger at higher redshift. It could not
explain the excess of radio sources at large distances (Ryle & Clarke, 1961),
nor the distribution of quasars. Most importantly, it did not explain the cos-
mic microwave background radiation(CMBR), discovered in 1965by Penzias
and Wilson.3 This strongly favoured the Big Bang theory.
2GeorgeGamow(1904–1968)andoneofhisstudents,RalphAlpher, publishedapaper
in 1948. Gamow, who had certain sense of humour, decided to put the reputed physicist
Hans Bethe as second author, even though he had not participated in the development of
thepaper. Bethewasamused,sothe resultwasapaperbyAlpher, BetheandGamow(to
rhyme with “alpha, beta and gamma”). Later, R. C. Herman joined the research team,
but—according to Gamow—he refused stubbornly to change his name to “Delter”.
3Indeed,theradiationhadbeendiscoveredpreviously,butPenziasandWilson,adviced
In 1993–94, Hoyle, Burbidge, & Narlikar (1993, 1994)4 published a mod-
ification of the model that was called the “quasi-steady state” theory. The
main modification consisted in positing an oscillatory expansion apart from
the exponential term:
P ∼ 1012 years, θ(t) ∼ t. The exponential factor had already been intro-
duced in the first version of the Steady State model to keep a˙ =constant and
consequently maintain a constant density of matter by invoking the continu-
ous creation of matter. The new term here is the sinusoidal oscillation. The
creation of matter is confined to epochs with minimum a(t) rather than be-
ing continuous. The parameter Q and η would be determined from Hubble’s
constant, the age of globular clusters and the maximum observed redshift
in the galaxies. With this model, some of the problems that affected the
original theory of 1948 were solved. This explained why there are younger
galaxies at higher redshift, the problem of the radio sources, the distribu-
tion of quasars (with lower density for z & 2.5), the formation of large-scale
structure (Nayeri et al., 1999).
The CMBR and its blackbody spectrum would be explained as the effect
of the thermalization of the radiation emitted by the stars of the last cycle
P/3 due to absorption and re-emision that produce needle-shaped particles
(“whiskers”) in the intergalactic medium. Due to the long distance travelled
bythephotonsinthemaxima oftheoscillationandduetothethermalization
that occurs at each minimum, there is no accumulation of anisotropies from
one cycle to another. Only the fluctuations of the last minimum survive,
which gives fluctuations of temperature comparable to the observed ∆T/T ∼
5 × 10 −6. First, the carbon needles thermalize the visible light from the
stars giving rise to far infrared photons at z ∼ 5, keeping the isotropy of
the radiation. Afterwards, iron needles dominated, degrading the infrared
by R. H. Dicke et al., interpreted it in cosmological terms (Dicke et al., 1965). In the old
Soviet Union, Shmaonov (1957) had made measurements at a frequency of 9 GHz of a
background radiation that was isotropic and had an antenna temperature of 4 ± 3 K.
There were also previous measurements by Japanese teams, and indirect measurements
of the existence of radiation of ∼ 2.3 K by MacKellar in 1941 with the spectral analyses
showing excitation of rotational transition of cyan molecules (Novikov, 2001).
4See also Hoyle, Burbidge, & Narlikar (2000) or Narlikar et al. (2007) for a complete
development of the theory and comparisonwith observationaldata.
radiation to produce the observed microwave radiation (Wickramasinghe,
2006). The anisotropies of this radiation would be explained in terms of
clusters of galaxies and other elements (Narlikar et al., 2003, 2007).
Concerning the origin of the redshift in the galaxies, the proposers of this
model admit a component due to the expansion a(t), like in the Big Bang,
but furthermore they posit the existence of intrinsic redshifts. This allows
the solution of problems such as the periodicity of redshift in quasars, and
the possible existence of cases with anomalous redshifts (L´opez-Corredoira,
2010). The total redshift would be the product of both factors, expansion
and intrinsic:
exp. int.
The intrinsic redshift is explained by means of the variable mass hypoth-
esis. Hoyle & Narlikar (1964) derived this hypothesis from a new gravitation
theory based on Mach’s principle with the solution that the Minkowski met-
ric and the particle mass depend on time as m ∝ t2. This variable mass
hypothesis is used by the authors of QSSC to explain cases of anomalous
redshifts, but it is not part of the main body of the hypothesis QSSC, that
is, it is optional; QSSC can be conceived without the variable mass hypoth-
esis. The intrinsic redshift would be due to variation of the energy of the
emitted photon when the masses of protons and electrons vary:
(1+z ) = observer = 0 .
int.
In the case of quasars, anomalies in the redshift would be observed be-
cause the mass of their constituent particles grows proportionally to (t −
t )2 instead of t2 (Narlikar, 1977; Narlikar & Arp, 1993).
Summing up, they proposed a model which aimed to compete with the
standard “Big Bang” theory but with a very different description of the
Universe. According to the authors, QSSC is able to explain the existing
cosmological observations, at least in an approximate way, and it can even
explain some facts that the Big Bang model does not explain (such as the
anomalies in the redshifts of quasars). It also contains predictions different
from the standard model, though these are difficult to test. The predictions
include (Narlikar, 2006): existence of faint galaxies (m > 27) with small
blueshifts (∆z < 0.1), the existence of stars and galaxies older than 14 gi-
gayears, an abundance of baryonic matter in ratios above those predicted
by the Big Bang, and gravitational radiation derived from the creation of
matter.
2.2. Plasma Cosmology
Plasma Cosmology assumes that most of the mass in the Universe is
plasma controlled mainly by electromagnetic forces (and also gravity, of
course), rather than gravity alone, as in the standard model. The Universe
has always existed, it is always evolving, and it will continue to exist forever.
Some of its proposers are the Physics Nobel Prize laureate Hannes Alfv´en
(1908-1995), O. Klein, A. L. Peratt, E. Lerner, A. Brynjolfsson (Alfv´en &
Klein, 1962; Alfv´en, 1981, ch. 6; Alfv´en, 1983, 1988; Lerner, 1991).
The plasma, through electric currents and magnetic fields, creates fila-
ments similar to those observed in the large-scale filamentary structure of
the Universe. The plasma cosmology model predicts the observer morpho-
logical hierarchy: distances among stars, galaxies, cluster of galaxies, and
filaments of huge sizes in the large-scale structure. The observed velocities of
the streams of galaxies in regions close to the largest superclusters are coin-
cident with those predicted by the model, without the need for dark matter
(Lerner, 1991). The formation of galaxies and their dynamics would also be
governed by forces and interactions of electromagnetic fields (Peratt, 1983,
1984; Lerner, 1991, chs. 1, 6).
Hubble expansion is admitted in the first version of plasma cosmology
and was explained by means of the repulsion between matter and antimat-
ter. Alfv´enproposed his“fireworks” model inwhich asupercluster isrepelled
by other superclusters; and within a supercluster each cluster is repelled by
other clusters; and within a given cluster each galaxy is repelled by the other
galaxies, and so on, obeying a distribution of matter and antimatter. In each
local volume, a small explosion would impose its own local Hubble relation-
ship, and this would explain the variations in the velocities of Hubble’s law,
i.e. the different values of the Hubble constant measured in the 70s and 80s,
whenAlfv´en positedhishypothesis, indifferent rangesofdistances orlooking
in different directions, all without invoking dark matter. The energy derived
from the annihilation of protons and electrons would produce a background
radiation of X- and γ-rays. In more recent times, some proposers of plasma
cosmology (e.g., Brynjolfsson, 2004; Lerner, 2006) have stated that there is
no expansion, the Universe is static, and that the redshift of the galaxies
would be explained by some kind of tired light effect of the interaction of
photons with electrons in the plasma.
With regard to the CMBR, Lerner (1988, 1995) explains it in terms of
absorption and re-emission of the radiation produced by stars. It is similar
to the mechanism proposed by QSSC, but here the thermalization is due to
interactionwith electrons. The interaction ofphotonsandelectrons produces
alossofdirection inthepathofthelight, giving risetoanisotropicradiation.
2.3. Static Models
There exist plenty of models which are characterized by lacking an origin
of time (an eternal Universe), such as those described in the two previous
subsections; such models moreover posit that there is no expansion, in some
casesthespaceeven beinginfiniteandEuclidean. Theredshift ofthegalaxies
given by Hubble’s law would be due to some mechanism different from the
expansion or Doppler effect, mainly a “tired light” effect (see reviews by
Lo´pez-Corredoira, 2003, §2.1; Lo´pez-Corredoira, 2006). Among the many
cases, I will mention just a few of them:
• The eternal Universe by Hawkins (1960, 1962a, 1962b, 1962c): Based
on the existence of a negative pressure in a cosmic fluid derived from
general relativity (not very different fromthe role the cosmological con-
stant hasacquired nowadays). The main point which differenciates this
model from the standard theory is the proposal that the Universe is
static, infinite, without an instant of creation and without expansion.
The redshift of the galaxies is explained as a gravitational effect com-
bined with a slight amount of intergalactic extinction5 (10 −7 times the
local interstellar absorption per unit distance). Hawkins (1993) argues
that his model is not unstable, with no tendency to collapse or expand,
and that the CMBR is due to the emission of Galactic and intergalactic
dust grains. Olbers’ paradox (which says that integrating over infinite
distance we should get infinite flux) is solved by means of absorption
in clouds of dust, but energy does not disappear, so this dust should
be heated and re-emit; this problem has no easy solution.
• Chronometric cosmology (Segal, 1976; Segal & Zhou, 1995): This
model assumes that global space structure is a 3D-hypersurface in a
Universe of four dimensions. Events in the Universe are ordered glob-
ally according to a temporal order. The redshift of the galaxies obeys
a quadratic law with distance (nowadays, it is known this cannot be
correct; Sandage & Tammann, 1995). There is no explanation for the
CMBR.
5Extinction produced by some particles which are placed in the space surrounding
galaxies.
• Curvature cosmology (Crawford, 2011; developed since the ’80s and
’90s): A new gravitational theory based on a combination of general
relativity and quantum mechanics. The curvature pressure stems from
themotionofchargedparticlesinnon-geodesicpaths. Inthecaseofthe
photons that travel across the matter, this produces a “tired light” ef-
fect as a product of the gravitational interaction between wave packets
and curved space-time, giving rise to the observed redshift of galaxies.
The result of the interaction of the photon is three new photons: one
withalmostidentical energyandmomentumtothatoftheoriginalpho-
ton and two extremely low energy secondary photons. Anomalous red-
shift cases might be produced by the extra redshift due to the photons’
passage through the cloud around the anomalous object (Crawford,
2011). The CMBR comes from the curvature-redshift process acting
on the high-energy electrons and ions in the cosmic plasma. The en-
ergy loss which gives rise to the spectrum of photons of the CMBR
occurs when an electron that has been excited by the passage through
curved spacetime interacts with a photon or charged particle and loses
its excitation energy.
• Wave system cosmology (Andrews, 1999): The Universe is a pure sys-
tem of waves with mass density and tension parameter proportional
to the local intensity of the modes of the waves. The peaks of the
constructive interferences are the elementary particles. The redshift is
produced by a “tired light” mechanism.
• Subquantum kinetics (LaViolette, 2012) is a unified field theory with
the foundations for a new wave theory of matter. Its non-dispersing,
periodic structures resolve the wave-particle dualism and produce de
Broglie wave diffraction effects. Subquantum kinetics model proposes
an open, order-generating universe, continuously creating matter and
energy. It predicts that gravity potential should have a finite range.
It uses “tired-light” redshift in a static Universe, without radiating a
secondary photon, no angular deflection, no strong wavelength depen-
dence. It works as if intergalactic space on the average were endowed
with a negative gravitational mass density.
2.4. Variations on the Standard Model
There are also models which are closer to the main characteristics of
the standard model, but they are different in some minor aspects. Many of
these models are investigated by some main stream cosmologists. They are
alternative models which stem from the variations of the standard model.
Here are some examples:
• Newtonian cosmology: In the early development of Big Bang cosmol-
ogy there appeared a proposal (Milne, 1933, 1934) to keep an infi-
nite euclidean space, with Newtonian gravity and expansion as a pure
Doppler effect in the recession of the galaxies. Many facts that were
explained by the standard model with general relativity could also be
explained with Newtonian cosmology. There remained some problems
(stability, Olbers’ paradox), but there are also proposals to solve them
without general relativity (see the review by Baryshev & Teerikorpi,
2012, §7.1.3)
• The fractal Universe (e.g., Baryshev et al., 1994; Gabrielli et al., 2005):
The density distribution of the Universe is not homogeneous on very
largescales, butobeysafractaldistribution. Thatis, thedensitywithin
a sphere of radius R is not proportional to R3 for large enough R (in
the regime in which there should be homogeneity) but proportional to
RD with a fractal dimension D < 3.
• The cold Big Bang (Layzer, 1990; developed since the ’60s): Rather
than a very high temperature at the beginning of the Universe with a
later progressive cooling, the Universe starts with T = 0 K. Alternative
explanations are offered for the origin of the elements (Aguirre, 1999),
the CMBR (Aguirre, 2000) and other phenomena explained by the
standard hot Big Bang.
• Variations or oscillations of physical constants (c, G, h, etc.) with time
or distance.
• Modifications of aspects of the gravity law. For instance, modified
Newtoniandynamics [MOND, reviewed by Sanders & McGaugh, 2002],
which posits that Newton’s law of gravitation is not followed for very
lowaccelerations. Another such theoryis modifiedgravity (MOG),and
there are many other cases.
• Multiple variations on the type of dark matter, dark energy/quintes-
sence, or even a Universe without these elements of the present-day
standard model. For instance, some authors claim that non-baryonic
(cold) dark matter in haloes is not necessary to explain the rotation
curves of the galaxies: with the above-mentioned MOND scenario, for
example, darkmatterisexplainedintermsofmassivephotons(Bartlett
& Cumalat, 2011), protons and alpha particles moving at relativistic
speeds(sotheyinteractverylittle; Drexler, 2005),magneticfields(Bat-
taner & Florido, 2000), some distribution of mass in the outer discs
(Nicholson, 2003; Feng & Gallo, 2011), etc. Other examples are al-
ternative proposals to explain the Hubble diagram of supernova data
in terms other than the standard dark energy interpretation: an in-
homogeneous Universe (Romano, 2007), evolution of SNIa luminosity
(Dom´ınguez et al., 2000) or the absorption of their light by grey dust
(Bogomazov & Tutukov, 2011), intergalactic extinction, variation of c
and G (as mentioned in the previous point), other cosmologies, etc.
• Multiple variations on inflation (alternative proposals such as cosmic
strings, walls and other textures). Variations in the number of neutrino
families; the formation of structures in a monolithic way (galaxies all
formed at once) rather than the standard hierarchical scenario (the
galaxiesbeing formedincontinuous episodes ofaccretion andmerging),
etc.
2.5. Caveats/Problems in the Standard and Alternative Approaches
All models have gaps and caveats in their explanation of certain data
derived from observations. The Big Bang has a lot of problems and aspects
that do not work properly or are not totally understood yet (see the reviews
by Lo´pez-Corredoira, 2003; Perivolaropoulos, 2008; Unzicker, 2010; Craw-
ford, 2011; Kroupa, 2012; Baryshev & Teerikorpi, 2012). Such problems
include: higher metallicity and dust content at high redshift than expected,
much higher abundance of very massive galaxies at high redshift than ex-
pected, poorly understood extreme evolution of galaxy sizes, galaxies with
4He< 24%, ill-understood deuterium abundances, failure in the predictions
of Li, Be, 3He, inhomogeneities at scales > 200 Mpc, periodicity of red-
shifts, correlations of objects with low redshift with objects at high redshift,
flows of large-scale structure matter with excessive velocity, an intergalactic
medium temperature independent of redshift, a reionization epoch different
from CMBR and QSO observations, anomalies in the CMBR (alignment
quadrupole/octopole, insufficient lens effect in clusters, etc.), wrong predic-
tions at galactic scales (no cusped halos, excessive angular momentum, insuf-
ficient number of satellites, etc.), no dark matter found yet, excessive cluster
densities, dark energy in excess of theoretical models by a factor 10120, no
observation of antimatter or evidence for CP violation, problems in under-
standing inflation, and so forth.
The expansion itself has no direct proof (nobody has directly observed
a galaxy increasing its distance with respect to us); the most direct argu-
ment in favour of expansion is the redshift of the galaxies, but the redshift
has possible explanations other than expansion. Most tests of expansion
are dependent on the evolution of galaxies, so they cannot give us a solu-
tion without a priori assumptions on that evolution. There are a few tests
which are dependent on other factors; for instance, the Alcock–Paczyn´ski
test is independent of the evolution of the galaxies but it presents entangle-
ment on the cosmological effects with the redshift-space distortions (Ross et
al., 2007). The CMBR, light element abundances and large scale structure
formation also have alternative explanations, as mentioned in previous sub-
sections. Other very recent fashionable topics in cosmology such as Baryonic
Acoustic Oscillation (BAO) peaks might be understandable in terms of dif-
ferent interpretations of the large scale structure too (L´opez-Corredoira &
Gabrielli, 2013).
Of course, if the Big Bang model has problems, the alternative proposals
have their own share of difficulties too, and their problems are more severe
(see, for instance, Edward L. Wright’s web-page6), perhaps because these
theories are not as developed and polished as the standard model. For the
expansion, either they take it as fact, so they need speculative elements to
argue that there was no beginning of the Universe (e.g., continuous creation
of matter in QSSC) or an alternative explanation for the redshift of the
galaxies. The CMBR has alternative explanations different from the Big
Bang, but with some ad hoc elements (e.g., whiskers to thermalize stellar
radiation in QSSC) without direct proof. Also, light element abundances
require very old populations that have not been observed yet.
Indeed, alternative models like QSSC do not apply a different methodol-
ogy from the standard model: both standard and QSSC models have some
basic tenets and a lot of free parameters and ad hoc elements which are in-
troduced every time some observation does not fit their models. Its modern
version (Hoyle et al., 2000) is able to explain most of the difficulties of the
previous (steady state) version of themodel. They introduce adhocelements
without observational support in the same way that the Big Bang introduces
ad hoc non-baryonic dark matter, dark energy, inflation, etc. And they con-
tinue to skip the inconsistencies ad hoc: for instance, the maximum redshift
of a galaxy was set to be 5 in the initial version of QSSC; however the au-
thors have some free parameters which can be changed conveniently when
some new observations do not fit the initial predictions, so at the end they
can introduce ad hoc corrections which render their theory compatible with
any maximum redshift of a galaxy. Indeed, something similar is done with
the Big Bang theory: think, for instance, the predictions of the Big Bang for
the maximum redshift of galaxy or the epoch of reionization. They do the
same kind of re-fitting of parameters. Why, then, are the different theories
accepted/rejected with different criteria?
The number of independent measurements relevant to current cosmology
andthenumberoffreeparametersofthetheoryareofthesameorder(Disney,
2007): in the ’50s the “Big Bang” was a theory with three or four free param-
eters to fit the few quantities of observational cosmology (basically, Hubble’s
constant and the helium abundance), and the increase in cosmological in-
formation from observations, with the CMBR anisotropies and others, has
been accompanied by an increase in free parameters and patches (dark mat-
ter, dark energy, inflation, initial conditions, etc.) in the models to fit those
new numbers, until becoming today a theory with around 20 free parameters
(apart from the initial conditions and other boundary conditions introduced
in the simulations to reproduce certain structures of the Universe). A similar
situation is given in particle physics too (Unzicker, 2010).
The number of independent measurements in CMBR anisotropies is also
very limited. While its power spectrum shows repeated information in the
form of multiple peaks and oscillations, its Fourier transform, the angular
correlation function, offers a more compact presentation that condenses all
the information of the multiple peaks into a localized real space feature.
Oscillations in the power spectrum arise when there is a discontinuity in a
given derivative of the angular correlation function at a given angular dis-
tance (L´opez-Corredoira & Gabrielli, 2013). These kinds of discontinuities
do not need to be abrupt over an infinitesimal range of angular distances
but may also be smooth, and can be generated by simply distributing ex-
cesses of antenna temperature in filled disks of fixed or variable radii on the
sky, provided that that there is a non-null minimum radius, and/or that
the maximum radius is constrained. This allows a physical interpretation
of these mathematical properties of CMBR anisotropies in terms of matter
distribution in the fluid generating the radiation. A power spectrum with
oscillations is a rather normal characteristic expected from any fluid with
clouds of overdensities that emit/absorb radiation or interact gravitationally
with the photons, and with a finite range of sizes and distances for those
clouds (L´opez-Corredoira, 2013a). The standard cosmological interpretation
of “acoustic” peaks, from the hypothesis of primeval adiabatic perturbations
inanexpandinguniverse(Peebles&Yu, 1970),isjustaparticularcase; peaks
in the power spectrum might be generated in scenarios that have nothing to
do with oscillations due to gravitational compression in a fluid.
The CMBR angular correlation function can be fitted by a generic func-
tionwithatotalof≈6freeparameters; sayingthatthepowerspectrum/angular
correlation function contains hundreds or thousands of independent parame-
ters for a given resolution is not correct, because their different values are not
independent in the same sense that hundreds of observations of the position
and velocity of a planet do not indicate hundreds of independent parameters,
the information of the orbit of planet being reduced to six Keplerian param-
eters. Nonetheless, the standard model with six free parameters (there are
indeed ∼20 parameters, but the most important ones are six in number, the
rest producing low dependence) produces a still better fit than the generic
fit with the same number of free parameters; it fits third and higher order
peaks whereas the generic fit reproduces only the first two peaks (L´opez-
Corredoira, 2013a). There are also other theories that reproduce the same
data with totally different cosmologies with a similar number of free parame-
ters; e.g., Narlikar et al. (2003, 2007) for QSSC, Angus & Diaferio (2011) for
MOND. The fact that different cosmologies with different elements can fit
the same data (with a similar number of free parameters to be fitted) indi-
cates that the number of independent quantities in the information provided
by the data is comparable to the number of free parameters in any of the
theories.
There is near consensus in the values of the cosmological parameters.
The independent cosmological numbers extracted from observations are of
the same order. Note, however, that there are some numbers which cannot
be fitted. And the publication of the measurements of these cosmological
parameters may be biased due to the existence of values expected a priori.
For instance, the analysis by Croft & Dailey (2011) shows us that: The value
oftheHubbleconstanthadahugedispersionofvaluesaroundtwovaluesof50
and 100 km/s/Mpc respectively before 1995, whereas immediately after 1995
almost all values clustered with small errors very close to the preferred value
of 70 km/s/Mpc given by the HST Key Project; Before 1999, approximately
1/3 of the measurements of Ω , using galaxy peculiar velocities, gave values
inconsistent with being lower than 0.5 whereas after 1999, all measurements,
including some using similar techniques, grouped around the preferred value
of 0.25–0.30; The measurements of Ω , which was considered null before the
’90s, have now settled at 0.7 and since 1995 it presents a dispersion much
lower thanexpected statistically fromtheerror bars, which means that either
the error bars were overestimated, or that there is a bias in the publication
of results towards the preferred value. Other examples could be given.
The development of modern Cosmology is somewhat similar to the de-
velopment of the Ptolemaic epicyclic theory. However, in this race to build
more and more epicycles, the Big Bang model is allowed to make ad hoc cor-
rections and add more and more free parameters to the theory to solve the
problems which it finds in its way, but the alternative models are rejected
when the gaps or inconsistencies arise and most cosmologists do not heed
their ad hoc corrections. Why are the different theories accepted/rejected
with different criteria?
3. TheDifficulties inCreating AlternativeModels: A Sociological/-
Epistemological Model of How Modern Cosmology Works
In my opinion, alternative models are not rejected because they are not
potentially competitive but because they have great difficulties in advancing
in their research against the mainstream. A small number of scientists can-
not compete with the huge mass of cosmologists dedicated to polishing and
refining the standard theory. The present-day methodology of research in
cosmology does not favour the exploration of new ideas. The standard the-
oryincosmologybecamedominant becauseitcouldexplainmorephenomena
than the alternative ideas, but it is possible that partial successes have pro-
pitiated the compromise with a general view that is misguided and does not
let other ideas advance that might be closer to a more correct description of
the Universe.
3.1. Methodology of science
Basically, there are two different methodologies to study Nature, both
inherited from different ways of thinking in ancient Greece: the rationalist–
deductive method and the empirical–inductive method (e.g., Markie, 2012).
The rationalist–deductive method: This is the method devised by Pythagoras
and Plato. The pure relations of numbers in arithmetic and geome-
try are the immutable reality behind changing appearances in the world
of the senses. We cannot reach the truth through observation with the
senses, but only through pure reason, which may investigate the abstract
mathematical forms that govern the world. In this way of thinking,
there is a predominance of creation of abstract theories, and mathemati-
cal modelling predominates over experimental and observational results.
There are good cases of success using a rationalist–deductive approach.
An example within modern science Einstein’s general relativity, which
was posited fromaesthetic and/or rational principles in a time in which
observational data did not require a new gravity theory. In fact, ob-
servational tests proved this theory successful. Present-day physics and
cosmology are partially Pythagorean when a theory is created before the
observations. It is also common among modern Pythagoreans to ap-
prove of statements such as the search for beauty in a mathematical
construction describing physical reality, or the Divine plan by which
the creator designed the Universe. The physicist–mathematician tries
to achieve something close to a mystical approach, tries to read into the
Mind of God. Also, analogously with religion, this extremely theoretical
physics and cosmology can only be understood by a priestly elite able to
think in four or more dimensions or in terms of similar abstractions.
The empiricist–inductive method: As opposed to the preceding method, this
one points out that Nature should be known through observations and
extrapolations of them. This is the Anaxagoras’ method of how to know
Nature. Aristotle uses both inductive and deductive methods, and he
says that “the mathematical method is not the method of the physicists,
because Nature, perhaps all, involves matter” (Metaphysics, book II).
Certainly, mathematics is useful for physicists, in spite of what was
said by Aristotle, and this is clear since Galileo Galilei put the bases of
the scientific method, but I agree with the Greek philosopher that matter
is not the same thing as mathematical entities. Matter is not numbers,
or geometry, or arithmetic, or the analysis of functions. Matter (or,
better, matter– energy) is the component of the physical Universe, and
this is what constitutes the reality of Nature to be studied by physi-
cal sciences. The empiricism of Galileo Galilei might be an example
within modern science, in the sense that observation and experimenta-
tion are a requisite prior to theoretization, although all scientists, even
Galileo, are also partly Pythagorean and all pythagoreans are in part
empirists too. These are extreme positions which cannot usually be
found in a pure form, but it is clear that, in some researchers, one of
the trends dominates. But, apart from a few exceptions, the empirical–
inductive method is more usual in science. Dingle (1937) made an
aggressive attack against the rationalist–deductive method in favour
of the empiricist–inductive method, with terms such as “paralysis of
reason”, “intoxication of the fancy”, “ ‘Universe’ mania”, “delusions”,
“traitors”, “treachery”. Robertson and de Sitter also favoured an em-
piricist inductive science. In my opinion, cosmology should be derived
empirically by first taking the data without preconceived ideas, and
then interpreting them from all possible theoretical viewpoints. Cer-
tainly, there are always prejudices and intuitions in our minds that
push us towards certain avenues of research, but at least we should
openly consider all the theoretical possibilities that can explain the
data, rather than taking only one (standard) theory and always try-
ing to squeeze the data into it in some way. In the words of Sherlock
Holmes7: ‘It is a capital mistake to theorize before you have all the
evidence’ (A Study in Scarlet), and ‘before one has data, one begins to
twist facts to suit theories instead of theories to suit data’ (A Scandal
in Bohemia) [cited by Burbidge, 2006].
Some astrophysicists closer to the observations than theory usually com-
plain about the lack of an empirical approach in cosmology. For instance,
G´erard de Vaucouleurs (1918–1995), known for his extragalactic surveys and
Hubble’s constant measurements, said that there are ‘parallelisms between
modern cosmology and medieval scholasticism. (...) Above all I am con-
cerned by an apparent loss of contact with empirical evidence and observa-
tional facts, and, worse, by a deliberate refusal on the part of some theorists
to accept such results when they appear to be in conflict with some of the
present oversimplified and therefore intellectually appealing theories of the
universe’ (de Vaucouleurs, 1970). Certainly, the amount of data for obser-
vational cosmology nowadays is much higher than in 1970 (although there
were also many of them: CMBR, redshifts of galaxies, abundance of light
elements, etc.); however, I think it is still valid nowadays: cosmology has not
7The famous character of the novels by Arthur Conan Doyle.
changed its methodology so much.
There is, however, an epistemological optimism encouraging the belief
that successful theories are successful because they reflect reality in Nature.
The philosopher of science Mosteir´ın (1989) said that scientists do not have
any prejudice to accept alternative cosmologies. He also said, ‘there are no
working alternatives to the standard big bang cosmological model (or family
of models). This fact is not due to the will of the scientists who created
the model, still less to the prejudices of the scientific stablishment. On the
contrary, it is almost exclusively due to the strong observational constraints
which reality puts on the activity of model-making. The standard big bang
cosmological model is the model no one wanted, but which recalcitrant ex-
perience forced everyone to accept, at least for the moment being.’ In my
opinion, this kind of statement is somewhat naive and denotes an excessive
confidence in a fair application of scientific methodology. Certainly, all the
available alternative models may be wrong, but this does not mean that
they are rejected fairly; and neither does it mean that the standard model is
maintained for fair reasons. This epistemological optimism might be correct
in certain branches of science but not in those areas close to metaphysical
speculation such as cosmology, where the scientific method is something like:
— Given a theory A self-called orthodox or standard, and
a non-orthodox or non-standard theory B. If the observations
achieve whatwaspredictedbythetheoryAandnotbythetheory
B, this implies a large success to the theory A, something which
must be divulged immediately to the all-important mass media.
This means that there are no doubts that theory A is the right one.
Theory B is wrong; one must forget this theory and, therefore, any
further research directed to it must be blocked (putting obstacles
in the way of publication, and giving no time for telescopes, etc.).
— If the observations achieve what was predicted by theory
B rather than by theory A, this means nothing. Science is very
complexandbeforetaking apositionwemust thinkfurtherabout
the matter and make further tests. It is probable that the ob-
server of such had a failure at some point; further observations
are needed (and it will be difficult to make further observations
because we are not going to allow the use of telescopes to re-test
such a stupid theory as theory B). Who knows! Perhaps the ob-
served thing is due to effect ‘So-and-so’, of course; perhaps they
have not corrected the data from this effect, about which we know
nothing. Everything is so complex. We must be sure before we
can say something about which theory is correct. Furthermore, by
adding some new aspects in the theory A surely it can also pre-
dict theobservations, and, since we have an army of theoreticians
ready to put in patches and discover new effects, in less than three
months we will have a new theory A (albeit with some changes)
which will agree the data. In any case, while in troubled waters,
and as long as we do not clarify the question, theory A remains.
Perhaps, as was said by Halton Arp, the informal saying ‘to make
extraordinary changes one requires extraordinary evidence’ really
means ‘to make personally disadvantageous changes no evidence
is extraordinary enough’. (L´opez-Corredoira, 2008)
Halton C. Arp (1927– ), a heterodox observational cosmologist, known
through his proposal of non-cosmological redshifts (L´opez-Corredoira, 2003,
§2.8), would point out: ‘Of course, if one ignores contradictory observations,
one can claim to have an “elegant” or “robust” theory. But it isn’t science.’
(Arp & Block, 1991)
3.2. The Snowball Effect
The alternative models try to compete with the standard model, but cu-
mulative inertia gives a clear social advantage to the standard model. This
advantage determines that researchers may continue to explore these alter-
native ideas. Metaphorically, it is like a snowball effect: ‘The snowball effect
arising from the social dynamics of research funding drove more researchers
into the Standard Cosmology fold and contributed to the drying out of alter-
native ideas’ (Narlikar & Padmanabhan, 2001). It is not strange that Jayant
V. Narlikar (1938– ), one of the creators of the QSSC who still tries to keep
it alive, should be frustrated in his odyssey and should link the lack of social
success of his theory to how social dynamics works. Anyway, regardless of his
frustration, either from dissidence or orthodoxy, what he claims is basically
correct and applicable to most speculative sciences or half-sciences such as
cosmology. Another creator of the quasi-steady state, Geoffrey R. Burbidge
(1925–2010), did not have a higher opinion:
Let me start on a somewhat pessimistic note. We all know
that new ideas and revolutions in science in general come from
the younger generation, who look critically at the contemporary
schemes, and having absorbed the new evidence, overthrow the
old views. This, in general, is the way that science advances.
However, in modern astronomy and cosmology, at present, this is
emphatically not the case. Over the last decade or more, the vast
majority of the younger astronomers have been conformists in
the extreme, passionately believing what their leaders have told
them, particularly in cosmology. In the modern era the reasons
forthisareeven strongerthantheywereinthepast. Toobtainan
academic position, to obtain tenure, to be successful in obtaining
research funds, and to obtain observing time on major telescopes,
it is necessary to conform. (G. R. Burbidge, 1997)
Here is a similar opinion from a researcher who is not particularly het-
erodox:
It is common practice among young astrophysicists these days
to invest research time conservatively in mainstream ideas that
have already been explored extensively in the literature. This
tendencyisdrivenbypeerpressureandjobmarketprospects, and
is occasionally encouraged by senior researchers. Although the
same phenomenon existed in past decades, it is alarmingly more
prevalent today because a growing fraction of observational and
theoreticalprojectsarepursuedinlargegroupswithrigidresearch
agendas. In addition, the emergence of a ’standard model’ in
cosmology (albeit with unknown dark components) offers secure
’bonds’ for a safe investment of research time. (Loeb, 2010)
The snowball effect, also called Matthew effect (Merton, 1968)8, is to a
certain extent present in the social dynamics of cosmology, as well as in other
speculative areas of science (L´opez Corredoira, 2013b, §3.8). It is a feedback
ball: the more successful the standard theory is, the more money and sci-
entists are dedicated to work on it, and therefore the higher the number of
observations that can be explained with more parameters and ingredients
Merton (1968) gave it the name “Matthew effect” from the Gospel of St. Matthew
(25:29): ‘Unto every one that hath shall be given,and he shallhave abundance: but from
him that hath not shall be taken away even that which he hath.’
(dark matter, dark energy, inflation, etc.) introduced ad hoc, and that cause
the theory to be considered more successful.
However, not everything is a social construct (as some postmodernists
claim): the CMBR, the redshift of galaxies, etc. may be real facts, or at least
I have no doubts of their existence although other authors have expressed
such9, and they also have weight in the credibility of the standard model.
3.3. Censorship and arXiv.org
It is also worth noting that the publication of heterodox ideas is far
to be free, in particular in recent years. Apart from the refereed journals,
which usually reject challenging ideas deviating from mainstream points of
view, there is another important tool for communicating scientific results
in physics: the preprint server arXiv.org. It is a monopoly within physics
and has no competitors. Even most of the papers published in journals are
posted on this preprint server, and people read them here. The situation is
that papers not posted on arXiv.org, will receive scant dissemination within
the community, particularly when the papers are not published in a reputed
refereed journal, which is often the case for non-mainstream positions.
The development of arXiv.org, first at Los Alamos National Laboratory
and later at Cornell University, was a wonderful example of freedom of ex-
pression between 1992 to 2004 that provided everybody with an open forum
in which to post their ideas. There was a small fraction of papers with ’ex-
otic’ ideas, but they were very few (5% or less), so they did not disturb the
flow of information. However, after 2004 there was a change in policy and
those responsible for the site decided to block the posting of certain contribu-
tions. In 2004, a system was introduced in which in order to post something
on the site support was requested from a colleague with experience in the
field. The methods of the system would become more subtle in the following
years, forbidding some scientists from giving support when arXiv moderators
noted that they had allowed the publication of very challenging heterodox
ideas, and creating committees to reject papers without having read them
and with the absence of a referee’s report: the committees just read the title
and the abstract and, if they did not like the content (and normally they
9For instance, there are some authors (Li et al., 2009; Cover, 2009) who suspect that
all of the reduction of raw data of CMBR have common a priori assumptions which lead
to the same measurement of power spectrum, but it could change or even be compatible
with no anisotropies with different methodology applied to the analysis of raw data.
do not like anything that has not been accepted in a refereed journal and
smells of heterodoxy, such as denial of the expansion of the Universe or dis-
cussions about alternative interpretations of the CMBR), they channel the
paper, which formerly would have been placed on ’astro-ph.CO’, widely read
by astrophysicists, to ’physics.gen-ph’, which is hardly read by anybody. In
somecases, theyremove thecontributiontotally, withoutfurther explanation
(e.g., Castro Perelman, 2008). When asked for anexplanation for a rejection,
they usually reply with set phrases: ‘arXiv reserves the right to reclassify or
reject any submission. We are not obligated to provide substantive reasons
for every rejection, and usually the moderators do not provide more than a
sentence or two, often in a form not appropriate for author viewing’. This
method of censorship of the promotion of new ideas in cosmology appears to
me to be somewhat on a par with certain totalitarian regimes (see further
discussion in Lo´pez Corredoira, 2013b).
3.4. The Influence of Culture and Religion
Another factor that carries some weight in the determination of the dom-
inant scenario in cosmology is the ideology of the researchers, and in the case
of religious ideas this is somewhat relevant. The association of cosmology and
religion is indeed very old–says Kragh (2007b)–but there are in my opinion
older themes that are never overcome.
In Timaeus, Plato says that time was created simultaneously with the Uni-
verse. This idea was introduced into Christianity from the third century A.D.,
after reconciling Christianity with existing Roman society and its ideas influ-
enced by Plato and Emperor Tertullian (Roberts, 1924; Lerner, 1991, ch. 2).
Augustine of Hippo later introduced certain Platonic ideas into Christianity,
such as the untrustworthiness of the senses and the instantaneous creation of
the Universe from nothing. A universe of infinite space and time is exclusive
to the Deity, and thus prohibited for the material universe.
The astrophysicist Binggeli (2006) compares the standard model of mod-
ern cosmology with the cosmology in the Judaeo–Christiano–Gnostic beliefs
of the Scholastic Middle Age, depicted in Dante’s Divine Comedy (Primum
Mobile), and the author finds that there is a perfect correspondence in some
essential points between both worldviews. The three basic tenets of Primum
Mobile are present in the observable Universe of the Big Bang theory: 1)
there is a maximum finite distance from us in the observable Universe, 2)
the observable Universe is a sphere with us at the centre; and 3) it has a
hierarchical structure. One may wonder about the cause of these correspon-
dences, and the answer is also given by Binggeli (2006): there must be a
psychological mechanism dominating our visions of Nature. The result of
our research is not objective but highly biased by the influence of the culture
in which we are embedded (which has inherited the Scholastic cosmological
view) and our own psychological patterns. Modern cosmology is a symbolic
expression of the states of our mind. The author argues that our view of the
external reality is indeed a reflection of our interior world, and that the way
to understand modern science should go through a psychological analysis. I
think that in some degree he is right: cosmology depends on the social and
psychological conditions of scientists. Nonetheless, we should not forget that
there are also some elements that are not a reflection of our souls but that
result from the observation of something which is outside us.
Because of this historical background and the coincidences of elements of
the standard model with certain credos, some authors think that nowadays
the Big Bang is simply the scientific version of Genesis, and that to many
people, the Big Bang idea is attractive in the same way, being a synthesis
of astrophysics and the dogma of a creation ex nihilo (e.g., Jastrow, 1978).
Indeed, in 1951 (when the Big Bang was not yet a dominantstandard theory),
Pope Pius XII asserted that the Big Bangsupports the doctrine of creation “ex
nihilo” (Pius XII, 1952). He wrote in an address to the Pontifical Academy
of Sciences:
In fact, it seems that present-day science, with one sweeping
step back across millions of centuries, has succeeded in bearing
witness to that primordial ‘Fiat Lux’ (Let there be light) uttered
at the moment when, along with matter, there burst forth from
nothing a sea of light and radiation, while the particles of the
chemical elements split and formed into millions of galaxies...
Hence, creation took place in time, therefore, there is a creator,
therefore, God exists!
In 1982, a conference on cosmology was held at the Vatican. The confer-
ence was confined completely to Big Bang cosmology and its proponents; rad-
icals such as F. Hoyle, V. Ambartsumian and G. Burbidge were not invited.
Many prestigious scientists have also used the ideas of modern cosmology for
theological claims. There are many who talk about the Big Bang leading to a
proof of God’s existence (e.g., Davies, 1983; the debate for and against the
idea in Soler Gil & L´opez Corredoira, 2008). George F. Smoot, when the dis-
covery of the anisotropies of the CMBR were announced, claimed that for a
religious person this was looking at the face of God (Wright, 1993). We must
also bear in mind that the United States, at present the leading country in
cosmological research, is dominated by a much higher proportion of followers
of the Christian religion than in other rich countries.
Christianity is not the only religion to have found this association of con-
cepts. There also seems to be great acceptance of the standard cosmology
in other monotheistic religions. The Israeli physicist and cosmologist Moshe
Carmeli (2000) says that not only does the Big Bang scenario agree with the
idea of creation described in the Bible, but also with the scenario of creation
in six days. The Muslim astronomer Kamel Ben Salem (2005) analyses the
Quranic description of phenomena linked to the evolution of the universe.
The opposite trend is also observed. Among heterodox scientists and scep-
tics (myself included) there has been and continues to be a higher ratio of
atheists and agnostics. It is known, for instance, that Fred Hoyle was not
a believer. And there are cases of practices in communist countries that
favoured non-standard cosmologies. For instance, in the People’s Republic of
China till the ’70s, there was some degree of censorship affecting the circula-
tion of ideas relating to the Big Bang (Hu, 2004; Kragh, 2007a, pp. 199-200).
Of course, there are also many atheists who follow Big Bang and vice
versa, but there have been correlations between religious dogma and preferred
cosmological scenario and these correlations are not fortuitous. This makes
us appreciate the weightof ideologyin the early developmentof scientific ideas
such as cosmology, i.e. that cosmology is not totally objective. Nonetheless,
from what I can observe among my colleagues (almost all cosmologists, either
christians or atheists, are pro-Big Bang) once the standard paradigm is in a
dominant position, religious ideas do not exert such a strong influence, and
other sociological factors seem to be more important.
3.5. The Psychological Profile of Cosmologists
Social trends or ideologies can greatly influence the kind of science that
is carried out in a given epoch and the corresponding results. Also, at the
level of the individual, the psychological profile of the researcher can produce
leanings towards either orthodoxy or heterodoxy. In my experience, cosmol-
ogists tend to fall in one of the following extreme categories, with gradations
of grey between them:
Heterodox: possessed by the complex of unappreciated genius, too much
“ego” which does not discourage the researcher in the difficulties for
the creation of a new alternative model. Normally working alone/indi-
vidually or in very small groups, creative, intelligent, non-conformist.
His10 dream is to create a new paradigm in science which completely
changes our view of the Universe. Many of them try to demonstrate
that Einstein was wrong, maybe because he is the symbol of genius and
defeating his theory would mean that they are geniuses above Einstein.
But they are not what they think they are, and most of their ideas are
ill-founded. Most of them are crackpots with crazy ideas with little to
be said in their support. Few of them need to be taken seriously.
Orthodox: dominated by groupthink,11 following a leader’s opinion, as in
the tale of the naked king. Any crazy opinion can be accepted if it is
supported by the leading cosmologist, and in this sense Big Bang theory,
even if it is a very speculative set of hypotheses, still finds a place in the
psychology of the wider community of scientists and grow by the snow-
ball effect. They are good workers, conformist, domestic, performing
10AsfarasIknow,therearenowomendoingthiskindofresearchwiththeirownglobal
cosmologicalmodel. If somebody knows any exception, let me know it.
11In a sociologicalanalysis,Janis (1972)categorizesthe symptoms of groupthink as: 1)
An illusion of invulnerability, shared by most or all the members, which creates exces-
sive optimism and encourages the taking of extreme risks. 2) An unquestioned belief in
the group’s inherent morality, allowing the members to ignore the ethical or moral con-
sequences of their decisions. 3) Collective efforts at rationalization in order to discount
warnings or other information that might lead the members to reconsider their assump-
tionsbeforetheyrecommitthemselvestotheirpastpolicydecisions. 4)Stereotypedviews
of enemy leaders as too deviant to warrantgenuine attempts to negotiate, or as too weak
andstupid to counterrisky attempts made at defeating their purposes. 5) Self-censorship
of deviations from the apparent group consensus, reflecting each member’s inclination to
minimizetohimselftheimportanceofhisdoubtsandcounterarguments. 6)Asharedillu-
sionofunanimityconcerningjudgmentsconformingtothemajorityview(partlyresulting
from self-censorship of deviations, augmented by the false assumption that silence means
consent). 7) Direct pressure on any member who expresses strong arguments against
any of the group’s stereotypes, illusions, or commitments, making clear that this type of
dissent is contrary to what is expected of all loyal members. 8) The emergence of self-
appointed mindguards - members who protect the group from adverse information that
might shatter their shared complacency about the effectiveness and morality of their de-
cisions (Dolsenhe, 2011, ch. 12). Sanrom`a (2007) applied the concept of groupthink to
present-day cosmology.
monotonous tasks without ideas in large groups, specialists in a small
fieldwhich theyknowverywell, andinwhich theydonottrytodevelop
new paradigms. His/her dream is getting a permanent position at an
university or research centre, to dedicate large portions of their time to
the administration and politics of science (i.e. astropolitics; see Lo´pez-
Corredoira, 2008; 2013b, chs. 3, 6), to be leader of a project. Many
of them are like sheep (or geese12), some of them have the vocation of
shepherds too.
Thesociologicalreasonsforfavouringorthodoxproposalsmightberelated
to the preference of domesticity in our civilization (see Lo´pez-Corredoira,
2013b, ch. 5). An anarchy in which everybody expresses his or her ideas
freely is not useful for the system. Sheep rather than crackpots are preferred.
Finding a promising change of paradigmcloser to the truthamong thousands
of crazy proposals is very difficult. In orthodoxy, although absolute truth is
not guaranteed, at least a consensus version of the truth is offered and that
is what has weight. By means of it, if somebody is wrong then everybody
is wrong and the fault is diluted among many. Investment in science prefers
security, it prefers domesticity and control, rather than a promising and chal-
lenging change of paradigm that is uncertain, with the attendant difficulty
of guessing from which direction a new paradigm could come. Nonetheless,
again I insist, we must not forget that there is empirical evidence in favour of
the standard theory. Nature is more than a social construct or similar kinds
of postmodern claims.
3.6. An Illustrative Example for the Sociology of Cosmology
Somebody may think that the arguments given in this paper are just
pure abstractions. They are not, they are based on observations of real
cases. Perhaps the case of a recent experience of mine might be illustrative.
Every year in my research centre (the ’Instituto de Astrof´ısica de Ca-
narias’ [IAC]), there is a call for proposals for the following year’s Winter
12In Hoyle et al. (2000), a serious and technical book about cosmology, a picture was
inserted in which a row of geese are turning around a corner all in the same way, with the
following ironic comment: “This is our view of the conformist approach to the standard
(hot big bang) cosmology. We have resisted the temptation to name some of the leading
geese”.
School for doctorate students and young postdocs. I have submitted a pro-
posal with the title “Different Approaches to Cosmology” and the following
abstract:
The aim of this winter school is to present the status of cur-
rent cosmology from both a standard and non-standard points of
view, discussing successes and failures. In particular, the stan-
dard model and a number of non-standardmodels will be presented
to provide the students with a set of tools to carry out and/or de-
vise new experiments to challenge the current paradigm, either
to prove or disprove it. Particular emphasis will be given to the
comparison between prediction of the different models and obser-
vations.
I also included a list of possible speakers. The topic attracted attention,
so I was advised of the interest for the school, which was chosen as the first
option among the proposals, provided that the following changes were made:
The first thing that I was told was that I should include the name of some
women among the list of possible invited speakers for political correctness of
gender balance. I replied that there are no women with their own alternative
theories in cosmology, but that we could include some to talk about variations
on the Big Bang, or partial aspects of an alternative theory. The second
complaint was that there should be a higher ratio of orthodox cosmologists in
the school, at least three or four of the total of eight speakers. I accepted this
suggestion too. The last stage came when I sent my list of speakers with
the eight names and possible replacements as second options (in total there
were sixteen names) including both women and many orthodox cosmologists.
Many of the names were accepted but I received the following new complaint
from the head of the research division at the IAC (the original e-mail on 31
October 2011 was in Spanish):
I have looked into it further, and I had the luck to get the
comments of a very senior astronomer who does not work directly
in cosmology (which is an advantage, because he/she is not set in
his/her own scientific ways) and has got a very wide experience in
editing journalsandorganizingcongresses. (...) [My contact] told
me that we could invite (...), but not Yurij [Baryshev], not even
as a second option. (...) I like Eduardo [Battaner] very much,
but he is not the appropriate person for the topic of magnetism
in cosmology. (...) We cannot invite Arp, as he is confrontational
(...) [his recent work] lacks a scientific basis. At this point I
vetoed it. (...) This topic [Plasma Cosmology and a proposal to
invite Eric J. Lerner] is too marginal, and I propose to forget it.
(...) [Jayant Narlikar and the QSSC] No, I vetoed that too. He is
totally marginal and the theory is dead. CDM has its problems,
but QSSC is not going to solve them. The only thing we could
do would be to invite Simon White to tell us why the theory
does not work, or even organize a mini-debate between perhaps
Kroupa and another researcher about the topic.
A magnificent example of how cosmology works. A school describing the
most important ideas about cosmology, Big Bang and others, was proposed
and the idea had been initially accepted as interesting, as a sign of openness
of the mind of our scientific community. But what happened? When one
gives some names of some of the most important creators of heterodox ideas
(Baryshev, Battaner, Arp, Lerner, Narlikar) they were rejected because some
members of a committee who were not even cosmologists decreed that these
theories were marginal and dead. The name of Virginia Trimble was also
rejected for different reasons.
The theories may be marginal and dead but not because irrefutable scien-
tific arguments against them were given, but rather precisely because of this
kind of attitude in the organization of social scientific events (journals, meet-
ings, etc.). Alternative theories die because they are being killed by the same
people who say that they are dead. And most of the scientists who claim that
these theories are dead/marginal have never read a paper on these ideas and
they merely repeat what they have heard from some colleague (groupthink,
blindly following the opinion of the leaders). What was particularly shocking
was the rejection of the invitation to Narlikar on the grounds that the QSSC
theory is dead. Indeed, what the censors probably meant is that Fred Hoyle
(1915–2001, father of the idea) and Geoff Burbidge (1925–2010, a physicist
with an important influence in the political decisions on astrophysics; former
editor of the highest impact factor journal of astrophysics, the Annual Review
of Astronomy and Astrophysics) are dead, certainly, so it is understood that
there is now no living sacred cow to respect, and the community decides to
declare that the theory is dead. However, I have not seen any scientific paper
in the last decade that demonstrates irrefutably that the basic points of the
QSSC are untenable. The final suggestion was the most revealing one: that
we invite Simon White totell uswhy QSSCiswrong, without giving Narlikar
the chance to defend his ideas. This is equivalent to organizing a meeting on
different religious ideas and inviting only christians to participate, including
a speech of the Pope to tell us why hinduism is a false doctrine. Finally, my
proposal was rejected because I insisted in keeping at least two of the five
rejected names.
4. Limits of Cosmology
And we would pretend to understand everything about cos-
mology, which concerns the whole Universe? We are not even
readytostart todothat. Allthatwe candoistoenter inthefield
of speculations. So far as I am concerned, I would not comment
myself onany cosmological theory, on the so-called ‘standard the-
ory’ less on many others. Actually, I would like to leave the door
wide open. [Jean-Claude Pecker, in Narlikar et al. (1997)]
I agree with Jean-Claude Pecker (1923– ), another classical heterodox
dissident cosmologist. Before wondering which is the true model of cosmol-
ogy, we must wonder whether we are in a condition to create a theory on
the genesis (or non-genesis) and evolution of the whole Universe, whether the
psychologico–sociological conditionsofthecosmologistsareorarenotweight-
ier factors than observations of Nature. Is present-day cosmology dominated
by our culture or by Nature’s objective truths?
4.1. The dogma of the cosmologist, according to Mike J. Disney
According to Michael J. Disney (1937- ), in his brave paper ‘The case
against Cosmology’ (Disney, 2000), present-day cosmology is a dogma with
a serie of gratuitous or quasi-gratuitous assumptions:
The non-theological assumption: speculations are not made which can-
not, at least in principle, be compared with observational or experi-
mental data, for tests.
The “good-luck” assumption: the portion of the Universe susceptible to
observation is representative of the cosmos as a whole.
The “simplicity” assumption: the Universe was constructed using a sig-
nificantly lower number of free parameters than the number of clean
and independent observations we can make of it.
The “non-circularity” assumption: the Laws of Physics which have sig-
nificantly controlled the Universe since the beginning are, or can be,
known to us from considerations outside cosmology itself.
The “fortunate epoch” assumption: we live in the first human epoch
which possesses the technical means to tease out the crucial observa-
tions. This is also expressed by Narlikar (2001): ‘there is one trait
which the cosmologists of old seem to share with their modern coun-
terparts, viz. their fond wish that the mystery of the nature of the
universe would be solved in their lifetime.’
From this, Disney (2000) concludes:
I can see very little evidence to support any of the last 4 as-
sumptions while it is dismaying to find that some cosmologists,
who would like to think of themselves as scientific, are quite will-
ing to abrogate the first.
He also says in another part of his text, referring to the cosmologists
who think that they can establish a cosmological model as securely as the
Standard Model of elementary particles:
We believe the most charitable thing that can be said of such
statements is that they are naive in the extreme and betray a
complete lack of understanding of history, of the huge difference
between an observational and an experimental science, and of the
peculiar limitations of cosmology as a scientific discipline.
That is the extremely sceptical position of an astrophysicist with a long
career who has made significant contributions to extragalactic astrophysics.
We may interpret it as too daring, as an exagerated parody that is out of
place in the present cosmological scene. C´irkovi´c (2002) criticizes Disney
(2000) saying that his claims are rhetorical with no new ideas about the
sociology/philosophy of science, and that his critique is unfair, biased and
constrained in an extreme inductivism. Other disciplines operate in a similar
way to cosmology andthey aresciences, says C´irkovi´c. But we could also pay
attentiontosomeofDisney’ssentences andseethatthereissomebackground
of truth in what he claims, in spite of the exaggeration.
4.2. Is a Science of Cosmology Possible?
I would say that before understanding the Universe, we must understand
the pieces of the puzzle separately (galaxies, their formation, their evolution,
whether they separate from each other, the origin of the elements, the origin
oftheCMBR)ratherthanassembling allofthemintoahappyideathatcould
convert astrophysics into a speculative science. There are however many
cosmologists, philosophersandhistoriansofsciencewhothinkthatcosmology
became an empirical science beyond speculation after the discovery of the
CMBR (e.g., Kragh, 2007b). As I have maintained throughout this paper,
I do not agree with Kragh’s (2007b) statement that cosmology is a proper
science like nuclear physics, hydrodynamics, etc. Even if there are aspects
which are comparable with observations, they are just a few partial aspects
of the whole reality, whereas cosmology stands for a science of the whole
Universe and its whole history, something for which we do not have all the
empirical/observational information that we need to have to fill in the many
gaps in that history that are so far questions of pure speculation and risky
extrapolations.
Iscosmologycomparableperhapstopalaeontologyorasciencewhichtries
to reconstruct the facts from fossils (C´irkovi´c, 2002)? No, I do not think it
can be put on the same level of scientificity as palaeontology, because the
objects of study in palaeontology are much more limited, and the geological
and biological processes are known, whereas cosmologists play with elements
for which there is no direct experience (dark..., dark..., new physics...), or
they must adopt extrapolations and assumptions for which there is no evi-
dence (the cosmological principle, the principle that the laws of physics do
not change over time, etc.). This means that the process of choosing between
standard and non-standard models in cosmology is less fair (less based on
evidence) than in other scientific disciplines. In any case, there are also huge
extrapolations involved in disciplines such as palaeogeography and palaeo-
biology. Certainly, one can doubt the different theories of different fields of
science, but for different reasons. The very word “Universe” also merits some
consideration: it means everything that exists or has existed, and we have
access only to a small part of the observable cosmos (the “good luck” as-
sumption given in the cosmologist’s dogma by Disney, 2000). In this aspect,
palaeontology is not so different from cosmology because it only has access
to a small part of the observable universe.
As Kragh (2007b) remarks (as an argument considering cosmology as a
science), Nobel prizes have been given to some cosmologists. In my opinion,
this does not mean anything. Nobel prizes are just part of sociological struc-
tures. Recognition does not mean a higher value of some knowledge and its
creators, but only higher status. Indeed, there are many social and economic
interests in declaring cosmology to be a solid science, there is a lot of money
in the game, and this motivates the arrogance of the claim that we can know
the whole Universe and its history.
5. Conclusions
Alternative theories are not at present as competitive as the standard
model in cosmology. If they were more developed, there is a possibility that
they might compete in some aspects with the Big Bang theory, but efforts
are made in the present-day scientific community to avoid their development.
The factthat most cosmologists do not pay themany attentionandonlyded-
icate their research time to the standard model is to a great extent due to
a sociological13 phenomenon (the “snowball effect” or “groupthink”). Cos-
mology, knowledge of the Universe as a whole, shares some characteristics
with other sciences, and there is some scientific content in it. However, in my
assessment, cosmology is more affected than most other sciences by human
factors (psychological, sociological, ideologies/culture, etc.).
NotethatIamnotdefendinganyspecificdogmahere: neitherthecorrect-
ness nor the wrongness of Big Bang; neither am I defending constructivism
or scientific realism (see discussion on these positions, for instance, in Soler
Gil, 2012). I am just presenting some sceptical arguments expressing certain
doubts on the validity of the standard cosmology, and this requires seeing
the problem from several points of view: in this paper I have talked more
about the social aspects and the alternative models. Nonetheless, there are
also reasons to support the standard model in a realistic way.
There are limits to cosmology because we are finite human beings limited
by our experiences and circumstances, not mini-gods able to read the mind
of a god who played maths with the Universe, as some Pythagoreans may
think. There is a lack of humility in Pythagoreanism, or in expressions like
“precision Cosmology”. One of the most reputed physicists of the former
Soviet Union, Lev Lavidovich Landau (1908–1968), said: ‘Cosmologists are
often in error, but never in doubt.’ Great old masters, even the creators
13Forfurtherreadingonmyimpressionsaboutsociologicalaspectsofscienceingeneral,
see Lo´pez Corredoira (2013b).
of the standard model, were cautious in their assertions. Edwin P. Hubble
(1889–1953) throughout his life doubted the reality of the expansion of the
Universe. Willem de Sitter (1872-1934) claimed: ‘It should not be forgotten
that all this talk about the universe involves a tremendous extrapolation,
which is a very dangerous operation’ (de Sitter, 1931). This scepticism is
sane since ‘all cautions are too little’ (Spanish proverb). It is not a question
of substituting one model for another, since it would be the ‘same dog with
a different collar’ (another Spanish proverb) but of realizing the limits of
cosmology as a science.
Rutherford (1871–1937) said ‘Don’t let me hear anyone use the word
‘Universe’ in my department.’ In the same style, the astrophysicist Mike
Disney (1937– ) dared to claim: ‘The word ‘cosmologist’ should be expunged
fromthescientificdictionaryandreturnedtothepriesthoodwhereitproperly
belongs’ (Disney, 2000). Those are the words of an old-style scepticism.
Nowadays, the young bloods of precision cosmology do not care for such
statements and proudly claim that people in the past did not know what
they know. Cosmologists with no indication of doubt and an amazing sense
of security who dissert on topics of high speculation. Of course, science
advances, and cosmology advances in the amount of data and epicycle-like
patches to the theory to make it fit the data, but the great questions remain
almostunchanged. Manywisemenhavealreadydeliberatedoncosmologyfor
a long time, without reaching a definitive solution. Do we live in a fortunate
golden age of cosmology that allows us, thanks to our technical advances
and our trained researchers, to answer questions on eternity, the finiteness of
the Universe, etc.? We could reply as the 19th century German philosopher
Schopenhauer did with the Know-alls of his time:
Every 30 years, a new generation of talkative candid persons,
ignorant of everything, want to devour summarily and hastily
the results of human knowledge accumulated over centuries, and
immediately they think themselves more skilful than the whole
past.
Acknowledgements: Thanks aregiven to the editor of this special issue
on “Philosophy of Cosmology”, Henrik Zinkernagel, and to the two anony-
mous referees of this paper for their helpful comments. Thanks are given to
Terry J. Mahoney (IAC, Tenerife, Spain) for proof-reading and comments on
this paper. The author was supported by the grants AYA2007-67625-CO2-01
and AYA2012-33211 of the Spanish Science Ministry.