2v3410120/ht-peh:viXra
MIT-CTP-3317, CCNY-HEP-3/02, BUHEP-02-31
Non-Abelian Fluid Dynamics in Lagrangian Formulation
B. Bistrovic and R. Jackiw
Center for Theoretical Physics, MIT, Cambridge, MA 02139-4307, USA
H. Li and V. P. Nair
Physics Department, City College of the CUNY New York, NY 10031, USA
Physics Department, Boston University, Boston, MA 02215, USA
Non-Abelian extensions of fluid dynamics, which can haveapplications to the quark-gluon plasma,
are given. These theories are presented in a symplectic/Lagrangian formulation and involvea fluid
generalization of the Kirillov-Kostant form well known in Lie group theory. In our simplest model
thefluidflowswithvelocityvandinpresenceofnon-Abelianchromoelectric/magneticE /B fields,
the fluid feels a Lorentz force of the form QaE a +(v/c)×QaB a , where Qa is a space-time local
non-Abelian charge satisfying a fluid Wong equation [(Dt +v·D)Q]a = 0 with gauge covariant
derivatives.
I. INTRODUCTION
When different species of particles compose a fluid, it may be that the collective variables describing the fluid
(density ρ, velocity v in an Eulerian formulation), and the dynamical equations that govern them, can reflect the
compositional variety. In this paper we develop models for fluids where the variety of constituents arises from an
internal symmetry group. We envision applying our theory to high densities of non-Abelian quarks, with or without
additional interaction to a dynamical gauge field.
Highenergycollisionsofheavynucleicanproduceofaplasmastateofquarksandgluons. Thisnewstateofmatter
has recently been of great interest both theoretically and in experiments at the RHIC facility and at CERN. Most of
thetheoreticalworkinthisareahasbeenbasedonperturbativeQuantumChromodynamicsathightemperatureswith
hard thermal loop resummations and other improvements [1]. This can be a good description at high temperatures
and for plasma states that are not too far from equilibrium. An alternative approach, which may be more suitable
for nondilute plasmas or for situations far from equilibrium, would be to use a fluid mechanical description.
It is well known that the equations of fluid mechanics can be derived from particle dynamics by taking suitable
averagesofBoltzmann-typeequations. Specificallyfor the quark-gluonplasma,someworkalongthese lines wasdone
many years ago using single particle kinetic equations [2]. These kinetic equations form a hierarchy, the so-called
BBGKY hierarchy, involving higher and higher correlated N-particle distribution functions. To be able to solve
them, one needs to truncate the hierarchy, very often at just the single particle distribution function. Therefore,
the feasibility of solving these equations limits the kinetic approach to dilute systems near equilibrium, where the
truncation can be justified. We might therefore expect that the regime of validity of equations derived within kinetic
theory is likewise limited. However, fluid dynamical equations can also be derived from very general principles,
showing that they have a much wider regime of validity, and, indeed in practice, we apply them over such a wider
range. This is the ‘universality’ of fluid dynamics.
Inthecontextofanon-Abelianplasma,inanalogywiththeordinaryfluidmechanics,wemaythereforeaskforana
priori derivationofanon-Abelianfluidmechanics,whichincorporatesthenon-Abeliandegreesoffreedom,couplingto
a non-Abelian gauge field, etc. This theory may be valid for dense, nonperturbative and nondilute systems. Further,
a canonical or symplectic formulation (at least in the conservative limit) is important for quantization. At the same
time, the analysisbasedonthe kinetic equationsremains usefulto us asa guide forarrivingatLagrangian,canonical
description.
Our goal is to provide plausible equations that generalize to the non-Abelian situation the continuity
and Euler equations
which govern conventional Eulerian perfect fluids. In (2) force denotes forces acting on a unit volume of the fluid.
The above four equations or their relativistic versions can be equivalently presented as the four conservationlaws for
the energy and momentum densities (either nonrelativistic or relativistic).
In the non-Abelian generalizations one must first fix the group transformation law for the collective variables and
the covariance properties of the equations, which now may number more than four, and cannot be comprised solely
in energy-momentum conservation. An obvious additional equation is the (covariant) conservation equation for the
non-Abelian current, but the relation of this current to the collective variables needs to be established.
Our constructions begin by postulating collective variable Lagrangiansthat are invariantagainstspace-time trans-
lations and internal symmetry transformations. Thus energy-momentum conservation and current conservation are
assured by Noether’s theorem, while the Euler-Lagrange equations describe the temporal evolution of the collective
variables. IntheSectionIIwereviewtheLagrangianaswellasotheraspectsofnonrelativisticandrelativisticAbelian
fluids. This is doneto motivate andcontrastournon-Abelianconstructions,whichwedevelopinSections III andIV.
Derivations are postponed to the Appendices; in the text only results are presented and discussed.
II. REVIEW OF ABELIAN FLUIDS
Equations (1) and (2) can be found as the Euler-Lagrangeequations for the Lagrange density [3]
where our coordinates are xµ =(ct,r). The various quantities are defined as
and V is a ρ-dependent potential that gives rise to the force. (In the usual theory, V depends only on ρ, but we
allowdependence onderivativesofρ aswell.) The canonical1-formisdeterminedby the firstcontributionto while
the dynamics is encoded in the 1ρv2 V term. Specifically, variation of v shows that v is given by the C L lebsch
parametrization [4]
Variation of θ results in (1), while variation of the Clebsch potentials (α,β) produces subsidiary equations
which are needed in the subsequent derivation of the Euler equation. Finally, the “Bernoulli” equation emerges by
( δ drV is just the Euler-Lagrangederivative of V.) The Euler equation (2) then follows by taking the gradientof
(8) and using (7). The force on the right of (2) is now seen to be
force= drV (9)
The energy and momentum densities carried by the fields are
= ρv. (11)
These satisfy continuity equations as a consequence of (or equivalent to) (1) and (2).
Interaction with electromagnetic fields is accommodated by including the Maxwell Lagrange density and adding
the electromagneticvector potentialto a , whereuponjµ becomes the electromagneticcurrent. This givesrise to the
Lorentz force in the Euler equations, thereby producing magnetohydrodynamics. Note that in this model the mass
density moves with the same velocity as the charge density as is seen by inspecting and j.
An interesting realization of the above equations is provided by Ma¨delung’s “hydrodynamical” rewriting of the
Schr¨odinger equation [5]
where the wave function is presented as
The imaginary part of (12) reproduces the continuitpy equation (1), when θ is identified as the velocity v, with
vanishing vorticity v = 0. Also the quantum current h¯Imψ∗ ψ beco ∇ me ρv. The real part of (12) gives the
Bernoulli equation with α and β set to zero and with a “quantum” force derived from
2m2 ∇ 8m2 ρ
The Euler equation (2) follows by taking the gradient of the Bernoulli equation.
The Lagrange density for a relativistic fluid is chosen as [3]
= jµa f(n), n jµj /c2 . (15)
The canonical 1-form is as in the nonrelativistic case (4)-(5) and now jµ is written in the Eckart form [6]
jµ =nuµ ,uµu =c2 , uµ =(c,v) 1 v2/c2 , n=ρ 1 v2/c2 (16)
f(n) encodes the dynamics; for the free theory f(n)=nc2.(cid:14)Vpariations of θ, α and βpstill produce equations (1) and
(7) while variation of jµ evaluates a
wheredashdenotesdifferentiationwithrespecttotheargumentofthefunction. Wecall(17)therelativisticBernoulli
equation, which leads to the Euler equation with the following steps. The curl of (17) reads
(cid:16) (cid:17) (cid:16) (cid:17)
Since accordingto (6)the leftside is equalto ∂ α∂ β ∂ α∂ β, itvanishes by(7)whenprojectedonuµ. Thusthere
remains the relativistic Euler equation
It is easy to show that in the nonrelativistic limit, with
the Lagrange density (15) passes to (3) (apart from an irrelevant term ρc2) and the spatial component of (19)
reproduces the Euler equation (2).
The energy-momentum tensor for (15) reads, after a is eliminated with (17) [7]
Its divergence ∂ Tµν can be expressed as
uνf′(n) uµ
(cid:20) (cid:21)
The first term on the right vanishes by the virtue of the continuity equation (1) and the second vanishes by the
relativisticEulerequation(19); orviceversa: sincethe twotermsin(24)arelinearlyindependent(the firstisparallel
touν andthesecondisorthogonaltoit),conservationofTµν implies(1)and(19). Relativisticmagnetohydrodynamics
is achieved, as in the nonrelativistic case, by adding the electrodynamical potential to aµ.
Finallywerecordonefact,whichweshallusebelow,aboutthealternative,Lagrange,formulationoffluidmechanics.
Here one describes the fluid with co-moving coordinates X(t,x) where x is a (continuously) varying particle label. It
may be chosen to coincide with X at t=0. The relation between Euler and Lagrange variables is the following. For
the density we have
whichisnormalizedtounityatt=0. (The integralandtheδ-functionfollowthedimensionalityofspace.) Evidently,
in the course of the x integral, the δ-function evaluates x at an expression χ(t,x) such that X(t,χ(t,r)) = r; i.e., χ
is the inverse of X. There is also a Jacobian. Thus
= det (26)
The Euler velocity is given by (cid:12)
A simple calculation shows that the density ρ and current j = ρv defined by these equations satisfy the continuity
equation(1). [TheEulerequationfollowsbydifferentiating(28)withrespecttotime,positingaforcethatdetermines
∂2X/∂t2, and performing the corresponding x integral; we shall not need this here.]
III. NON-ABELIAN MODELS BASED ON A PARTICLE SUBSTRATUM
A. Non-Abelian current
Before presenting a specific model, we give a general analysis of the non-Abelian current Jµ =(cρ ,J ).
The conventional formula for the current of a single, non-Abelian point particle, moving in a 4-dimensional space-
time t,r , along a space-time path Xµ(τ) (τ parametrizes the path) is
a Q a dτ − −
This is covariantly conserved
µ a abc µ c ≡ µ a
proved that satisfies the Wong equation [8]
dτ abc dτ µ Q c
For several particles and Xµ are indexed by a discrete particle label n, which is summed in the definition of the
current Jµ. In a cont Q inuum limit n x we have
(cid:0) (cid:1)
∂τQ a abc ∂τ µ Q c
[Noticethat,sincewereplaceasumovernwithanintegraloverx, (τ,x)isnowachargedensity.] Theparametriza-
tion may be fixed at X0(τ,x)=cτ so that the equations read Q
t Q a abc 0 t · Q c
Observe that just as in the Abelian cas(cid:2)e discussed above, the x integration evalu(cid:3)ates x at χ(t,r), the inverse of X,
and the Jacobian factor det∂Xi/∂xj −1 is just the Abelian charge density ρ [see (26) ]. Thus
(cid:0) (cid:1)
Moreover,differentiating (39) with respect to time and using (1) and (35) results in an equation for ∂Qa/∂t,
t a ·∇ a − abc 0 · c
which can also be written as (cid:0) (cid:1)
This is analogous to the Abelian equations (7). Equations (40) and (41) can be understood from the fact that the
covariantly conserved current (30) factorizes according to (37) into a group variable Q and a conserved Abelian
current jµ. Consistency of (1), (30) and (37) then enforces (41).
We recognize that formulas (32) and (34) are the non-Abelian version of the Lagrange variable – Euler variable
correspondence[see(25)and(28)]. Also,(35),(40)and(41)arethefieldgeneralizationsoftheparticleWongequation
(31), with (35) being presented in the Lagrangeformalism and (40), (41) in the Euler formalism. The decomposition
of the non-Abelian current in (37) is the non-Abelian versionof the Eckart decomposition (16) [2]. Indeed, (37) may
be further factored as in (16)
In the remainder of Section III, we are guided in our construction of a dynamical model for non-Abelian fluid
mechanicsand“color”hydrodynamicsbytheabovepropertiesofthenon-Abeliancurrent,whichfollowfromthevery
general arguments, based on a particle picture for the substratum of a fluid. In Section IV we present a different
model, based on a field theoretic fluid substratum.
B. A Model for non-Abelian Color Hydrodynamics
The model that we present is based on a group with group elements g, and anti-Hermitian Lie algebra elements
with basis Ta.
[Ta,Tb]=fabcTc (43)
tr(TaTb)= δab . (44)
The Lagrange density for an Eulerian fluid built on such a group is taken to be the following generalization of the
Abelian expression (15)
=jµ2tr Kg−1D g f(n)+ . (45)
Here jµ is an Abelian vector field (current) which(cid:2)can also b(cid:3)e decomposed as in (16)
The covariantderivative
D g =∂ g+A g (47)
involves a dynamical non-Abelian gauge potential A = AaT whose dynamics is provided by . K is a fixed,
µ µ a L gauge
constant element of the Lie algebra. The first term in contains the canonical 1-formfor our theory and determines
the canonicalbrackets,while f(n) describes the fluid dynamics. The theory is invariantunder gauge transformations
with group element U
According to (45), the current Jµ to which Aa couples is of the Eckart form (42)
Q Q Ta =gKg−1 . (50)
For consistency of the gauge field dynamics Jµ JµTa must be covariantly conserved. To satisfy the general
argumentsofSectionIIIA,jµ mustbedivergenceless ≡ and a thentheWongequation(41)willfollow. InAppendixAwe
showthatbothconservationlawsareaconsequenceofinvarianceoftheactionwithrespecttovariationsofthe group
element g; arbitraryvariations of g leadto covariantconservationof Jµ (30) while the particularvariationδg =gKλ
ensures that jµ is conserved (1). Therefore the Wong equation (41) is also a consequence.
Thus our model reproduces all the equations satisfied by the current that were established in Section IIIA from
general principles. Indeed the canonical (first) term of the Lagrangian (45) is like a Kirillov-Kostant 1-form, which
has been previously used to give a Lagrangianfor the point particle Wong’s equation (31) [9]. Moreover,as we show
in the Appendix B, the canonical brackets implied by the canonical 1-form ensure that the charge density algebra is
represented canonically
It remains to derive the Euler equation. This is accomplished by varying jµ; stationary variation requires
(cid:2) (cid:3)
which we callthe non-Abelian Bernoulliequation. The Euler equationthen follows,as in the Abelian case,by taking
(cid:0) (cid:2) (cid:3)(cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:2) (cid:3)(cid:1) (cid:16) (cid:17) (cid:16) (cid:17)
In the Appendix C we show that manipulating the left side allows rewriting (53) as
(cid:2) (cid:3) (cid:16) (cid:17) (cid:16) (cid:17)
Finally, contracting with jµ =nuµ and using (41) produces the relativistic, non-Abelian Euler equation
The left side is as in (19) while the right side describes the non-Abelian Lorentz force acting on the charged fluid.
Apartfromthe gaugefield contribution,the energy-momentumtensorfor the Lagrangedensity (45)is the same as
in (23) when (52) is used to eliminate trKg−1D g
Just as in the Abelian case, the divergence of Tµν entails two independent parts: one proportional to uν and the
other orthogonalto it
uνf′(n) uµ
(cid:20) (cid:21)
The first vanishes by the virtue of (1) and the rest is evaluated from Euler equation (55), leaving
which is canceled by the divergence of the gauge-field energy-momentum tensor
µ gauge − µ
Thus energy-momentum conservation reproduces Abelian current conservation (1) and the non-Abelian Euler force
equation (56), but the Wong equation (41) has to be enforced additionally. This is achieved by our Lagrangian(45).
We record the nonrelativistic limit of (55); using (20) – (22), we find that the nonrelativistic limit for the spatial
component of (55) gives the Euler equation with a non-Abelian Lorentz force
∂ v+v v=force+QaE + QaB (60)
whereforce isthepressureforcecomingfromthe potentialV (andisthereforeAbelianinnature),whilenon-Abelian
force terms involve the chromoelectric and chromomagnetic fields
Ei =cFa , Bi = ǫ Fa (61)
a 0i a −2 ijk ij
It is seen that our non-Abelian fluid moves effectively in a single direction specified by j = ρv. Nevertheless, it
experiences a non-Abelian Lorentz force. In the next subsection we present a generalizationwherein the non-Abelian
fluid develops severalindependent directions of motion.
C. Generalization
A generalization of our Lagrange density (45) that will give rise to several fluid components carrying various
densities and moving with various velocities is obtained by choosing several directions in the Lie algebra, K , and
coupling to different Abelian currents [10]
= jµ 2tr K g−1D g f(n ,n ,...,n )+
n = jµ j /c2
(Sumsoversareindicatedexplicitly;thesummationconventiondoesnotapply.) Evidentlythecurrentwhichcouples
to the gauge potential is now
Jµ = Q jµ , with Q =gK g−1 . (63)
Arbitrary variation of g ensures that (63) is covariantly conserved, but we also need the conservation of individual
jµ . This is achieved by choosing special forms for δ g = gK λ which will work provided that different K
commute (see Appendix A). Therefore,we choosethe K to belongto the Cartansubalgebraofthe Lie algebraand
the totalnumber ofdifferentchannels equalsthe rankr ofthe group. With this choiceforthe K , specialvariations
of g ensure
The Wong equation which follows from the conservation of the non-Abelian current now reads
jµ D Q =0. (65)
Varying the individual jµ produces the Bernoulli equations
2tr Q (D g)g−1 = µ f(s) where f(s) f(n ,n ,...,n ) (66)
(cid:2) (cid:3)
Again, the curl of the above can be cast in the form
n (cid:16) (cid:17) (cid:16) (cid:17)o (cid:2) (cid:3) (cid:2) (cid:3)
When contracted with jµ =n uµ , this leaves
(cid:16) (cid:17) h i (cid:2) (cid:3)
However, unlike in the single channel case, the right side does not simplify since j Q cannot be replaced by J
µ(s) (s) µ
because the latter requires summing over s. Also the first right-handterm in (68) does not vanish since (65) requires
summation over s.
The energy-momentum tensor is
Its divergence of course reproduces (57)
X s=1 (cid:16) (cid:17) (cid:16) (cid:17)
The first term in the brackets vanishes according to (64) and the remainder is evaluated from (68) as
2tr (jµ D Q )(Dνg)g−1 +2tr j Q Fµν
X s=1(cid:16) h i (cid:2) (cid:3)(cid:17)
Since now we are summing over all channels, it follows from (63) and (65) that, as before,
A more transparent picture of what is happening is given if the dynamical potential separates
f(n ,...,n ) = f (n ) (72)
Thenthe leftside of(68)refersonlyto variableslabeleds,while the rightside maybe rewrittenwiththe helpof(62)
and (65) to give
(cid:16) (cid:17) s X ′6=s (cid:2) (cid:0) (cid:1)(cid:3)
Thus in the addition to the Lorentz force, there are forces arising from the other channels s′ = s. Note that for
separated dynamics (72), the energy-momentum tensor also separates
X s=1 X s=1 (cid:16) (cid:17)
but the divergence of individual Tµν does not vanish. This reflects that energy is exchanged between the different
channelsandwiththe gaugefield,asis alsoevidentfromthe equationofmotion(74). It isclearthatthis fluid moves
with r different velocities v .
The single-channel Euler equation (55) is expressed in terms of physically relevant quantities (currents, chromo-
magnetic fields); the many-channel equation (68) involves, additionally, the the gauge group element g. One may
simplify that equation by going to special gauge, for example g =I, so that the right side of (68) reduces to
2tr j (DµQ )(D g)g−1 +2tr jµ Q F =2tr K jµ (∂ A ∂ A ) (76)
(cid:2) (cid:3) h i h i
while the Wong equation (65) becomes
It is interesting that in this gauge the non-linear terms in Fµν disappear.
IV. NON-ABELIAN FLUIDS WITH A FIELD SUBSTRATUM
In the Abelian case, the Ma¨delung parametrization (13) of the Schr¨odinger equation gives the conventional
nonrelativistic Euler equation, [even while the forces are derived from a potential that depends on density and
(unconventionally) on its derivatives] (see Section II). We are therefore led to examine a Ma¨delung-like construction
for a non-Abelian, “colored” Schr¨odinger equation
We consider only the free, nonrelativistic case, and the “non-Abelian” structure resides solely in the fact that the ψ
is a multi-component object, transforming under some representation of a group. The color degrees of freedom also
lead to the conserved color current
a a a a a m ∇
Of course, the singlet current
is also conserved. For definiteness and simplicity, we shall henceforth assume that the group is SU(2) and that the
representationis the fundamental one: Ta =σa/(2i), Ta,Tb = δab/2. We shall also set the mass m and Planck’s
constant h¯ to unity. The non-Abelian analog of the Ma¨delung decomposition (13) is
where ρ is the scalar ψ†ψ, g is a group element, and u is a constant vector that points in a fixed direction [e.g., for
SU(2) u could be , then iu†Tau=δa3/2]. The singlet density is ρ, while the singlet current j is
(cid:18) (cid:19)
j=ρv, v iu†g−1 gu. (82)
With the decomposition (81), the color density (79) becomes
ρ =Q ρ, Q =iu†g−1Tagu=iR u†Tbu= R tb/2 (83)
a a a ab ab
where R is in the adjoint representation of the group and the unit vector ta is defined as ta/2 = iu†Tau. On the
other hand, the color current reads
which with the introduction of
g−1 g 2vaTa (85)
v = vata (86)
Unlike the Abelian model, the vorticity is nonvanishing
va =ǫabcvb vc (88)
A difference between the Ma¨delung approach and the previous particle based one is that the color current is not
proportional to the singlet current. Equation (87) may be written as
J =Q ρv+ R vb (89)
a a 2 ab ⊥
where the “orthogonal”velocity va is defined as
va = δab tatb vb . (90)
Equation (88) shows that color current possesses com(cid:0)ponents th(cid:1)at are orthogonalto the singlet current.
InAppendixDwederivefortheSU(2)casethedecompositionoftheSchr¨odingerequationwiththeparametrization
(81). Two equations emerge: one regainsthe conservationof the Abelian current(1) andthe other is the “Bernoulli”
g−1∂ g a = vb vb ∇ 2√ρ ta+ 1 ρǫabcvbtc (91)
· − √ρ ρ∇·
(cid:20) (cid:21)
(cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:1)
It is further verified that the covariant conservation of the color current is enforced by both (1) and (91). However,
there is no Wong equation because the color current is not proportional to the conserved singlet current. Finally,
using the identity, which is a consequence of the definition (85)
∂ va = 1 g−1∂ g a +ǫabcvb g−1∂ g c (92)
(cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:1)
one can deduce an Euler equation for ∂ va from (91).
We record the energy and momentum density
(cid:0) (cid:1)
Both parallel and orthogonal components of the velocity contribute to the energy density but only the parallel
component v contributes to the momentum density. It is clear that within the present approachthe fluid color flows
in every direction in the group space, but the mass density is carried by the unique velocity v. This is in contrast
to our previous approach where all motion is in a single direction (Section IIIB) or at most in the directions of the
Cartan elements of the Lie algebra (Section IIIC).
ThedifferencebetweenthetwoapproachesisbestseenfromacomparisonofLagrangians. ForthecolorSchr¨odinger
theory in the Ma¨delung representation
Schrodinger t t
− 2 · − 8ρ
With u u† I/2 2iK, the free part of the above reads
0 =ρ2tr Kg−1∂ g ρva va (97)
LSchrodinger t − 2 ·
(cid:2) (cid:3)
On the other hand, the free part of the Lagrange density (45) in the nonrelativistic limit is
0 = ρ2tr Kg−1∂ g +ρv 2tr Kg−1 g ρ2(c2 v2)
ρ2tr (cid:2)Kg−1∂ g(cid:3)+ρv 2tr (cid:2)Kg−1 g(cid:3) pρc2+ ρv2
= ρ2tr (cid:2) Kg−1∂ g (cid:3) 1 ρv2 ρ (cid:2) c2 (cid:3) (98)
(cid:2) (cid:3)
where we have used v = 2tr Kg−1 g , which follows upon the variation of v, in the next-to-last equality above.
Thus the canonical1-formis the same forboth models while the difference residesin the velocitydependence oftheir
respective Hamiltonians. Only t (cid:2) he singlet (cid:3) v enters (98) while the Ma¨delung construction uses the group vector va.
Finally,note thatwhile the Eulerequation,whichemergeswhen(91)and(92)arecombined,intricatelycouplesall
directions of the fluid velocity va, it does admit the simple solution va =vta, with v obeying the Abelian equations
that arise from (12)-(14).
V. DISCUSSION
In this paper, we have presented in Section III two distinct non-Abelian generalizations of ordinary particle based
Abelian fluid dynamics. Both versions use a fluid generalization of the Kirillov-Kostantform that naturally encodes
the algebra of charge densities (51), which is needed if the charge density is to be identified as the generator of
non-Abelian symmetry transformations. In Section IIIC we generalized the first version, given in Section IIIB so
that the density is specified in terms of a set of Abelian densities equal in number to the rank r of the Lie algebra,
rather than a single density as in the first version. Since the charge density at a point in the fluid is an element of
the Lie algebra, diagonalization shows that an invariant specification must use r eigenvalues. Alternatively, we may
use the r Casimir invariants of ρ at a point to characterize it. Therefore the appearance of r Abelian currents in
the Lagrangian is entirely natural. This is also in accord with what happens with the Kirillov-Kostant form where
our jµ are replaced by the fixed weights of a representation of the Lie algebra and lead to that representation upon
quantization.
The twoversionsalsodiffer inthe formulaforthe current. Ourfirstversion,whichis mathematicallymoreconcise,
gives the non-Abelian Eckart decomposition, (49), while the second version does not allow the factorization of the
current into a non-Abelian charge density and an Abelian velocity, rather it is a sum of such factorized expressions –
a generalized Eckart decomposition as in (50). The Eckart decomposition shows that we can choose a local Lorentz
frame for which a givenfluid element canbe broughtto rest. The chargedensity is then relatedto the chargecarried
by this element. By contrast, in the second version, with a generalized Eckart decomposition, we see that even if we
choose a frame where one Lie algebra component of the velocity is zero, the other color velocities need not be. Thus
the latter applies to a situation where color separating flows can occur. Physically, it is not yet clear what kinematic
regimes of a quark-gluon plasma, for example, would admit or require such flows.
We note that the currents we have obtained are the non-Abelian analogues of the irrotational part of the Abelian
current, even though the vorticity is nonvanishing. The other components can be easily incorporated, if needed , by
generalizing the Lagrangianin (62) as
= jµ 2tr K g−1D g +a f(n ,n ,...,n )+ (99)
X (cid:8) (cid:2) (cid:3) (cid:9)
where a is given by
The final fluid equations remain unchanged.
We have also derived in Section IV a field based fluid mechanics by extending the Ma¨delung construction to the
non-Abeliansituation. Herethe“Euler”equationsaremuchlessappealingbecausetheyinvolvevelocitiesinallgroup
directions. We know of no compelling physical reason for preferring this field based model over the particle based
one, even though in the Abelian case it coincides with the particle-based construction.
Acknowledgements
ThisworkwassupportedinpartbyDOEgrantsNos. DE-FC02-94-ER40818,DE-FG02-91-ER40676,byNSFgrant
number PHY-0070883and by a PSC-CUNY grant.
APPENDIX A: VARIATIONS OF g
We determine the variation of
I0 = dtdr jµ 2trK g−1D g (A1)
when g is varied either arbitrarily or in the specific manner
whereλisanarbitraryfunctiononspace-time. Thiswillprovidetheneededresults(1)and(30)forthesinglechannel
situation as well as (64) and (65) for many channels.
Recall the definitions Q = gK g−1 and D g = ∂ g+A g, which implies D g−1 = ∂ g−1 g−1A . First, the
variation of g−1D g is established
To evaluate the last term, note that D(cid:0)δg =D (cid:1) gg−1δg =(D g)g−1δg+gD g−1δg . Thus
Inserting (A4) into the variation of I0(cid:0)in (A1)(cid:1), integr(cid:0)ating b(cid:1)y parts, and rearranging the trace with K gives
δI0 = dtdr ∂ jµ 2trK g−1δg+jµ 2tr g−1D g,K g−1δg . (A5)
Z X s=1(cid:16) (cid:2) (cid:3) (cid:17)
Considering first arbitrary variations: the vanishing of δI0 requires
∂ jµ K +jµ g−1D g,K =0 (A6)
X s=1(cid:16) (cid:2) (cid:3)(cid:17)
or, after sandwiching the above between g...g−1,
X s=1(cid:16) (cid:2) (cid:3)(cid:17)
Finally we verify that
D gg−1,Q =D Q , (A8)
so that the desired results (30) and (65) follo(cid:2)w (cid:3)
∂ jµ Q +jµ D Q =D jµ Q =D Jµ =0. (A9)
!
X s=1(cid:16) (cid:17) X s=1
Next we consider the specific variation (A2) and separate the sum (A5) into the term s = s′ and s = s′. After a
rearrangementof the last term in (A5), we get
Z (cid:16) (cid:17)
s X 6=s′ (cid:16) (cid:17)
The first commutator vanishes; so does the second when K (s) and K (s′) commute, i.e., when they belong to the
Cartan subalgebra. Also 2trK (s) K (s′) = − K ( a s) K ( a s′) ; for s′ = s this is constant, while for s′ 6 = s it vanishes when
it is arranged that distinct elements of the Cartan algebra are selected. Thus for stationary variations jµ must be
conserved, and (1) as well as (30) are validated.
APPENDIX B: CHARGE DENSITY ALGEBRA
The portion of the Lagrange density (45) that determines the Poisson bracket is
canonical t t
Withaparametrizationofthegroupelement,e.g.,g(ϕ)=eTaϕa,oneseesthat(∂ g)g−1 hastheform ∂ ϕ Ca(ϕ)Tb,
where the non-singular matrix Ca(ϕ) is defined by
L canonical t a b b t a b b
and the momentum conjugate to ϕ is
With inverse to Ca defined as cb ,
The non-Abelian charge density ρ is a function of (t,r) and for (51) we need the bracket with another density
evaluated at (t,r′). Since the dependence of ca on ϕ involves no spatial derivatives of ϕ, it is clear that the brackets
will be local in r r′; just as is the bracket between ϕ and Π.
cb b′ca c′
!
To evaluate the derivative with respect to ϕ, return to (B2) and observe
The first term in the parentheses is symmetric in (b′,c′); when inserted in (B6) it produces a symmetric contribution
in (a,b) and does not contribute when antisymmetrization in (a,b) is effected. What is left establishes (45).
= (cid:16) 2trTaTbTc′′ ρ c′′ a b δ(r r′) (cid:17)
= 2 (cid:16) trfabdTdTc′′ ρ c′′δ(r r′) (cid:17)
APPENDIX C: MANIPULATING EQUATION (53)
Observe that the first term in (53) equals
(cid:2) (cid:3) (cid:2) (cid:3)
The first term on the right side is rewritten with the help of (A8) and combined with the last term, leaving
2tr Q(D D g)g−1 Q(D g)g−1(D g)g−1
After antisymmetrization in (µ,ν), the le(cid:0)ft side of (53) reads (cid:1)
When (A8) is used a(cid:0)gain, (C2) becomes the left side of (55).(cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:1)
APPENDIX D: NON-ABELIAN MA¨DELUNG PARAMETRIZATION
When (81) is inserted into (78), and use is made of the definition (85), we find in the SU(2) case
Next (D1) is premultiplied by u†, where it implies
The imaginary part reproduces the continuity equation for the singlet current (82), while the real part gives
To obtain further information, we premultiply (D1) with u†Tb. This gives
The imaginary part gives (91) while the real part is identically satisfi(cid:0)ed b(cid:1)y virtue of (1) and (91).
[1] R. Pisarski, Physica A158, 246 (1989); Phys. Rev. Lett. 63, 1129 (1989); E. Braaten and R. Pisarski, Phys. Rev. D 42,
2156 (1990); for a recent update and later references, see J. Andersen, E. Braaten, E. Petitgirard and M. Strickland,
hep-ph/0205085.
[2] U. Heinz, Ann. Phys. 161, 48 (1985); H.-T. Elze and U. Heinz, Phys. Rep. 183, 81 (1989); for a recent update and later
references, see D. Litim and C. Manuel, Phys. Rept. 364, 451 (2002).
[3] Lagrangians for nonrelativistic and relativistic Abelian Eulerian fluids exist in the literature; see for example R. Jackiw,
Lectures on Fluid Dynamics (Springer, New York,2002) whose development and conventionsare followed in thispaper.
[4] A.Clebsch, J. Reine Angew. Math.56, 1(1859); H.Lamb,Hydrodynamics (CambridgeUniversityPress, CambridgeUK,
1932) p. 248; C. C. Lin in International School of Physics E. Fermi (XXI), G. Careri ed. (Academic Press, New York,
1963).
[5] E. M¨adelung, Z. Phys. 40, 332 (1926).
[6] For a discussion of the Eckart decomposition, as well as other forms, see S. R. de Groot, W. A. van Leeuwen and Ch. G.
van Weert,Relativistic Kinetic Theory (North Holland, Amsterdam, 1980) p.10
[7] When comparison is made with the usual expression for the energy-momentum tensor of a relativistic fluid, we see that
nf′(n)−f(n) is the pressure and nf′(n) is the pressure summed with the energy density, i.e., f(n) is the energy density;
see Ref. [3].
[8] S.K.Wong, Nuovo Cim. A65, 689 (1970).
[9] A.Balachandran,S.BorchardtandA.Stern,Phys.Rev.D 17,3247(1978);A.Balachandran,G.Marmo,B.-S.Skagerstam
and A. Stern, Gauge Symmetries and Fibre Bundles, Lecture Notes in Physics 188 (Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1982). The
canonicalanalysispresentedinourpaper(AppendixB)follows themethodinD.Bak,R.JackiwandS.-Y.Pi,Phys. Rev.
D 49, 6778, (1994) (Appendix).
[10] Inapreviouspaper,wepresentedasimilarcandidateLagrangianfornon-Abelianfluids,exceptthattheK (s) comprisedall
generatorsforasubgroupH ofthegroupGtowhichgbelongs,withtheadditionalrequirementthatG/H beasymmetric
space. This construction is based on a non-Abelian version of the Clebsch parametrization. But the equations that follow
do not have a clear physical interpretation, so we have not pursued this approach. R. Jackiw, V. P. Nair and S.-Y. Pi,
Phys. Rev. D 62, 085018 (2000).