Notions of Chaotic Cryptography:
Sketch of a Chaos based Cryptosystem
Pellicer-Lostao Carmen, López-Ruiz Ricardo
Department of Computer Science and BIFI,
University of Zaragoza, Spain
1. Introduction
Chaotic cryptography describes the use of chaos theory (in particular physical dynamical
systems working in chaotic regime as part of communication techniques and computation
algorithms) to perform different cryptographic tasks in a cryptographic system.
Then, we can start by answering the questions: what exactly is chaos?, how is it used in
cryptography?. First of all, let us say that there is not an universally mathematical accepted
definition of the term “chaos”. In general sense, it refers to some dynamical phenomena
considered to be complex (lack of time and spatial order) and unpredictable (erratic).
Although it was precluded by Poincaré at the end of the XIX century (Poincaré, 1890), chaos
theory begins to take form in the second half of the XX century (Lorenz, 1963; Mandelbrot,
1977) after observations of the evolution of different physical systems. These systems
revealed that despite of the knowledge of their evolution rules and initial conditions, their
future seemed to be arbitrary and unpredictable. That opened quite a revolution in modern
physics, terminating with Laplace’s ideas of casual determinism (Laplace, 1825).
Chaos has been observed in nature, in weather and climate (Sneyers, 1997), population
growth in ecology (May & McLean, 2007), economy (Kyrtsou & Vorlow, 2005), to mention
only a few examples. It also has been observed in the laboratory in a number of systems
such as electrical circuits (van der Pol & van der Mark, 1927), lasers (Casperson, 1988),
chemical reactions, fluid dynamics, mechanical systems, and magneto-mechanical devices.
In essence, chaos theory studies systems that evolve in time presenting three particular
properties of movement: sensitivity to initial conditions (dynamical instability), stretching
and folding of the phase space (topological mixing) and aperiodic trajectories arbitrary close
to an infinite set of periodic orbits (dense orbits). Chaos theory provides the means to
explain chaos phenomena, and control and make use of chaotic dynamical systems.
A remarkable characteristic of chaotic systems is their capability of producing quite complex
patterns of behavior from simple real systems or in simulations from low dimensional
systems given by a small set of evolution equations. This quality has made them particularly
useful for application in a wide variety of disciplines, such as biology, economics,
engineering and others (Cambel, 1993; Kocarev et al., 2009). In these applications, chaotic
systems are used to produce, simulate, assist or control different processes improving their
performance or providing a more suitable output.
The use of chaos in cryptography seems quite natural, as its inherent properties connect it
directly with cryptographic characteristics of confusion and diffusion. This idea is present in
Shannon’s works (Shannon, 1949), even earlier than the term “chaos” appeared in the
scientific literature. Additionally, chaotic dynamical systems have the advantage of
providing qualitatively simple mechanisms to generate deterministic pseudo randomness.
For cryptography, this could be the promise of producing simpler or better randomness in
terms of performance (Tenny et al., 2006).
By now, the history of chaos-based cryptography is more than two decades long. First, some
works appear in the 80’s (Wolfram, 1985; Guan, 1987), but it is in the 90’s, when chaotic
cryptography really takes off. Two papers mark this beginning (Matews, 1989) and (Pecora,
1989). The first one proposes a digital stream cipher where a signal generated from a chaotic
system is used to mask the clear message. The second proposes chaos synchronization to
mask the clear message with a chaotic signal at the physical level of the communication
channel and to use synchronization techniques at the receiver to filter the chaotic signal.
These two papers also open two different views of the application of chaos to cryptography
that will be later referred as digital or analog techniques (Alvarez & Li, 2006).
Since then, the number of chaotic cryptosystems that have been proposed is too large to be
covered in this chapter. The interested reader can find a complete and updated view of this
field in (Kocarev, 2011). In addition, for more recent developments, some work is also
needed to assess their security. Nevertheless these works have been published in journals of
physics or engineering; they have revealed the potential of this field, but also a series of
errors and weak points that need to be overcome. As a consequence, chaotic cryptography
has been an active research field but with marginal impact in classical cryptography
(Dachselt & Schwarz, 2001; Amigó, 2009).
In the end, the question is, can chaotic systems provide alternative techniques able to
enhance cryptographic algorithms?. This chapter can be a worthy material so that the reader
can find some guides in order to answer himself this question. Thus, the objective of this
chapter is to give a general vision of what chaotic cryptography is and a comprehensive
example that illustrates the main techniques used in this field. In it, the authors are intended
to present a series of selected topics of special interest in this field.
In successive sections of this chapter the reader will be introduced to the following topics:
fundamentals of chaos, relation between chaos and cryptography, different kinds of chaotic
cryptosystems and their main characteristics, Pseudo-Random Number Generation (PRNG)
based on digitized chaos, cipher design based on two dimensional chaotic maps, and the
corresponding best practices and guidelines required for designing good cryptographic
algorithms.
2. Chaos and Cryptography
This section explains the basic concepts of chaos theory. Then, the focus is set on those
properties that seem relevant for its application to cryptography. In particular, first it is
given a conceptual introduction to chaotic systems, to follow with a practical approach
through non-linear dynamical systems. The section concludes considering how chaos theory
can be useful for cryptographic applications.
2.1 Basic properties of chaotic systems
Chaos has been observed in numerous natural and laboratory systems (Sneyers, 1997; May,
1976; Casperson, 1988; Kyrtsou & Vorlow, 2005; van der Pol & van der Mark, 1927) covering
a substantial number of scientific and engineering areas (physics, biology, meteorology,
ecology, electronics, computer science and economy, among others). These phenomena, as
mentioned before, show specific properties that make them complex and unpredictable.
Chaos theory deals with systems that evolve in time to a particular kind of dynamical
behaviour. As this is a vast mathematical theory, the interested reader is addressed to
(Robinson, 1995) for a broader introduction. In general, these systems obey a certain set of
laws of evolution, and so, they are deterministic. It has to be said, that chaos occurs only in
some deterministic non-linear systems. Explicitly, chaos appears when there is a sustained
and disorderly-looking long-term evolution that satisfies certain mathematical criteria.
There is a set of properties that summarize the characteristics observed in chaotic systems.
These are considered the mathematical criteria that define chaos. The most relevant are:
• Dynamic instability: also referred as butterfly effect, it is the property of sensitivity
to initial conditions, where two arbitrarily closed initial conditions evolve with
significantly different and divergent trajectories.(Boguta, 2011)
• Topological mixing: intuitively depicted as mixing coloured dyes, it means that
the system will evolve in time so that any given region of states is always
transformed or overlaps with any other given region. (Mahieu, 2011)
• Aperiodicity: the system evolves in an orbit that never repeats on itself, that is,
these orbits are never periodic (Zech et al., 2011).
• Dense periodic orbits: it means that the system follows a dynamics that can
arbitrarily closely approach every possible asymptotic state.
• Ergodicity: statistical measurements of the variables give similar results no matter
if they are performed over time or space. Put it in another way, the dynamics
shows similar statistics when measured over time or space.
• Self-similarity: the evolution of the system, in time or space, shows the same
appearance at different scales of observation. This characteristic makes the system
to appear auto-repetitive at different scales of observation (Fabre, 2011)
The references included above show interactive demonstrations of these properties. The
following section introduces some notions of non-linear dynamical systems.
2.2 Non-Linear Dynamical Systems (NLDS)
A dynamical system is a physical phenomenon that evolves in time. In mathematical terms,
the states of the system are described by a set of variables and its evolution is given by an
equation and the value of the initial state. This is summarized in Eq. (1),
where X(t)ЄRN is the coordinate i of the state of the system at instant t, that is X is an N-
dimensional vector with i,j=0,1,…N with N≥1, F is a parametric function that describes the
evolution of the system and Λ is the vector of parameters that control the evolution of the
system.
As chaotic systems only occur in non-linear dynamical systems, F will be considered to be
non-linear. For digital cryptographic applications we centre our attention on discrete-time
NLDS. Then, a discrete-time NLDS is given by the following equation:
The significance of the mathematical symbols in Eq. (2) is the same as in Eq. (1) but now the
time t is discrete. It is observed that this kind of systems is deterministic, thus the time
evolution of X can be calculated with F and Λ from a given initial state X. They are also
recursive, as the next state is calculated from the previous state.
There are a series of concepts or terms that are of special interest in the study of NLDS. The
first one is the phase space that is the subspace of RN, where all possible states of the system
are confined:
U ⊂ RN and F: U(cid:5)U , (3)
where N is the dimension of the phase space or degree of freedom of the system. The
evolution in space of an initial state when time passes is called orbit. As we are considering
F a discrete-time function, the orbits of these systems will be a collection of real pairs of
numbers:
0 0 1 0 i i 0
Then there is the central concept in chaos theory of attractor. The term attractor refers to the
long-term behavior of the orbits, and it represents the region of phase space where the orbits
of the system converge after the transitory. The attractor A is a compact region where all
orbits converge and where the system gets trapped,
A⊂ U and A= F(A) . (5)
Geometrically, an attractor can be a point, a curve, a manifold, or even a complicated set
with a fractal structure known as a strange attractor. A brief description of them is given:
• Fixed point, it corresponds to a stationary state of the system.
• Limit cycle, which is associated with a periodic behaviour of the system. Once the
system enters this attractor the states of the system repeat periodically.
• Manifold, where there are more than one frequency in the periodic trajectories of
the system. For example, in the case of two frequencies, the attractor is a 2D-torus.
• Strange attractor, it is informally said to have a complex geometric shape with non-
integer dimension. Any state in the attractor evolves within it and never converges
to a fixed point, limit cycle or manifold. The dynamics on this attractor is normally
chaotic, but there exist also strange attractors that are not chaotic. (Mahieu, 2011)
After reviewing the main characteristic of NLDS, one could define the term chaotic system
as a NLDS that have at least a chaotic strange attractor.
NLDS are usually studied only in a qualitative and computational way, as opposed to the
study of linear systems, where there is a set of analytical tools (Devaney, 1989). Different
models of N-dimensional discrete-time mappings have been studied, and under certain
circumstances complex behaviour in time evolution has been shown. The 1-dimensional
cases have been deeper analyzed (Collet & Eckmann, 1980), cases of N=2 have also several
well explored examples (Mira et al., 1996) and (López-Ruiz & Fournier-Prunaret, 2003), but
as N increases, the complexity grows and less literature is found with a well documented
analysis of the chaotic properties of the mapping (Fournier-Prunaret et al., 2006).
In chaotic cryptography the behaviour of the dynamical system is fully studied to assess the
security of the cryptosystem. Due to the nature of NLDS, chaotic cryptography does not
have analytic tools, as those that exist in classical cryptography. Then, qualitative techniques
have to be applied in chaotic cryptoanalysis. In particular, the study of the sensitivity to the
initial conditions and to the control parameters is considered of importance. Normally these
elements are also a key part of the cryptosystem.
a) Assessing the sensitivity to initial conditions
Lyapunov exponents are used as a quantifier of the divergence of the orbits in NLDS. N
exponents can be calculated for a N-dimensional system. These exponents allow us to
decide if the dynamical system has sensitivity to initial conditions. A system is considered to
be chaotic when it has a dense aperiodic orbit, and at least the higher of the Lyapunov
exponents is positive.
The study of the value of Lyapunov exponents as a function of the control parameters
(vector Λ in Eq. (2)) is a matter of interest as it allows to discover windows of non chaotic
behaviour of the system, where periodic patterns may appear.
b) Assessing the sensitivity to control parameters
Chaotic systems are also sensitive to the variation of the control parameters (vector Λ in Eq.
(2)). This dependence may produce that the dynamics of the system can be completely
different (chaotic, periodic, divergent, etc...) depending on the values of Λ. A substantial
change in the dynamics of the system due to a variation of the values of the control
parameters is called a bifurcation (Mahieu, 2011).
The bifurcations diagrams are used to study the dynamics of the system as a function of the
values of Λ. These unfolding diagrams allow knowing the regions of the phase space where
the system displays chaotic or regular behaviour, depending on the values of the control
parameters.
2.3 Connection between Chaos and Cryptography
As it has been said previously, the main characteristics of chaotic systems make them
intuitively interesting for their application in cryptography. Here, this connection is
explored in more detail.
Chaotic systems are implemented with deterministic NLDS, being able to produce the
deterministic pseudo-randomness required in cryptography. In addition to that, NLDS are
able to produce complex patterns of evolution. This gives to chaotic systems the algorithmic
complexity required in cryptographic systems.
Now, let us examine how the inherent properties of chaos connect it directly with
cryptographic characteristics of confusion and diffusion (Shannon, 1949). Referring to the
properties discussed of chaotic systems, it is clear that the properties of ergodicity, auto-
similarity, topological mixing are directly connected with confusion. The dynamics in the
chaotic attractor is given by aperiodic orbits that generate similar statistical patterns. These
patterns can be used to mask clear messages by means of substitution-like techniques.
On the other hand, diffusion is closely connected with the sensitivity that chaotic systems
present to initial conditions and control parameters. Diffusion produces the avalanche effect
where a minimum difference in the input of the cryptosystem gives a completely different
output. A chaotic system produces this behaviour when a small change is applied to its
initial conditions or control parameters. The use of these variables as input in the
cryptosystem algorithm may produce the same avalanche effect.
Table 1 obtained from (Alvarez & Li, 2006), summarizes the connection between chaos and
cryptography.
Chaotic Cryptographic
Description
characteristic property
Ergodicity The output of the system seems similar for any
Mixing property Confusion intput.
Auto-similarity
Sensitivity to initial A small diference in the input produces a very
conditions and Difusion different output
control parameters
Deterministic A deterministic procedure that produces pseudo-
Deterministic
pseudorandomness randomness
Algorithmic A simple algorithm that produces highly complex
Complexity
complexity outputs
Table 1. Comparisons of chaotic and cryptographic properties (from Alvarez & Li, 2006).
To conclude, it would be interesting to describe particular potential advantages that chaotic
cryptosystems may provide to cryptography (Tenny et al., 2006). First of all, chaotic systems
appear spontaneously in nature and can be directly applied to security processes, as it is the
case of physical devices used in communications. Those show naturally non-linear and
chaotic behaviours that can be straightforwardly used to secure communications.
Also chaotic NLDS have the advantage of being implemented with simple computable
deterministic algorithms. Additionally these algorithms may refer to N-dimensional
equations or to several systems combined at a time. They could be subject of implantation
with parallel computing and become faster algorithms.
3. Chaotic based Cryptosystems
This section presents two specific examples of chaotic based cryptosystems. Full versions of
them can be found in (Pellicer-Lostao & López-Ruiz, 2008, 2009). These are specially suited
to illustrate in detail some relevant techniques used in chaotic cryptography. In particular,
they cover three interesting topics: Pseudo-Random Number Generation (PRNG) based on
digitized chaos, cipher design based on two-dimensional chaotic maps and the role of
symmetry and geometry of chaotic maps in encryption algorithms.
Along with that, an introduction provides a global (though not extensive) picture of
different techniques used in chaotic cryptography.
3.1 Review of chaos based encryption techniques
The number of chaotic cryptosystems proposed in literature is too large and diverse to be
covered in this chapter. Valuable overviews with corresponding references can be found in
(Li, 2003; Kocarev, 2011). It is important as well, to have in mind that it is an active area of
research and recent developments need some time to assess their security.
To keep this review sufficiently small and clear, it will only cover a general view of the main
techniques and their basic concepts of operation. See Table 2 for a brief summary of them
obtained from (Li, 2003). To conclude and provide a comprehensive background, a detailed
description is dedicated to the specific technique used in the examples described later in this
section.
CATEGORY METHOD DESCRIPTION
Additive chaos A chaotic signal is added to the message.
Chaotic shift A digital message signal switches among different chaotic systems
Analog keying to be added to the message
cryptosystems Chaotic A message signal is used to change the parameters or the phase
modulation space of the chaotic transmitter
Chaotic A message signal is ciphered in a classical way and used to
Control perturbate the chaotic system
Chaotic PRNG A chaotic signal generates a pseudorandom
sequence (keystream) to XORed the message
Chaotic A message signal is added to the output of
Stream ciphers
Inverse System the chaotic signal, which has been feeded by
approach the ciphered message signal in previous
Backwards A block of a clear message is ciphered using
iterative of inverse chaotic systems
Forwards A block of ciphered message is obtained by
cryptosystems
Block ciphers iterative pseudoramdom permutations obtained from a
chaotic system
S-Boxes An S-Box is created from the chaotic system.
There can be dynamic or static S-Boxes
Searching A table of characters is generated from a
based chaotic chaotic system. The table is used to cipher
Miscellaneous
ciphers the characters of the message text
Cell. Automata The chaotic system is a Cellular Automata
Table 2. Different kinds of chaos based cryptosystems presented in literature (Li, 2003).
As it is seen in Table 2, the application of chaotic systems to cryptography has followed two
main approaches. These have been called, analogue and digital techniques (Alvarez & Li,
2006). Let us discuss in further detail their principal concepts and features of operation.
a) Analogue chaos-based cryptosystems
These systems are mostly used to secure communications and have attracted very extensive
research activity lately (Larson et al., 2006). In them, the clear message is masked with a
chaotic signal at physical level of the communication channel. The natural non-linearity of
electric and optical communication devices is controlled to produce a chaotic waveform that
modulates the message in a secure way for transmission. At the receiver, chaotic
synchronization techniques demodulate the signal and produce the clear message. Though
no completely secure their implementation results straightforward.
Main techniques of chaotic modulation (Yang, 2004), described in Table 2, are shown in Fig.1
Fig. 1. Modulation techniques used in analogue chaotic cryptosystems (Yang, 2004).
Typically used in optical communications with high rates of transmission, synchronization
techniques become critical, also due to the fact that chaotic performance implies highly
sensitivity to small deviations. Here, a chaotic control signal is used to provide a
synchronous performance of transmitter and receiver. Though not necessary to be equal
(Femat et al., 2005), they require careful fabrication and operation within specific conditions.
These systems are not cryptographically secure (Larson et al., 2006), due intrinsic limitations
of their design. As it has been seen in previous section, chaotic signals are deterministic and
though they appear to be random, they are intrinsically correlated. This means that patterns
can be found in the communication signals that may allow an attacker to decipher the
message. Even though, their technical complexity and high transmission rates makes them
valuable for communications that only require security for a limited period of time.
b) Digital chaos-based cryptosystems
These cryptosystems are basically algorithms implemented in digital circuits or computers.
These algorithms are based in iterative computations of chaotic functions that produce
digital signals. Then, basic cryptographic operations (substitution and mixing) are used to
mask the clear message with the chaotic signals. These cryptosystems involve one or more
chaotic systems in the algorithm and use their initial conditions and/or control parameters
as secret keys.
But chaos implemented on computers with finite precision may diverge from real-precision
chaos. This is why it is normally called “pseudo chaos”. In pseudo chaos, the chaotic
properties of the system may suffer dynamical degradation, for pseudo orbits may depart
from the real ones in many manners (Guckenheimer & Holmes, 1983; Li, 2003; Li et al, 2005).
Even so, it is possible for these pseudo chaotic systems, to minimize their dynamical
degradation. In this direction, the idea of using high dimensional chaotic systems may also
be helpful. While less known, these systems whirl many variables at any calculation and the
periodic patterns produced by the finite precision are diminished (Falcioni et al., 2005).
Anyway, only a detailed study of the dynamical system may guarantee their performance.
Main techniques used here are algorithms that implement stream or block ciphers (Li, 2003).
Understanding by them, the encryption of individual bits or blocks at a time, respectively.
There are also miscellaneous systems that use characteristic techniques or systems and
belong to specific families. As for security, cryptographers demand more rigorous studies of
security in publications (Alvarez & Li, 2006). Also the novelty of chaotic cryptography
shows a lack of tools for cryptanalysis as the ones of classical cryptography (Amigó, 2009).
c) Digital stream ciphers implemented with chaotic PRBG
Pseudo Random Bit Generation (PRBG) is a topic of high interest. As it is shown in Table 2,
these are used in stream cipher encryption but they are also a subject of broad application in
many scientific and engineering areas. This is why, since 1990 the proposals of chaos based
PRBG have demonstrated great development (Kovarev, 2001; Kocarev & Jakimoski, 2003).
To build a chaotic PRBG, we take an N-dimensional deterministic discrete-time dynamical
system. As seen in Eq. (2), it is an iterative map f : RN → RN of the form:
where k = 0, 1,…, n. is the discrete time, Λvector of parameters, X initial condition and
X,…, X states of the system in the following instants of time. Then it is necessary to
construct a numerical algorithm that transforms the states of the system into binary
numbers. Additionally not all states of the orbit are used to produce the pseudo-random
sequence. Normally the orbit is sampled in order to get rid of the correlation existent
between consecutive states. The existing designs of chaotic PRBGs use different techniques
to pass from the continuum to the binary world (Li, 2003). The most relevant are:
• Extracting bits from each state along the chaotic orbits (Protopopescu, 1995;
Bodgan et al., 2007; Fournier-Prunaret &Abdel-Kaddous, 2012).
• Dividing the phase space into m sub-spaces, and output a binary number i = 0,
1,…,m if the chaotic orbit visits the i-th subspace (Stojanovski &Kocarev, 2001;
Suneel,2009).
• Combining the outputs of two or more chaotic systems to generate the pseudo-
random numbers (Li et al, 2001; Po et al., 2003).
The binary sequence generated with the chaotic PRBG algorithm is used as a keystream. To
mask the clear message, the keystream is added to it through a binary XOR operation. The
initial conditions and the vector of parameters are used as the secret key.
3.2 First example: Building a stream cipher based on 2D chaotic maps
This subsection presents an asymmetric or secret key chaotic cryptosystem. It describes a
chaotic digital stream cipher. Its nucleus is a Pseudo-Random Bit Generation (PRBG) based
on 2D chaotic mappings of logistic type (Pellicer-Lostao & López-Ruiz, 2008). This chaotic
PRBG produces pseudorandom binary sequences out of the chaotic dynamics of the
considered maps. The sequences produced are used as the keystream in the cipher.
To illustrate its implementation and functionality, the design of the chaotic PRBG algorithm
is fully described and different evaluations are presented, such as statistical tests,
predictability and speed measurements. Considering the application of this PRBG in
cryptography, the size of the available key space is also calculated.
First let us see the chaotic systems that are going to be used in this example. In (López-Ruiz
& Pérez-García, 1991) the authors analyze a family of three chaotic systems obtained by
coupling two logistic maps. The focus here will be made on models (a) and (b), which will
be referred as System A and B:
SISTEM A: SISTEM B:
n+1. n n n n+1. n n n
n+1. n n n n+1. n n n
The interest of using these systems is their symmetry properties (T (x,y) = T (y,x) and
T2 (x,y) = T2 (x,y)) wich will be of used in 3.3 to improve the algorithm. From a geometrical
point of view, both present the same chaotic attractor in the interval λЄ [1.032 1.0843]. The
parameter λ in Eq. (2), could be considered different for the calculus of x and y coordinates.
This would give two independent control parameters λ and λ , which in a similar rank
[1.032, 1.0843] maintain the system in a chaotic regime due to its structural stability. The
dynamics in this regime (Pellicer-Lostao & López-Ruiz, 2011a) is particularly interlaced
around the saddle point P4:
P4=[P4 x , P4 y ] P4 x =P4 y = (1+ 4 − ) (8)
Despite of the similarities of these systems, their dynamics have some differences. In Fig. 2
one can see one orbit and its spectrum for both systems with equal initial conditions.
Fig. 2. Chaotic Attractor with λ= 1.07 , X=[0.737,0.747] for System A in (a). Orbit x(n) and
spectrum S(w) for and Systems A and B in (b) and (c) respectively for the same λ and X.
Second, let us present the algorithm used to obtain the Symmetric Coupled Logistic Map
PRBG. In (Suneel, 2009) the author presents an algorithm to build a PRBG based on a 2D
chaotic system, the Hénon map (Hénon, 1976; Pellicer-Lostao & López-Ruiz, 2011b). This
algorithm is based on the technique of subspace division. The pseudorandom sequences
generated with this algorithm show good random properties when subjected to different
statistical tests. The author indicates that the choice of the Hénon map is rather arbitrary and
similar results should also be attainable with other 2D maps. This algorithm is then taken
and the chaotic Hénon map is substituted by the Symmetric Coupled Logistic Map.
But, as it normally happens in chaotic cryptosystems, this algorithm is dependent of the
chaotic system and the mere substitution of the chaotic systems is not enough to maintain its
performance (Li, 2003). In particular, it is found that the sub-space division method has also
to be adapted to fit the geometrical characteristics of the new chaotic systems. In (Pellicer-
Lostao & López-Ruiz, 2008) the interested reader can find these details. The final algorithm
applied to the Symmetric Coupled Logistic Maps is shown in Fig.3 through a functional
diagram. In the following paragraphs the details of its implementation are described.
Fig. 3. Functional block structure of the proposed algorithm (example for System A)
The input of the algorithm are a state of initial conditions X.= [x ,y] and a value of the
parameters (λ , λ ). The functional block named as Logistic Bimap produces a series of
iterations through Eq.(4). Whenever the initial input values produce chaotic regime this
block produces a chaotic sequence of 2D real states X.= [x,y]. Then, it is used the technique
of dividing the phase space in four sub-spaces to transform the 2D states into binary vectors
[bi , bi ]. This is done in the block named as sub-space decision. This produces two binary
sequences S = {bi }∞ and S = {bi }∞ .
X X i=1 Y Y i=1
As it is said before, the division of the phase space in four sub-spaces must be defined, in a
way that the Logistic Bimap system visits each subspace as the Hénon map does in (Suneel,
2009). A finite automata that summarizes the pattern of visits is used to obtain that. A finite
automata is inferred from the Hénon map in (Suneel, 2009) and a division of sub-paces is
chosen in the Logistic Bimaps in order to get the same finite automata. In particular, if we
name the sub-spaces corresponding to [bi , bi ] with values [0, 0], [1, 0], [0, 1] and [1, 1] as
1,2,3 and 4, we can analyze the detail of this pattern of visits. This is shown in Fig.4.
In (Suneel, 2009) the Hénon map does not visit the four sub-spaces equally. It is observed
that there exists a symmetry of movements between sub-spaces 1-3 and 2-4, which has a
characteristic mixing of 50% and 50%, as long as a predominant (80%) and constant
transition between 3 and 2. This leads to a highly variation of binary values in sequences S,
S . In the end, these conditions give the final result of an output sequence O(j) with a proper
balance of zeros and ones, or put it in another way, with pseudo-random properties.
To get this automata for the symmetric coupled logistic maps Systems A and B, one should
chose the diagonal axis, which divides phase space in two parts, each of which is equally
visited (50%). And additional statistical calculus is required to divide these two sub-spaces,
in another two with a visiting rate of 40%-10% each one. When this is done, one can observe
that this is got by merely selecting P4 and the line perpendicular to the axis in P4 as the
other division line.
The final sub-space division for each system is presented in Fig. 4(a) and 4(c), along with the
indications of the evolution of the visits to each sub-space. For Systems A and B, this finite
automata is depicted in Fig. 4(b) and 4(d).
Fig. 4. (a) Final sub-space division and (b) finite automata for System A. (c) Final sub-space
division and (d) finite automata for System B. (In both cases, λ = 1.07).
Finally the operation performed in the sub-space decision block is summarized in Eq (5):
After obtaining S = {bi }∞ and S = {bi }∞ , they are sampled with a frequency of 1/P
X X i=1 Y Y i=1
(each P iterations) and B = {bP*i }∞ and B = {bP*i }∞ are obtained. The effect of skipping
X X i=1 Y Y i=1
P consecutive values of the orbit is necessary to get a random macroscopic behaviour. With
this operation, the correlation existing between consecutive values generated by the chaotic
system is eliminated.
This is done in a way that over a P , sequences generated with P > P will appear
macroscopically random. Although P is normally introduced as an additional key
parameter in pseudo-random sequences generation (Kocarev, 2001), it strongly determines
the speed of the generation algorithm, so it is recommended to be kept as small as possible.
The output binary pseudorandom sequence O(j) is obtained by a mixing operation of the
actual and previous values of the sequence B(j) = [B (j);B (j)] given by the truth table
sketched in Table 3.
B(j-2) 0 1
Table 3. Truth table generating the binary sequence O(j).
As a direct application for cryptography, the above described PRBG could be used in the
construction of a stream cipher. Different initial conditions, x and y and parameters λ and
P, can be applied to the input of the system and be used as a key to generate the keystream,
or output sequence O(j). The keystream O(j) can be XORed directly with a clear text,
obtaining that way the ciphertext.
In rest of this example, we evaluate the functionality of the chaotic PRBG with the calculus
of the size of the key space, applying statistical and predictability tests to different sequences
produced with it and measuring its speed.
a) Calculus of the key space
Let us determine the operative range of initial conditions and parameters values that can be
applied to the PRBG in Fig. 3. This range, when the PRBG is used in cryptography
applications is known as the key-space. Then, the key space is determined by the interval of
the parameter and the initial conditions that keep the dynamical system in the chaotic
regime. These are λ∈ [1.032, 1.0843], x∈ (0, 1) and y∈(0, 1). The parameter λ can be
considered as two independent parameters λ y λ, and the dynamic properties of the
system still remain chaotic in the same interval. The sampling parameter can also be
considered as another parameter of the key space. One must observe that P should be kept
in a suitable range, so that the PRBG is fast enough for its desired application. These
intervals can be denoted with brackets and calculated as [λ]= [λ]=0.0523, [x ]=1, [y]=1 y
[P]=890, when taking [P]∈[110,1000] as the functional range of the sampling factor.
The size of the key space will be determined by the numeric representation used in the
calculus of the algorithm. If floating-point representation under standard IEEE 754 is
chosen, the smallest available precision is ε
≈1.1921×10-7 for simple precision with 32 bits
and ε≈2.2204×10-16for double precision with 64 bits. These quantities give the maximum
number of possible values of every parameter in any of the two representations. This is
easily computed dividing the intervals by ε, as K =[λ]/ε, K =[λ]/ε, K =[x]/ε, K =[y]/ε,
λx x λy y x0 0 y0 0
and K =[P]. Notice that the calculus of K is different as P can only take integer values.
The total size of possible parameter values is given by K, calculated as K=K ×
K ×K ×K ×K . K is the size of the available key-space and its logarithm in base 2 gives us
λy x0 y0 P
the available length of binary keys or entries to produce pseudo-random sequences in the
generator. The values obtained for each number precision, are K =1.21×1028, with a key
length of 93 bits for single precision and K =1.00×1063, with a key length of 209 bits for
double precision.
These results are fine for the use of the chaotic PRBG in cryptography, where a length of
keys greater than 100 is considered strong enough against brute force attacks, (Alvarez & Li,
2006). Nevertheless, it has to be said for accuracy’s sake of that the calculus of the key space
is a coarse estimation and a deeper study is required (Alvarez & Li, 2006) for accurate
evaluation. The high sensitivity to parameter values and initial conditions of chaotic systems
may produce windows on periodicity in the key space. Another possibility is that the
dynamics can diverge towards infinity. In the systems presented here an initial calculus of
100 iterations is enough to ensure the boundless or goodness of the initial conditions.
a) Statistical testing
In general, randomness cannot be mathematically proved. Alternatively, different statistical
batteries of tests have been proposed over time to assess randomness. Each of these tests
evaluates a relevant random property expected in a true random generator. Then, to test a
certain randomness property in a PRBG, several output sequences are taken from the
generator. As one knows a priori the statistical distribution of possible values that true
random sequences would be likely to exhibit for that property, a conclusion can be obtained
upon the probability of the tested sequences to be random.
There exist different well-known sources of test suites available in literature, such as those
described by Knuth (Knuth, 1997), the Marsaglias Diehard test suite (Marsaglia, 1995) or
those of the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) (Rukhin et al., 2010). But
there are many more (Rütti et al, 2004; Mascagni, 1999), perhaps not so nicely packaged, but
still useful. In these collections of tests, each test tries a different random property and gives
a way of interpreting its results. In this example, the Diehard test suite (Marsaglia, 1995) and
the NIST Test Suite (Rukhin et al., 2010) were selected, for they are very accessible and
widely used. Table 4 lists the tests comprised in these suites.
Ner Diehard test suite NIST test suite
1 Birthday spacings Frequency (monobit)
2 Overlapping 5-permutation Frequency test within a block
3 Binary rank test Cumulative sums
4 Bitstream Runs
5 OPSO Longest run of ones in a block
6 OQSO Binary matrix rank
7 DNA Discrete fourier transform
8 Count-the-1’s test Non-overlapping template matching
9 A parking lot Overlapping template matching
10 Minimum distance Maurer’s universal statistical
11 3D-spheres Approximate entropy
12 Squeeze Random excursions
13 Overlapping sums Random excursions variant
14 Runs Serial
15 Craps Linear complexity
Table 4. List of tests comprised in the Diehard and NIST test suites.
In each test, a p-value is obtained. This value summaries the strength of evidence against the
randomness of the tested sequence. In Marsaglia’s Diehard test suite, p-values should lie
within the interval [0, 1) to accept the PRBG. In NIST Statistical Test Suite, the acceptance
happens when the p-values are greater than α, the significance level of the test.
To assess the randomness of the PRBG obtained in the previous section with systems A and
B, several sequences are obtained and submitted to the Diehard and NIST test suites
described in Table 4. The significance level of the tests was set to a value appropriate for
cryptographic applications (α= 0.01). Similar results were found for both systems and for
simplicity, only those obtained with system A will be presented here after. Ten sequences
were generated with six different sets of initial conditions and considering λ = λ = λ . Their
characteristics are described in Table 5.
Sequence S1 S2 S3 S4 S5 S6
x 0.9891 0.4913 0.6727 0.7268 0.3956 0.9998
y 0.6891 0.6913 0.4977 0.9018 0.4956 0.6498
λ 1.048 1.053 1.069 1.080 1.064 1.074
P 55 45 35 47 n.a. n.a.
P 83 105 83 83 100 85
Table 5. Parameters P and P for different sequences Si , i = 1,…,6, with different
initial conditions (x , y) and control parameter λ.
Six of them (S1, S2, S3, S4, S5 and S6) were tested with Nist tests suite with 200 Mill. of bits
and four of them (S1, S2, S3 and S4) were tested with Diehard tests suite with 80 Mill. of
bits. Here, the parameters P and P are the minimum sampling rate or shift factor,
P , over which, all sequences generated with the same initial conditions and P > P pass
Diehard or Nist tests suites, respectively. It is observed here, that the Nist tests suite requires
a higher value of P and that S5 and S6 were not tested with Diehard battery of tests.
In the Diehard tests suite, each of the tests returns one or several p-values which should be
uniform in the interval [0,1) when the input sequence contains truly independent random
bits. The software available in (Marsaglia, 1995) provides a total of 218 p-values for 15 tests,
and the uniformity requirement can be assessed graphically, when plotting them in the
interval [0,1). For example Fig. 5 shows the p-values obtained for three sequences (a),(b) and
(c) with the same initial conditions S1, and different sampling factor P. The first one, Fig.
5(a), demonstrates graphically the failure of the tests, for there is a non-uniform clustering of
p-values around the value 1.0. Fig. 5(b) shows the uniformity obtained with P = 55 over
the interval [0,1). A better uniformity can be appreciated when P > P in Fig. 5(c).
Sequences S1 to S4 where proved to pass the Diehard battery of tests with significance level
α= 0.01. Fig. 5(d) presents a graphical representation of the p-values obtained for each
sequence with sampling factor P=P of Table 6. It can be observed that some p-values are
occasionally near 0 or 1. Although it can not be well appreciated in the figure, it has to be
said that those never really reach these values.
In the Nist tests suite, one or more p-values are also returned for each sequence under test.
These values should be greater than the significance level a, which was selected as α=0.01
(as in the Diehard case). These tests also require a sufficiently high length of sequences and
to prove randomness in one test, two conditions should be verified. First, a minimum
percentage of sequences should pass the test and second, the p-values of all sequences
should also be uniformly distributed in the interval (0, 1). For this case, each of the six
sequences with initial conditions S1 to S6 are arranged in 200 sub-sequences of 1Mill. bits
each and submitted to the Nist battery of tests. Sequences Si proved to pass all tests over a
minimum value P , shown in Table 5.
In Fig.5(e) and 5(f), the results obtained for S1 and S4 respectively are graphically presented,
as an example of what was obtained for each Si. The tests in the suite are numbered
according to Table 4. Fig. 5(e) represents the percentage of the 200 sub-sequences of S1 that
pass each of the 15 tests of the suite. These percentages are over the minimum pass rate
required of 96.8893% for a sample size of 200 binary sub-sequences.
Fig. 5(f) describes the uniformity of the distribution of p-values obtained for the 15 tests of
the suite. Here, uniformity is assessed. The interval (0, 1) is divided in ten subintervals
(C1,C2,…,C10) and the number of p-values that lay in each sub-interval, among a total of
200, are counted and proved to be uniform.
Fig. 5. Diehard test suite p-values obtained for initial conditions S1 with (a) P = 20 , (b) P =
P = 55 and (c) P = 110. In (d), p-values obtained for initial conditions S1, S2, S3 and S4
with P= P of Table 5. NIST test results, in (e) the proportion of sub-sequences of S1 that
passes each test, in (f) the distribution of p-values of S4 is examined for each test to ensure
uniformity.
The results above obtained are finally compared with the ones produced by other standard
PRBG. To do that, two generators provided in the software packet of Diehard (Marsaglia,
1995) are submitted to the statistical tests.
The first one is the shift-register, generator number 13 with parameters L1= 13, R=17 and
L2=5. The second one is a extended congruential generator; the first one provided in the
packet with seeds 78, 29 and 33. These generators produced sequences two sequences of 11
Mill. of bytes, more than 80 Mill. bits. Another two generators given in NIST (Rukhin et al.,
2010) were also used to produce another two standard pseudorandom sequences. In
particular two sequences of 200 Mill. bits were produced with the ANSI X9.17(3-DES) and
the linear congruential generator.
The results obtained for these standard generators are similar to the ones obtained with the
Symmetric Coupled Logistic Map PRBG and they are presented in Fig.6. Only one of the
standard generators shows poorer performance than the chaotic PRBG. This is the shift-
register generator that fails with p-value=1 the following tests: binary rank test and count-
the-1’s test.
Fig. 6. Diehard test suite p-values obtained sequence generated with the chaotic PRBG and
initial conditions S1 and P=110 (circles) and for the sequence generated with the standard
generators (stars). (a) The shift register. (b) The extended congruential generator. (c)
Proportion of sub-sequences that passes each one of NIST tests with generator ANSI X9.17
(black cross) and linear congruential generator (asterisk) and chaotic PRBG (circles) with
initial conditions S1 and P=50 (c) or P=90 (d).
c) Predictability testing
A PRBG is called a cryptographically secure pseudorandom bit generator (CSPRBG) when is
not predictable. [Menezes et al, 1996]. To assess the unpredictability it is necessary to pass
any of the following tests: the polynomial-time statistical test or the next-bit test. Both tests
are equivalent.
A PRBG passes the first one if no polynomial-time algorithm can correctly distinguish
between an output sequence of the generator and a truly random sequence of the same
length with probability significantly greater than 0.5. A PRBG passes the next-bit test if there
is no polynomial-time algorithm which, on input of the first L bits of a generated sequence s,
can predict the (L + 1)st bit of s with probability negligible greater than 0.5 (a function is
negligible if it is eventually smaller than the inverse of any positive polynomial). As it is not
possible to prove the non existence of something, a generator is considered to pass these
tests if it is possible to verify the above conditions under some plausible but unproved
mathematical assumption.
Conventional cryptography has a framework of concepts and techniques that allows
conclude on predictability, based on number and computation theories. In chaotic
cryptography one may expect predictability to be a function of the dynamical parameters of
the chaotic system. However, here there is a lack of theoretical tools to carry out such kind
of analysis. In return, one can perform empirical measurements.
This part presents several measurements to assess the predictability of the PRBG. These will
show, that due to the characteristics of the design of the PRBG, the probability of producing
a 0 or a 1 at a given instant t=j is:
and the maximum value of Δε will be measured (Δε ).
To do that, the chaotic PRBG algorithm is revised. The conditions necessary for
unpredictability are analyzed. After that, a binary pseudorandom sequence is generated, the
probability of obtaining a 0 or a 1 bits is measured on that sequence and the error magnitude
Δε is evaluated. Our discussion is centred in System A, but measurements could also be
performed to System B the same way and similar results should be obtained.
The design of the generator is depicted in Fig.3. There it can be seen that the output bit
generated at instant t=j, O(j) is generated by means of Table 4 as a function of the binary
vectors B (j-1) , B (j-2) y B(j) = [B (j),B (j)] where at instant t=j=P*i, B (j)= bP*i y B (j)=
Y Y X Y X X Y
bP*i . As a result the output bit is produced explicitly as it is shown in following Table 7.
[0,0] 0 0 1 1
[0,1] 1 1 0 0
[1,0] 0 1 1 0
[1,1] 1 0 0 1
Table 6. Truth table generating the output bit O(j).
From Table 6 one observes that the output O(j) will have a 0.5 probability of being a 0 or 1
bit whenever the probabilities of the vectors B (j-1) , B (j-2) y B(j) = [B (j);B (j)] are also 0.5.
And we can say that the distribution of 0’s and 1’s the output binary sequence will be
uniform as long as the distribution of the sequence of the binary vector B(j) = [B (j);B (j)] is
uniform.
But B(j) is obtained in the output of the sub-space division block, as t=j=P*i, B (j)= bP*i
and B (j)= bP*i and as it was seen the pattern of visits of any sub-space is not uniform, it
depends of the dynamic of the chaotic attractor. The dynamic of visits of every sub-space is
analyzed in Fig. 7.
In Fig.7, it is observed that the sequences of binary vectors [bi , bi ] in (a) and [bP*i , bP*i ]
in (b) have a characteristic evolution. In particular, from the Fig.7 (a) is easy to conclude that
it is possible to predict next states in the automata given and initial state for P=1. For
example P([bi , bi ] =[0,0])/([bi-1 , bi-1 ] = [1,0])=1. On the other hand, in Fig.7 (b) this
sequence is sampled at P rate, when P is taken sufficiently high, P>>1. Then, the correlation
of the states in the chaotic system disappears and any transition is possible.
Fig. 7. Finite automata for the evolution dynamics of binary vector [bP*i , bP*i ] generated in
the chaotic PRBG with system A (a) when P=1 and (b) when P>>1.
To measure the predictability, different binary sequences are produced in the chaotic PRBG
with initial conditions S2 of Table 5, a length of n=2Mill of bits and different values of
sampling factor P=1, 101 y 151. With these sequences, it is measured the probability of
transition from a state B(j-1) = [B (j-1),B (j-1)] at instant t=j-1 to the state B(j) = [B (j),B (j)]
in the next instant. These measurements can be seen in Table 7.
Table 7. Measurements of the probability of transition from one subspace to another.
Table 7 shows two tables for every value of P used in the measurements. The table on the
left counts the visits or transitions from the sub-space where B(j-1) = [B (j-1),B (j-1)] was at
instant t=j-1 to the sub-space where [B (j),B (j)] is at the following instant. The table on the
right calculates the probability of transition between the four subspaces calculated from the
table on the left. The values in the different tables are obtained in (a), (b) with P=1, in (c), (d)
P=101, and in (e), (f) P= 151. As a conclusion of these, it is found that the system at instant
t=j has the following probabilities for being in any of the four possible states:
It is observed that the greater the value of P, the closer the probabilities to 0.5. The case
where P=151 is then considered to proceed with the measurements. Now it is possible to
calculate from Table 7 the probability of obtaining B (j) = 0 or B (j)=1 from a given
predecessor state B(j-1) = [B (j-1),B (j-1)]. And the same for the probabilities of B (j) = 0 or
B (j)=1 from the state B(j-1) . These calculus can be done by the reader in all cases with the
data of Table 7(f), but here the first one is illustrated as an example:
All results are summarized in Table 8, where Δε is the deviasion from probability 0.5:
Table 8. Calculus of the probability of obtaining from the estate B(j-1) = [B (j-1),B (j-1)] (a)
B (j) = 0 or B (j)=1 and (b) B (j) = 0 or B (j)=1.
From Table 8 it can be seen that:
The error Δε is different in each case of Eq. (12). To get this equation we have taken the
approximations of Eq. (13) for all cases:
Considering all cases, we obtain that Δε<0.0006. This result can be compared with the the
acuracy of this measurement δ=1/n= 5x10-7, where n is the length of the sequence. Finally it
can be concluded that the distribution of the binary vector B(j) is uniform with an error of
Δε <0.0006. And from Table 8 we conclude that the probability of producing a bit 0 or 1
given a sequence S2 of n=2Mill bits is almost 0.5 within a maximum error of Δε <0.0006.
This gives a quantitative magnitude of the chaotic PRBG’s predictability.
d) Performance Test
To assess the functionality of the PRBG for its use in cryptography, it is necessary to
measure its speed. As it is said, an allegedly “secure” cipher is not acceptable for real
applications if it is not efficient.
To establish the complexity, and consequently the performance of the chaotic PRBG, the
principle of invariance is observed. This says that the efficiency of one algorithm in different
execution environments differs only in a multiplicative constant, when the values of the
parameters of cost are sufficiently high. In this case, the asymptotic behavior of the
computational cost of the PRBG is governed by the calculus performed in the chaotic block
of Fig.3. This block makes P iterations for each output bit, O(j). The capital theta notation
(Θ) can be used to describe an asymptotic tight bound for the magnitude of cost of the
PRBG. And consequently, the 2D symmetric coupled logistic maps have a computational
cost or complexity of order Θ(P*n). This result is typical in chaotic based cryptosystems
where multiple iterations are required for each encryption step. In this case the number of
iterations required for good statistical quality is around 100 iterations and this can be
considered small compared with other cryptosystems ( Examples: larger than 250 or 65536
in (Kocarev, 2001)). Nevertheless in our case, the calculus is two dimensional and two real
variables are computed for each step.
To measure the speed of the chaotic PRBG the following test is performed: the algorithm is
implemented in C++ code with the compiler Bloodshed C++ 4.9.9.2 and run in PC with
Windows 2000 5.00.2195 SP4 - Intel Pentium 4 - CPU 2.80GHz – 515.056 KB RAM.
Generally speaking, on a PC with a f Hz CPU, it is acceptable if the encryption speed is f /a
bps, where a <=100 (Alvarez & Li, 2006). In our case the chaotic PRBG gives a speed of
a=2394 if P=25 and a=4219 when P=47.
The results obtained show no optimal performance, but as it is known (Alvarez & Li, 2006)
besides the CPU frequency, the encryption speed of a software implementation is tightly
dependent on other issues, such as the CPU structure, the memory size, the underlying OS
platform, the developing language, all options of the compiler, and so on. In consequence
one could say that this speed needs to be increased with code optimization. In this case,
among other things, it could be convenient to use hardware implementations with parallel
mechanisms for calculating simultaneously each variable of the 2D chaotic iterations.
3.3 Second example: Improving encryption with symmetry swap of chaotic variables
In this example it is explored how the geometric and symmetric characteristics of the chaotic
maps can be used to improve the encryption algorithm. In particular, these characteristics
are studied in the chaotic logistic bimap attractors and a mechanism called “symmetry-
swap” (Pellicer-Lostao & López-Ruiz, 2009) is introduced to enhance the previous PRBG. It
is shown that this mechanism can increase the degrees of freedom of the key space, while
maintaining the performance of the PRBG algorithm.
Let us observe that the maps under consideration present symmetry with respect to the
diagonal axis. Now let us consider a point [x, y] and its conjugated [y, x] with respect to
the diagonal [x, y] as two different initial conditions. It can be seen, that starting from any
of these points systems A and B produce different but symmetric orbits (conjugated orbits).
Now it becomes clear that an interchange (or swap) of coordinates x and y in an orbit state
will to produce a jump to a conjugated orbit, while the attractor and the chaotic regime are
not affected. These facts are illustrated in the schematic diagram of Fig. 8 for Systems A and
B. When starting with the same initial conditions, one orbit and its conjugated are presented,
jumping from one to the other is possible thanks to the swapping factor.
Fig. 8. Five points in the evolution of trajectories for System A (a) or B (b) when starting with
λ= 1.07 and the Same Initial Conditions [x, y] (point 0 with the star-marker) and its
Coordinate Conjugated [y, x] (point 0 with the circle-marker).
In these circumstances, a swapping of coordinates could be introduced in the algorithm of
Fig. 3, without altering its pseudorandom properties. This mechanism is named by the
authors as “symmetry-swap”. In practice, the s symmetry-swap can be an additional step at
the input of the system, which is applied at specific instants t=i-1 as desired. When the
swapping is applied at a constant rate S, a swap of coordinates is introduced every S
iterations and the algorithm has the following performance: the map evolves along one
specific orbit during S iterations and after a swap in the coordinates (swapping x↔y), the
map jumps to a conjugated orbit. Let us call S the rate of swapping or the swapping factor.
a) Calculus of the key space
It is important to observe at this point, that the introduction of a swapping factor S does not
penalizes the computational cost of the resulting PRBG. The chaotic block again dominates
its asymptotic behavior. As a result, the swapped 2D symmetric coupled logistic maps
PRBGs have an asymptotic tight bound of order Θ(P*n). Then we must expect a similar
performance as for the algorithm in the first example. Another valuable aspect to remark is
that the swapping factor S can offer an improvement in the range of input values of the
initial PRBG algorithm. In cryptography, this means an enhancement in security and it can
be obtained straight from the fact that S, considered as a constant value, may represent a
new free parameter in the key-space.
Let us consider that the useful values of S could range in the interval S =[1,n], where n is the
number of bits generated. Taking n for a typical value of 1 Mill. of bits, this would enlarge
the key space calculated last example. Following analogous calculations and S taking integer
values, then [S] =1000000 , K = K=K × K ×K ×K ×K ×K This increases the key size from
λX λY x0 y0 P S.
93 to 113 for single precision and from 209 to 229 for double. The enlargement of the key
space makes the swapped algorithm stronger against brute force attack than the non
swapped one.
b) Statistical testing
The interesting point about the symmetry-swap, is that no matter what number of
consecutive iterations and swaps are performed to the system, the chaotic behavior always
prevails. Logically, this particular fact will make pseudorandomness to prevail too.
The authors explore the construction of a swapped PRBG. this is, following algorithm in
Fig. 3 with system A and adding a constant swapping factor of value S in the input. Ten
pseudo-random binary sequences are generated with the same characteristics (initial
conditions and length) as the ones described in Table 5. A swapping factor of S = 90 is
applied for sequences to be tested with Diehard test suite. To illustrate a different value, a
swapping factor of S = 50 is chosen with NIST’s suite. The sequences of the swapped PRBGs
demonstrate similar random results when submitted to the tests. Very similar P values to
those in Table 5, or even the same, are obtained in all cases. Fig. 9 shows graphically the
results obtained and illustrated the success of the tests. Unsurprisingly, this demonstrates
that in this case the symmetry-swap maintains pseudo randomness.
Fig. 9. In (a), p-values obtained with all tests of Diehard suite for initial conditions S1, S2, S3
and S4 with P = P and S = 90. In (b) the proportion of sub-sequences that pass NIST test
suite with initial conditions S1, P =P and S = 50. In (c) The distribution of p-values for
each test with the same conditions of (b) demonstrates the required uniformity.
In addition, one may think that the introduction of a swapping factor S can be applied in
multiple ways. Consider, for example, different values of S used alternatively in the process,
this may make the swapping factor many dimensional. Another way could be to consider an
S value variable in time. The swapping factor can also offer an easy feedback mechanism,
when making its value dependable of the output. Therefore the symmetry-swap mechanism
is a very flexible tool. In the end, it can be observed that the symmetry-swap offers a
remarkable advantage, while maintaining speed and simplicity of the initial PRBG
algorithm.
To conclude, the symmetry swap mechanism represents an interesting strategy for finding
additional degrees of freedom in the key space with no extra computational costs. This is
possible thanks to the symmetric and geometric properties observed in the chaotic attractor.
Unlike what happens when introducing the sampling factor P, the swapping factor S
doesn’t force the designer to consider a trade-off between its range of values and the speed
of the algorithm. Moreover this degree of freedom can be introduced in multiple ways.
Therefore the swapping factor S can increase the security of the system with great flexibility.
4. Conclusion and perspectives
Chaotic cryptography has experienced significant development since its birth in the early
90’s. Nevertheless, as other interdisciplinary areas of research, it has encountered many
difficulties in its way through. Chaotic cryptographers have been censured by conventional
cryptographers of a lack of deep knowledge in cryptography.
Chaotic cryptography appears as an applied branch of non-linear dynamical systems. Initial
works were discussed in the area of applied cryptology (Dachselt & Schwarz, 2001; Amigó,
2009) but soon demonstrated low security or performance, being discarded before long.
Since then, numerous cryptosystems have been proposed, many still lacking of thorough
security and efficiency analysis or difficult to implement in practice. This has damaged the
image of chaotic cryptography in the cryptographic community.
Nevertheless hard work has been done to this respect (Alvarez & Li, 2006) and relevant
aspects have been identified as important in the process of designing good chaotic
cryptosystems. As a consequence, there are a series of guidelines to assist designers to fulfil
some basic cryptographic requirements (Alvarez & Li, 2006). They address three main
issues: implementation, key management and security analysis. Implementation guidelines
take into account the necessity of a detailed description of the cryptosystem and
measurements of its performance. Regarding to the key, a complete analysis should be done
to guaranty the required behaviour of the chaotic algorithm in the key space. This means
looking for regions of weak keys or windows of non chaotic behaviour, among others. The
definition of the key and the procedure to build it, should be also clearly specified.
As for the security analysis, the novelty of chaotic cryptography makes difficult a rigorous
study on the security of these algorithms (Amigó, 2009). As well as it is not yet established a
general analytical methodology to study non-linear dynamical systems, there is also a lack
of adequate analysis tools to assess the behaviour of these systems as part of the
cryptographic algorithm. In this case, conventional cryptography tools cannot be directly
applied to chaotic cryptographic algorithms. This is another reason why these totally new
schemes seem doubtful to conventional cryptographers.
However, lessons have been learnt and the work done in this area (Alvarez et al, 2011) is
giving a series of mathematical tools to assess the security of the algorithms. Chaotic
cryptoanalysis works show examples of the tools used to assess security and the details of
their realization. The analysis of the dynamical properties of the systems as the bifurcation
diagrams and the Lyapunov’s exponents is considered a basic security analysis. These tools
allow the designer to discover regions of the parameters of design where the chaotic system
shows windows of periodic behaviour. Furthermore a study of the statistical characteristics
of the cryptosystem must be recommended. This is done, through the study of the
histograms looking for uniformity in the distribution of ciphertexts and calculating for
different values of the parameters the entropy of the orbits and the statistical complexity.
Today chaotic cryptography remains a very active field, with many publications in different
areas of modern cryptography. This interdisciplinary approach has been quite successful in
pseudo random number generation. But it is still in the side of chaotic cryptography to
develop the necessary analytical tools and prove the compliance of the required standards.
The chapter concludes here. It has intended to give a vision of what chaotic cryptography is
and a comprehensive example of the techniques used in this field. This example gathers a
series of topics considered of interest in the field of chaotic cryptography, such as digital
chaotic cryptosystems, chaos based Pseudo-Random Bit Generation (PRBG) and the use of
chaotic two-dimensional maps. It also covers a detailed explanation of its implementation
and describes the measurements performed to assess its performance characteristics. This
provides a display of how digital chaotic cryptosystems are built and the tools used in this
area to evaluate their quality. Additionally it is presented a mechanism that illustrates how
the geometry characteristics of the chaotic attractors can be used to improve the security of
the cryptographic algorithm.
The authors would like to leave a final remark. This is that, though chaotic cryptography
may be considered at present peripheral in circles of conventional crypto, chaotic number
generation may have attractive applications as simulation engines in computational science
(Pellicer-Lostao & Lopez-Ruiz, (2011c). Chaos based number generators are easy to use and
highly configurable. This makes them a valuable tool for this application.
4. Acknowledgment
The authors thank the BIFI Institute of the Universidad de Zaragoza by financial support.
5. References
Alvarez, G., Li, S. (2006). Some Basic Cryptographic Requirements for Chaos-Based
Cryptosystems. International Journal of Bifurcation and Chaos, World Scientific, Vol.
16, pp 2129-2151.
Alvarez, G., Amigó, J.M., Arroyo, D., Li, S. (2011). Lessons Learnt from Cryptoanalysis of
Chaos-based Ciphers, in Chaos-Based Cryptography. Theory, Algorithms and
Applications. Studies in Computational Intelligence, Vol. 354, ISBN 978-3-642-20542-
2, Berlin, pp. 257-295.
Alligood, K. T., Sauer, T., & Yorke, J.A. (1997). Chaos: an introduction to dynamical systems.
Springer-Verlag, ISBN 0-387-94677-2, New York.
Amigó, J.M. (2009). Chaos-Based Cryptography. In: Intelligent Computing Based on Chaos,
Springer, ISBN 978-3-540-95971-7, pp. 291-313, Berlin.
Bogdan, C., Chargé, P., Fournier-Purnaret, D. (2007). Behavior of Chaotic Sequences Under a
Finite Representation and its Cryptographic Applications, IEEE Workshop on
Nonlinear Maps and Applications (NOMA), Toulouse, 2007.
Boguta, K.. (2011). Sensitivity To Peturbation in Elementary Cellular Automata, from the
SensitivityToPeturbationInElementaryCellularAutomata/
Cambel, A. B., (1993). Applied Chaos Theory: A Paradigm for Complexity. (Ed. 1). Academic
Press, ISBN 0-12-155940-8, London.
Casperson, L. W. (1988). Gas laser instabilities and their interpretation. In: Instabilities and
Chaos in Quantum Optics II. Proceedings of the NATO Advanced Study Institute,
Italy, June 1987 pp. 83–98, Springer Verlag.
Collet, P., Eckmann, J. P. (1980). Iterated Maps on the Interval as Dynamical Systems,
Progress in Physics, Birkhauser, Cambridge.
Dachselt, F., Schwarz, W. (2001). Chaos and Cryptography, IEEE Transactions on Circuits
and Systems, Part 1, Special Issue. IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems I:
Fundamental Theory and Applications, Vol. 48, No. 12, pp. 1498-1509.
Devaney, R. L. (1989). Introduction to chaotic dynamical systems. Addison-Wesley Publishing
Company, Inc., ISBN 13: 9780201130461, pp. 161-172.
Fabre, C. (2011). Chaos Game 2D/3D, from the Wolfram Demonstrations Project
Fournier-Prunaret, D., Lopez-Ruiz, R., Taha, A. K. (2006). Route to Chaos in Three-
Dimensional Maps of Logistic Type, Grazer Mathematische Berichte, Vol. 350, pp. 82-
95.
Fournier-Prunaret, D., Abdel-Kaddous T. (2012). Chaotic sequences as pseudo-random
sequences obtained from 2-dimensional maps, International Journal of Applied
Mathematics & Statistics, Special Issue on Statistical Chaos and Complexity, Vol. 26,
No. 2, pp. 92-105.
Guan, P. (1987). Cellular automaton publick-key cryptosystem. Complex Systems, Vol. 1,
pp.51-57.
Guckenheimer, M., Holmes, P. (1983). Nonlinear Oscillations, Dynamical Systems and
Bifurcation of Vector Fields, Applied Mathematical Sciences Vol. 42, Springer-Verlag,
ISBN-13: 978-0387908199
Kocarev, L. (2001). Chaos-based Cryptography: A Brief Overview, IEEE Circuits and Systems
Magazine, IEEE Publications, Vol. 1, pp. 6-21.
Kocarev, L., Jakimoski, G. (2003). Pseudorandom Bits Generated by Chaotic Maps”, IEEE
Transactions on Circuits and Systems I: Fundamental Theory and Applications,
Vol.50, No. 1, pp 123-126.
Kocarev, L., Galias, Z., & Lian, S. (2009). Intelligent Computing Based on Chaos. Studies in
Computational Intelligence, Vol. 184 Springer-Verlag, ISBN 978-3-540-95971-7,
Berlin.
Kocarev, L., Lian, S. (2011). Chaos-Based Cryptography. Theory, Algorithms and Applications.
Studies in Computational Intelligence, Vol. 354, ISBN 978-3-642-20542-2, Berlin.
Falcioni, M., Palatella, L., Pigolotti, S., Vulpiani, A. (2005). Properties Making a Chaotic
System a Good Pseudo Random Number Generator, Physical Review E, Elsevier,
016220, pp. 1-10.
Femat, R., L. Kocarev, L., van Gerven, L., Monsivais-Pérez, M.E. (2005). Towards
generalized synchronization of strictly different chaotic systems, Physics Letters A,
Vol. 342, pp. 247–255.
Hénon, M. (1976). A Two-dimensional Mapping with a Strange Attractor, Communications in
Mathematical Physics, Springer, Vol. 50, pp 69-77.
Knuth, D. E. (1997). The Art of Computer Programming, Vol. 2, (3rd Ed.): Seminumerical
Algorithms, Addison-Wesley Longman Publishing Co., ISBNv13: 978-0-201-89684-
8, pp. 38-113.
Kyrtsou, C., & Vorlow, C., (2005). Complex dynamics in macroeconomics: A novel
approach. In: New Trends in Macroeconomics, Diebolt, C., and Kyrtsou, C., (eds.), pp.
223-245, ISBN-13: 978-3-540-21448-9, Springer Verlag, Berlin.
Laplace, P. S. (1825). Traité du Mécanique Céleste. Oeuvres complètes de Laplace (vol. 5),
Gauthier-Villars, Paris.
Larson, L. E., Liu, J. M., Tsimring, L. S. (2006). Digital Communications Using Chaos and
Nonlinear Dynamics, Springer-Verlag, ISBN-13: 978-0387-29787-3, New York.
Li, S., Mou, X., Cai, Y. (2001). Pseudo-random Bit Generator Based on Couple Chaotic
Systems and Its Application in Stream- Ciphers Cryptography”, INDOCRYPT 2001,
LNCS, Springer, Vol. 2247, pp 316-329.
Li, S. (2003). Analyses and New Designs of Digital Chaotic Ciphers. Ph.D. thesis, School of
Electronic and Information Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China.
Li, S., Chen, G., Mou, X. (2005). On the Dynamical Degradation of Digital Piecewise Linear
Chaotic Maps, International Journal of Bifurcation and Chaos, World Scientific, Vol.15,
pp. 3119-3151.
López-Ruiz, R., Fournier-Prunaret, D. (2003). Complex Patterns on the Plane: Different
Types of Basin Fractalization in a Two-Dimensional Mapping, International Journal
of Bifurcation and Chaos, World Scientific, Vol. 13, pp. 287-310.
López-Ruiz, R., Pérez-García, C. (1991). Dynamics of Maps with a Global Multiplicative
Coupling, Chaos, Solitons and Fractals, Elsevier, Vol.1, pp 511-528,
Lorenz, E. N. (1963). Deterministic non-periodic flow. Journal of the Atmospheric Sciences, vol.
20, pp 130–141.
Mahieu, E. (2011). Ikeda Attractor, from the Wolfram Demonstrations Project
Mandelbrot, B. (1977). The Fractal Geometry of Nature (Ed. 1), W.H. Freeman & Company,
ISBN-13: 978-0-7167-1186-5, New York.
Mahieu, E. (2011). Bifurcation Diagram of the Hénon Map from the Wolfram Demonstrations
Mascagni, M. (1999). The Scalable Parallel Random Number Generators Library (SPRNG) for
May, R. M., McLean, A. R. (2007). Theoretical Ecology: Principles and Applications, Blackwell,
Oxford, ISBN 978–0–19–920998–9
Menezes, A. J., Paul C. van Oorschot, P. C., Vanstone, S. A. (1996). Handbook of applied
Cryptography, CRC Press, ISBN: 0-8493-8523-7, Available at:
Mira, C., Gardini, L., Barugola, A., Cathala, J. C. (1996). Chaotic Dynamics in Two-Dimensional
Noninvertible Maps, World Scientific Series on Nonlinear Science, WorldScientific.
Series A, vol. 20, ISBN: 978-981-02-1647-4.
Pellicer-Lostao, C., Lopez-Ruiz, R. (2008). Pseudo-Random Bit Generation based on 2D
chaotic maps of logistic type and its Applications in Chaotic Cryptography. LNCS,
Vol. 5073, pp. 784-796, Springer, Heidelberg. (Available pre-print at:
arXiv:0801.3982)
Pellicer-Lostao, C., Lopez-Ruiz, R. (2009). Role of Symmetry and Geometry in a Chaotic
Pseudorandom Bit Generator, International Journal of Computer Science and Software
Technology, Vol. 2, No. 1, International Science Press, ISSN: 0974-3898, pp. 43-53.
(Available pre-print at: arXiv:0802.4350)
Pellicer-Lostao, C., Lopez-Ruiz, R. (2011a). Orbit Diagram of Two Coupled Logistic Maps,
OrbitDiagramOfTwoCoupledLogisticMaps/
Pellicer-Lostao, C., Lopez-Ruiz, R. (2011b). Orbit Diagram of the Henon Map, from the
OrbitDiagramOfTheHenonMap/
Pellicer-Lostao, C., Lopez-Ruiz, R. (2011c). Transition from Exponential to Power Law
Income Distributions in a Chaotic Market, International Journal of Modern Physics C,
Vol. 22, No. 1 pp. 21–33.
Po Han, L., Soo Chang, P., Yih Yuh, C. (2003). Generating Chaotic Stream Ciphers using
Chaotic Systems, Chinese Journal of Physics, The Physical Society of the Republic of
China, Vol. 41, pp 559-581,.
Poincaré, J. H. (1890). Sur le problème des trois corps et les équations de la dynamique.
Divergence des séries de M. Lindstedt. Acta Mathematica, vol. 13, pp 1–270.
Protopopescu, V. A., Santoro, R. T., Tollover, J. S. (1995). Fast Secure Encryptiondecryption
Method Based on Chaotic Dynamics, US Patent 5479513.
Robinson, C. (1995). Dynamical Systems, (Ed. 2), CRC Press, ISBN 13: 9780849384936, New
York.
Rukhin, A., Soto, J., Nechvatal, J., Smid, M., Barker, E., Leigh, S., Levenson, M., Vangel, M.,
Banks, D., Heckert, A., Dray, J., Vo, S. (2010). Special Publication 800-22 Revision 1
Rütti, M., Troyer, M., Petersen, W.P. (2004). A Generic Random Number Generator Test Suite.
Suneel, M. (2009). Cryptographic Pseudo-Random Sequences from the Chaotic Hénon Map.
Sadhana, Indian Academy of Sciences, Vol. 34, pp. 689–701 Available pre-print in:
Stojanovski, T., Kocarev, L. (2001). Chaos Based Random Number Generators. Part I:
Analysis, IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems I: Fundamental Theory and
Applications, IEEE Publications, Vol. 43, pp 281-288.
Tenny, R., Tsimring, L. S., Abarbanel, H. D. I., and Larson, L. E. (2006). Security of chaos-
based communication and encryption. In: Digital Communications Using Chaos and
Nonlinear Dynamics (Institute for Nonlinear Science). Springer, 2006, pp. 191–229.
van der Pol, B., & van der Mark, J. (1927). Frequency demultiplication, Nature, vol. 120, pp.
363–364.
Wolfram, S. (1985). Cryptography with cellular automata. In: Advances in Cryptology-
Crypto'85, Lectures Notes in Computer Science, Vol. 218, pp.429-432, Springer-
Verlag, Berlin.
Zech, A., Donges, J. F., Marwan, N. & Kurths, J. (2011). Frequency Distribution of the
Logistic Map, from the Wolfram Demonstrations Project,