Nuclear flow in a filamentous fungus
Patrick C. Hickey1,2, Anna Simonin4, Nick Read3
N. Louise Glass4 and Marcus Roper1
1 Dept. of Mathematics, UCLA, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA
2 NIPHT Ltd., Edinburgh, EH9 3JF, UK
3 Institute of Cell Biology, University of Edinburgh,
Edinburgh EH9 3JH, UK
4 Dept. of Plant and Microbial Biology, UC Berkeley,
Berkeley, CA 94720, USA
June 21, 2022
The syncytial cells of a filamentous fungus consist of a mass of
growing, tube-like hyphae. Each extending tip is fed by a continuous
flow of nuclei from the colony interior, pushed by a gradient in turgor
pressure. The myco-fluidic flows of nuclei are complex and multidirec-
tional, like traffic in a city. We map out the flows in a strain of the
modelfilamentousfungusN. crassathathasbeentransformedsothat
nuclei express either hH1-dsRed (a red fluorescent nuclear protein) or
hH1-GFP(agreen-fluorescentprotein)andreportourresultsinafluid
dynamics video.
1 Introduction
The filamentous fungi are the most diverse of any eukaryotic organisms,
thriving as mutualists, decomposers and pathogens the world over. One
suspected contributor to their tremendous ecological success is their un-
usual mode of life. Unlike plant and animal cells, the cells of filamentous
fungi are generally multinucleate, and can even harbor genetically different
nuclei, bathed by a common cytoplasm. As the tube-like hyphae grow, each
extending incrementally at its tips, nuclei flow from the colony interior to
fill the free space created at the tips. We show that the flow is driven by
]nyd-ulf.scisyhp[
1v9560.1121:viXra
pressure gradients across the colony, and that nuclei follow complex multi-
directional trajectories, reminiscent of cars traveling through a city. We
hypothesize that the complexity of nuclear paths is a deliberate effort by
the fungus to keep genetically different nuclei well mixed. Disrupting the
exquisite hydraulic engineering of the cell (e.g. by knocking out the ability
of hyphae to fuse, to make the multi-connected network) causes genetically
different nuclei to become un-mixed during growth.
2 Discussion
Our fluid dynamics video includes 11 short segments:
1. Atimelapsesequence,accelerated7500foldshowingacolonyinvading
a small block of agar.
2. Confocal imaging of hH1-GFP transformed nuclei flowing toward a
growing tip. As we pan deeper into the colony, we see how these tip
hyphae are fed as branches of trunk hyphae, each supplying nuclei to
many tips. The flow speed in a tip hyphae is ∼ 0.1 µm/s, flow speed
in trunk hyphae can be 30 or 80 times greater.
3. In the colony interior, nuclei flowing through the complex network of
hyphae follow torturous and even multidirectional paths, looking in
confocal microscopy, like the headlights of cars navigating a micro-
scopic city. Flow speeds in the colony interior can reach 10-20 µm/s.
4. Just like cars in a city, speeds vary between hyphal roads. Some roads
remain grid-locked while in others nuclei flow at speeds of up to 10-20
µm/s.
5. Under some conditions, in small colonies, the nuclei form spontaneous
traffic jams.
6. What drives the fluid flow? We measured the variation in nuclear
speeds across hyphae. When collapsed by hyphal diameter and axial
flowspeed,weseeacommonPoiseuille-flowprofileineachhypha,indi-
cating that the flows are hydrodynamic: driven by pressure gradients
across the colony.
7. We can manipulate the pressure gradients by applying hyper-osmotic
solutions to the colony. These treatments apply a uniform pressure
gradient counter to the normal direction of flow. Flow in each fungal
hyphae is transiently reversed, indicating that the hyphal network ar-
chitecture – far from being random – is finely tuned to create mixing
flows from spatially coarse pressure gradients.
8. What is the function of these flows? Since real fungi can harbor many
genetically different nucleotypes, we hypothesize that physical mixing,
associated with the flows, helps to preserve nuclear diversity as the
fungus grows. We show a sequence of nuclear mixing in a chimeric
colony formed by fusing two N. crassa colonies; one with hH1-dsRed
and one with hH1-GFP transformed nuclei.
9. We can manipulate the hyphal architecture genetically. We show mi-
crographs of conidiophores (spore-bearing hyphae) of chimeric wild
type and so mutant colonies. Both colonies have dsRed (red) and
GFP (green) expressing nucleotypes. In the wild type colony, the red
and green nuclei remain well mixed in the colony. In the so colony
they segregate out, so that conidiophores end up almost exclusively
red or exclusively green (shown). so mutations stop the hyphae from
fusing to create an interconnected network.
10. Conidiophores are branched structures (without interconnections) so
poseparticularchallengesformixing. Taylordispersion(enhanceddif-
fusionduetofluidshearacrossahypha)cankeepnucleiwell-mixedbut
only if flow speeds in the conidiophore exceed 200 µm/s. To achieve
such fast flows each conidiophore must feed into at least 2000 hyphal
tips.
11. A time-lapse video showing the growth and collapse of conidiophores,
accelerated 7500 fold. 2000 separately growing hyphae places impossi-
ble weight upon the conidiophore, causing it to collapse. Since spores
are thought to be dispersed by air-flows across the colony and col-
lapsed conidiophores are likely to experience reduced wind speeds,
rates of spore liberation are reduced. Loss of spore dispersal effec-
tiveness represents the high price paid by the colony for maintaining
mixing flows.