SystemixReports 1,Feb18,2007.
Nucleotide Distribution Patterns in Insect Genomes
ManojPratim Samanta
SystemixInstitute,LosAltos,CA94024
manoj.samanta@systemix.org
This work analyzed genome-wide nucleotide distribution patterns in ten
insect genomes.Two internal measures were applied – (i) GC variation and (ii) third
codon nucleotide preference.Although the genome size and overall GC level did not
show any correlation with insect order, the internal measures usually displayed
higher levels of consistency. GC variations in genomes of hymenopteran insects,
honeybee and wasp, ranked highest among all eukaryotic genomes analyzed by us.
Genomes of honeybee and beetle, insects of different orders with similar overall GC
levels, showed significant internal differences. Honeybee genome stood out as
unusual due toitshigh GC variation and 'left-handed' genelocations.
Recent sequencing of several insect genomes provides us with an unique
opportunity to understand the nature of molecular level evolutionary forces and their
manifestation in the phenotypic variations between the organisms [Adams-00, Holt-02,
THGSC-06, Xia04, Zdobnov-02]. Much of the earlier genetic knowledge on insects were
derived through a narrow prism of analysis of the Drosophila genome, but recent studies
on other insects displayed additional unique characteristics. For example, the genome of
hymenopteran insect honeybee had much lower GC level than the fly, isochore-like
nucleotide distributions and preferences of genes to locate in theAT-rich segments of the
genome [Elsik-07, Jorgensen-06, THGSC-06].Among other insect genomes, GC level in
coleopteran insect Tribolium castaneum was as low as honeybee, whereas another
hymenopteran insect, Nasonia was GC-rich like Drosophila. These observations
prompted us to perform a comparative study of nucleotide distributions in all insect
genomes sequenced so far. Here we present the first report of this comparison. With
availability of new data, these results will be continually updated at
At present, sequencing of ten insect genomes are initiated or completed, and four
others are also being considered (Table 1). Their phylogenetic relationship is shown in
Fig. 1. All but two of them are from the endpoteran division. Among the endopteran
insects, the order Diptera is most well represented with eight members being considered
for sequencing. From the other orders such as Hymenoptera, Coleoptera and Lepidoptera,
two, one and one representatives are selected respectively. Among ten genomes, where
sequencinghas beeninitiated,sevenarefullyassembledandthree areunassembled.
Following inferences can be drawn from a comparison of genome sizes and GC
levels as shown in Table 1. The genome sizes vary widely from 130Mb in Drosophila to
1384 Mb in Aedes. Incidentally, both limits are represented by insects from the same
order (Diptera). Large divergence is seen even within a suborder of dipterans, such as
among two mosquitoes, Anopheles and Aedes. Overall GC levels for the assembled
genome also vary widely from 32.7% in honeybee to 44.3% in mosquito Anopheles. In a
separate study, we compared ten fungal genomes and observed a similar range, although,
on average, the GC levels were ~10% higher in the fungal genomes (41-57%)
for the unassembled insect genomes based on subsets of sequencing reads (see Methods).
If those estimates truly reflect the GC levels of the overall genomes, the range of mean
GC for insect and even Dipteran genomes would increase substantially, with Culex
mosquito (63.2%) being twice as GC-rich as aphid (31.5%). We also note that both
hymenopteraninsectsinTable 1havesimilar genomesizes,butsignificantlydifferent GC
levels.
Above comparison demonstrates that the measures such as genome size and GC
level do not maintain any identifiable pattern across the insect phylogenetic tree. This is
not surprising, because random substitutions, insertions and deletions continually take
place within the genomes, resulting in changes of genome lengths and GC compositions.
Therefore, to derive additional insights into the insect genomes, this work applied two
other measures – GC variation and third codon nucleotide composition - referred to as
'internal measures' from here on. Similar measures were applied by Bernardi et al. to
compare nucleotide distributions in vertebrates [Bernardi-05]. Following thoughts were
applied in selecting those measures. Firstly, they are likely to be substantially unaffected
by random substitutions, insertions and deletions, unless those random processes
preferentially affect certain regions of the genomes than others. Secondly, these measures
can be applied to early sequencing versions of the genomes, even prior to initial draft
assemblies. In contrast, measures such as domain lengths [THGSC-06] cannot be
correctly computed, unless a good quality assembly of the genome is available. Thirdly,
these measures are easy to compute and interpret. This is an important factor, because
similar calculations will be repeated for hundreds of genomes that are being sequenced or
The first measure, genome-wide GC variation, was computed for each genome in
the following manner. From an entire genome, 5,000 segments of length 1Kbases were
randomly selected and their GC-levels were calculated. GC variation was defined as the
standard deviation of those 5,000 samples (see Methods). GC variations for all assembled
and unassembled insect genomes are shown in Table 1 and the distributions of 5,000
samples are plotted as histograms in Fig. 2. It can be shown that random mutation, even
though it is biased to modify the overall GC level of a genome, should not significantly
affecttheGC variationor the shapeof thedistributionfrom oneinsect toanother.
Following observations are made from comparison of GC variations among ten
insect genomes. In all except the hymenopteran insects, the variations range between 5-
7%, and are generally higher than the fungal genomes (3-4.5%). However, the variations
in two hymenopteran insects (honeybee – 9.9%, Nasonia – 8.14%) are larger than all
other eukaryotic genomes analyzed by us (e.g. human – 7.8%, sea urchin – 4.3%). Large
variation inhoneybee is unrelated to its generalAT-richness, because Tribolium and aphid
genomes with similarAT-levels do not show similar high variations.The manifestation of
high variation inthe sequence data is shownin Fig. 3, where GC levels in 6Mb regions of
the bee and fly genomes are compared. Higher fluctuation in the local GC levels of bee
genomeisapparent from visual inspectionof the images.
Further understanding of GC variations can be made from the distribution plots
shown in Fig. 2. The same figure also includes the distributions of human and sea urchin
genomes for comparison. Most genomes, including human, show unimodal Gaussian-like
distributions with a long tail on the right. However, the distributions of the hymenopteran
genomes show distinct broad patterns suggesting larger standard deviation or GC
variation. Interestingly, distribution of the Nasonia genome is bimodal unlike other
genomes. In an independent investigation, Jorgensen et al. reported observing bimodality
in the distribution of third codons in honeybee genes, but such bimodality do not show in
our dataset possibly due to sampling of the entire genome. Apart from Hymenoptera,
unique pattern is seen in the distribution of the mosquito Culex pipiens. It is right-shifted
(GC-rich) and inverted with large tail on the left. As a cautionary note, we mention that
the data for this genome was derived from a subset of unassembled reads. Clearer picture
will emerge,once thegenomeis fullyassembled.
As a second internal measure, GC levels of third codons (GC3Cs) of protein-
coding genes are compared with the rest of the genome. Median of GC3Cs of all coding
genes is computed for every genome and drawn as red vertical lines in Fig. 2 along with
the previously discussed distributions. Nearly 75% of third codons are neutral bases that
could be either A/T or G/C. In unicellular organisms, such as yeast S. cerevisiae and
diatom T. pseudonana, the red line of Fig. 2 nearly coincides with the mode of the
distribution for the entire genome. Secondly, any evolutionary process of random
mutation that raises or lowers the overall GC level of a genome should not affectthe third
codons of proteincoding genes differently.Another significance of third codonnucleotide
distribution is that in honeybee, it generally reflects the GC level of the genomic region
where the gene is located [Jorgensen-07]. However, we do not know whether the same is
true for other insects. Overall, any difference between the mode of the distribution for the
entire genome and the third codons provides useful information regarding codon
preferencesof theprotein-codinggenes,andmaybe,their locational preferences.
We computed the median GC3C measure for six assembled insect genomes, as
well as for sea urchin and human genomes. For all genomes in Fig. 2 showing regular
Gaussian-likedistributions withlongtailsontheright,thirdcodondistributionsof coding
genes are on the long tails. We name this pattern 'right-handed'. Nasonia genome also
shows right-handed pattern, but the median GC3C is closer to the mode than others. A
truly unique 'left-handed' pattern is seen in the bee genome. We note that among over 20
eukaryotic genomes analyzed by us, bee genome is the only one showing such clear 'left-
handed' pattern.Yeast S. cerevisiae shows slightly 'left-handed' pattern, but the difference
between the mode of the distribution and median GC3C is statistically insignificant
(.02%). If the median GC3C in Culex mosquito is on the long tail like other genomes, it
may also show similar 'left-handed' gene locations due to its inverted overall distribution.
Wenotethat extremeGC-richness of Culexgenomedoes not require it to be'left-handed'.
The genome of Chlamydomonas reinhardtii is equally GC-rich (63%), but still remains
right-handedwithextremelyhighmedianGC3C (82%).
Fig. 4 compares the GC levels of entire coding regions and third codons of all
genesseparatelyforeachgenome.It isinterestingthat despiteall differences betweenthe
genomes discussed earlier, broad features of this measure appear nearly identical (linear
correlation with same slope) in all insects. Fig. 5 presents enlarged versions of the same
plots for fly and bee. They show information similar to what has been discussed
previously [THGSC-06] and in this report. In bee, the dots are clustered near the bottom,
because the protein-coding genes prefer to locate in the AT-rich regions. The pattern is
opposite in fly with the dots clustered near the top of the plot (GC-rich). Additional
analysis will bepresentedinafuture report.
What are the evolutionary implications of the observations discussed in this
report? Or framing the question differently – what was the genome of the common
ancestor of all insects like, and how did it evolve to create the diversity of distributions
and gene locations as presented above? Nearly all insect genomes as well as human and
sea urchin genomes show Gaussian-like distributions with longer tails on the right, and
therefore it is likely to be the internal pattern for their common ancestor. This suggests
that the honeybee genome evolved differently to emerge into a different internal
configuration. If that is true, the followup question would be whether this process started
in the common ancestor of all hymenopteran organisms, or whether it happened at a later
time point. Similarity between the distributions of bee and Nasonia genomes, and their
higher GC variations suggest that both were affected by the same processes. However,
this does not explainthe left- and right-handedness of median GC3Cs in bee andNasonia
respectively.
One hypothesis that mayexplain the above is as follows.Overall the datasuggests
the presence of multiple types of evolutionary processes of different timescale.Aprocess
of shorter time-scale that changes the GC levels of the genomes without affecting the
internal measures is present in all genomes. This process likely constitutes of random
substitutions, insertions and deletions. It is present in all insect genomes and tends to
increase the GC levels of the protein-coding genes compared to rest of the genome.
However, an additional longer timescale process must have been active in honeybee to
cause its unusual distribution, including left-handedness in the bee genome.The common
ancestor of the hymenopteran insects went through some unusual changes comprising of
indiscriminate modification of all neutral bases toA/T. Further evidence of this presence
of such forces will be presented in a different report [Samanta-07]. It lowered the GC
level of the entire genome and also resulted in the left-handedness. In honeybee, this
force is dominant over any other shorter time frame processes.Abalance was achieved in
Nasonia between this force and the shorter time frame process. Hence the genes were
pushed to higher GC levels. Competition between two forces resulted in its bimodal
distribution.
The honeybee genome paper mentioned: “Consistent with an (A+T)-rich genome,
honeybee genes occur more frequently in (A+T)-rich domains compared with other
species” [THGSC-06]. This analysis suggests that the honeybee genome is unique among
the AT-rich genomes to have such preferences in gene locations. Also, the AT-rich
isochores in honeybee are not merely mirror images of the GC-rich isochores in the
mammalian genomes and may have originated from different processes. Apart from the
use of the same word 'isochore', their evolutionary origin could be distinct. The pattern
seeninhoneybeeis likelytobe uniquetothehymenopterangenomes.
In conclusion, this work compared all available insect genomes based on two
easy-to-compute internal measures. Two hymenopteran genomes show most distinct
patterns suggesting the presence of unexplained evolutionary forces in the formation of
their common ancestor. In particular, the honeybee genome showed internal patterns
different from all insect and non-insect eukaryotic genomes analyzed by us. Finally, an
internal measures for all other sequenced eukaryotic genomes, such as fungi and
chordates.
Availabilityofgenomicdata.
Assembled genomes of Bombyx mori (version SW_scaffold_ge2k from silkDB),
Tribolium castaneum (version Tcas20051011 from Baylor HGSC), Apis mellifera (V4
from Baylor HGSC), Nasonia vitripennis (V0.5 from Baylor HGSC), Drosophila
melanogaster (V4.2.1 from flybase), Anopheles gambiae (version agamP3.fa from
vectorbase) and Aedes aegypti (version AEDES1 from vectorbase) were downloaded
from their respective sequencing centers or insect-related databases. Web links for
pisum, Culex pipiens and Ixodes scapularis, unassembled reads were downloaded from
either the NCBI trace archive (ftp://ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/pub/TraceDB/), or the Vectorbase
Gene predictions were available for Tribolium castaneum (GLEAN3 from
Baylor), Apis mellifera (GLEAN3 from Baylor), Drosophila melanogaster (dmel-all-
CDS-r4.2.1.fasta from flybase), Anopheles gambiae (agambiae.CDNA-
KNOWN.AgamP3.3.fa from vectorbase) and Aedes aegypti (aaegypti.TRANSCRIPTS-
AaegL1.1.fa from vectorbase). For Nasonia vitripennis, a preliminary set of predictions
were derived byperforming homology search of honeybee proteins on toV0.5 genome of
Nasonia,andthenconsideringonlythelonger exons.
Definition and calculation of variation.
For each inset, 5,000 segments of length 1 Kbases were selected randomly from
the entire genome and their GC levels were calculated. Variation for a genome (Table 1)
was defined as the standard deviation of those 5,000 GC-levels. The above calculations
were improved with the following adjustments, where appropriate. If any chosen segment
had over 50% of unsequenced bases, it was discarded and a new segment was chosen.
For insects with unassembled genomes, 5,000 sequencing reads longer than 1 Kbases
wererandomlyselected,and1Kbasesegmentwasrandomlyselectedfrom eachread.
Acknowledgments
This report is dedicated to Prof. Gene Robinson for getting me curious about the
nucleotide distribution in honeybee. The efforts by the respective sequencing centers in
providing raw or assembled sequences for Acyrthosiphon pisum, Aedes aegypti, Culex
pipiens, Ixodes scapularis, Nasonia vitripennis and Tribolium castaneum is duly
acknowledged. We also thank Baylor Human Genome Sequencing Center for providing
thepredictedgenes for Triboliumcastaneum.