Nucleation and the transition state of the SH3 domain.
Isaac A. Hubner†, Katherine A. Edmonds‡, and Eugene I. Shakhnovich†*
†Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology
Harvard University
12 Oxford Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
‡Harvard Biophysics Program
Medical School Campus
Building C-2 Room 122
240 Longwood Avenue
Boston, MA 02115
*corresponding author
tel: 617-495-4130
fax: 617-384-9228
email: eugene@belok.harvard.edu
We present a verified computational model of the SH3 domain transition state (TS)
ensemble. This model was built for three separate SH3 domains using experimental φ-
values as structural constraints in all-atom protein folding simulations. While averaging
over all conformations incorrectly considers non-TS conformations as transition states,
quantifying structures as pre-TS, TS, and post-TS by measurement of their transmission
coefficient (“probability to fold”, or p ) allows for rigorous conclusions regarding the
structure of the folding nucleus and a full mechanistic analysis of the folding process.
Through analysis of the TS, we observe a highly polarized nucleus in which many
residues are solvent-exposed. Mechanistic analysis suggests the hydrophobic core forms
largely after an early nucleation step. SH3 presents an ideal system for studying the
nucleation-condensation mechanism and highlights the synergistic relationship between
experiment and simulation in the study of protein folding.
Current understanding of the protein folding process is largely based on the theory of
nucleation1,2 and energy landscape theory3. For the majority of small proteins, which
serve as model systems for studying protein folding, the process occurs via a two-state
mechanism4. In analogy to a first order phase transition, the folded and unfolded states
may be thought of as different phases (i.e. liquid and gas) and the transition state (TS) as
the “critical nucleus” that seeds the transition5. Since the kinetics of the transformation
between the thermodynamically stable folded and unfolded states is determined by the
TS, understanding this state allows for a deeper understanding of the rate and mechanism
of folding. The folding process may also be thought of statistically with the formation of
a transition state ensemble (TSE) as the rate limiting process in folding5. Experiments,
mainly based on the protein engineering method of “φ-value analysis”6, have made
significant progress in testing theories of folding. Concurrently, theory and simulation
have continued to improve our understanding of the nature of nucleation in the TSE7.
A prototypical example of the interplay between theory and experiment is the
structural interpretation of experimental φ-values through simulation8,9. This method for
reconstructing a protein’s TSE from experimental constraints has proven highly useful in
understanding folding, especially as it was refined to test the assumption that a set of
structures meeting experimental constraints is, in fact, a TSE10,11. A TS is characterized
by a transmission coefficient of 1/2. In proteins, this corresponds to a probability of
folding, or “p ”5 equal to one half. Verifying this condition prior to making statements
regarding computational models of the TSE is absolutely essential as it has been shown
that an ensemble of structures meeting a set of φ-value restraints is not composed entirely
of TS conformations11,12. Once a model of the TSE is obtained, it is possible to conduct
analyses that are currently impossible by experiment, such as exploring the role of
residues for which mutation does not cause sufficient destabilization and building an
atom-level structural model of the TSE.
SH3 is a widely studied protein that exhibits two-state folding, and is composed of
two orthogonally packed three-stranded β-sheets that form a single hydrophobic core13.
SH3 domains have served as the experimental13,14 and computational15-18 model for
numerous recent studies of nucleation in protein folding. Although there have been
simulations that attempted to reconstruct the TSE using φ-values17,18, the essential step of
testing the assumption that the resulting structures are transition states was not
necessarily taken18. As it has been shown that not all conformations consistent with
experimental φ-values are members of the TSE, it is difficult to accurately interpret these
conclusions regarding nucleation and the TSE. In the following study we use the src, fyn,
and spectrin SH3 domain and reported experimental φ-values19 as a model systems to
study the nature of nucleation in the protein folding transition state. Importantly, p
analysis is used to quantify the position of each structure along the folding pathway. We
also examine the role and formation of the hydrophobic core and explore the order of
folding events in this classic nucleation-condensation mechanism. In SH3, nucleation is
early and separate from hydrophobic core formation. The early, polarized TS that we
observe is largely solvent-exposed and is formed by a minimal number of contacts.
Results.
A Model of the TSE. A side-by-side comparison of the native and transition state is
presented in Figure 1. The general features of all observed SH3 TSEs include
denaturation of the N- and C-termi, turns and loops, and a small amount of secondary
structures located in the central β strands. The TSE for the three different SH3 domains
exhibit average C root mean square deviation (RMSD) ranging from 7.1 to 11.4 Å and
radii of gyration (Rg) of 12.5 to 14.53Å, which is largely expanded compared to the ~10
Å Rg of the native conformations. The high RSMD is largely a result of unfolding of the
N- and C-terminal strands as well as the expansion of the hydrophobic core. The fraction
of native contacts (Q) ranges from 0.17 in src and spectrin to 0.27 in fyn. By any
measure, we observe a TSE in all three domains that occurs early in folding. This implies
much less structure than has been observed in streptococcal protein G11 and ribosomal
protein S612. The properties of the pre-TS, TS, and post-TS ensembles for three SH3
domains are summarized in Table 1.
The picture of a TSE that lacks much of the long range interactions found in the
native state is consistent with experimental evidence of similarities between the
denatured state and folding transition state of the SH3 domain20. Our results suggest an
early TS, resembling the unfolded ensemble more than the native state, with a small
amount of structure (specific nucleus) focused on the central β strands and the majority of
the hydrophobic core unformed. Explicit solvent molecular dynamics (MD) studies have
also suggested an early TSE with a solvated hydrophobic core21. To substantiate and
understand the details of the observed diffuse polarized TSE it is essential to identify the
specific residues around which the polarized nucleus is organized. Also, it is important to
understand the extent to which hydrophobic core formation makes its enthalpic
contribution before, during, or after nucleation and, if it is not formed, the extent to which
it is exposed to solvent. After understanding the central event of nucleation, we describe
the mechanism by which it is formed and how folding proceeds to the native state.
A distinct network of nucleating contacts. As expected, in each domain the high φ-
value residues that were constrained in simulation generally exhibit a high Q and number
of native contacts (N). These high φ-value residues, which are experimentally known to
play an important role in the TSE, allowed us to effectively sample p = 1/2 structures.
However, they do not uniquely define the TSE. The independently determined and p
verified TSE of each of the three studied SH3 domains, despite minor differences, exhibit
fundamentally similar topology. Figure 2 illustrates the number of contacts made by each
residue in the TSE and native states as well as the location of restrained residues, which
varied from domain to domain. While most residues make few, if any contacts, a subset
of residues confined to a small region of the protein define the TSE. This polarization of
structure is characteristic of a classic nucleation mechanism. More important than the
number of contacts made by each residue is the information regarding how those contacts
are made. In each of the domains, the RT loop, turn/β2, β3, and distal hairpin regions
form a network of tertiary interactions. The contact maps of the native and transition
states, presented in Figure 3, illustrates this network of contacts and the specific tertiary
structural elements that define the native and transition states.
Residues that were restrained in construction of the src TSE due to their high φ-
values include E30 and L32 in the diverging turn/β2 regions as well as L44, S47, L48,
T50, Q52, T53, Y55, and I56, which span the β3-β4 hairpin19. In the fyn domain F4 in
β1; F20, E24, and I28 in the RT/turn/β2 region; and T44, G45, I50, and V55 in the
β3/hairpin/β4 region were restrained 22,23. In spectrin the φ-values of V23, T24, and D29
in the RT/ turn/β2 region; K43 and V44 in β3; and F52, V53, and V58 in β4/β5 were
used24. Although necessary, the contacts of the restrained residues do not alone define
the TSE, as demonstrated through p analysis. The fact that even the set of all available
restraints does not uniquely define a TSE is also observed in other proteins11,12. In SH3,
we find that additional restraints do not significantly improve TSE sampling, whereas
using fewer restraints results in largely unfolded, low p , ensembles. Then, by
definition, the specific nucleus is composed of the network of contacts formed in each
domain by the above residues, including contacts made to residues outside this set in p
= 1/2 conformations.
From Figure 2, it is clear that a number of unconstrained residues also play a role
in the TSE. There is a small amount of structure in the RT loop centered on residues near
the diverging turn. L24 (numbering from the src domain) is a highly conserved position
in the SH3 fold family25 and has been shown experimentally to be at least partially
involved in the TSE26 despite its relatively low φ-value and also appears to play an
important role in the fyn and spectrin domains. The n-src loop has some native structure
around Q33 and I34 near β2, as well as D41, which leads into β3. None of these residues
have reported φ-values. The same effect is seen in the fyn and spectrin domain, where
the n-src loop region is unstructured. Simulation provides key insight into the structure
of the n-src loop in the TSE, since most experimental data on this region is difficult to
interpret19. In the β3/distal hairpin region, W43 and A45, both highly conserved in SH3,
make a number of important contacts in the TSE. W43 has no φ-value and A45 has a
difficult to interpret φ = 1.20. Residue G51, which is also highly conserved across
different SH3 domains27, exhibits high Q but very low values of N. Its important role is
also suggested by an experimental φ = 1.0619 as well as other recent, independent
mutagenic experiments27.
Through the preceding analysis, it is clear that the structure of the TSE, common
to all domains, is formed by a small number of residues in the β2-β3 hairpin making non-
local contacts to the RT loop/diverging turn and distal β-hairpin regions. The nucleus
residues common to all three domains include L24, F26, E30, L32, W43, L44, A45, H46,
and G51 (numbering corresponds to the src domain, see Supplemental Figure 1 for an
alternative presentation of the data). This agrees with experimental results indicating that
the second, third, and to a lesser extent the fourth β strands are the most ordered regions
of the TSE19; however, we are able to go beyond this qualitative description to understand
how the contacts are being made (Figure 3). The importance of this network of tertiary
contacts in the SH3 TSE has also been observed in simplified model simulations28. It is
interesting to note that the folding nucleus is not simply composed of large hydrophobic
residues as one might naively assume. In fact many such residues belong to “unfolded”
regions in the TSE. The network of contacts formed by the specific nucleus described
above is the necessary and sufficient condition for reaching the TSE. It is noteworthy
that simply averaging over all conformations consistent with experimental restraints
yields a misleading picture of a TSE that is largely defined as a distorted/partially formed
native state topology, a claim that has been made previously in SH318. Accurate
characterization of the true TSE is only possible through the implementation of p
analysis, which allows for the discrimination and separate analysis of pre-TS, TS, and
post-TS conformations.
Solvent accessibility in the TSE. Many experimental29,30 and theoretical21,31 studies have
used SH3 domains to explore and understand the role of solvent in protein folding. Since
the Go model does not explicitly represent solvent, we examine solvent accessibility in
the TSE rather than the mechanistic role of individual water molecules. Figure 4
summarizes the change in solvent accessibility for each residue between the native and
transition states for three SH3 domains. The N- and C-terminal strands are both very
solvent exposed, indicating their largely denatured conformation in the TSE. This may
also be inferred from Figure 2, which shows how few contacts these residues make.
More striking than the solvent exposure of these residues, is the fact that the most
exposed residues in the first β strand and beginning of the RT-loop, and the residues from
the end of β4 through the 3 helix and β5 are largely non-polar and hydrophobic. The
same trend of exposed hydrophobic residues is observed in the n-src loop and beginning
of the β3 strand. This observation is consistent across three different SH3 domains.
As described above, full formation of the hydrophobic core is not necessary for
reaching the TSE. The ordering of water molecules around these hydrophobic residues
creates an entropic penalty that is relieved upon desolvation. Thus, desolvation in the
polymer compaction subsequent to the transition barrier, may mitigate the entropic cost
of polymer collapse. This, coupled with the energy of the eventual hydrophobic contact
formation, could help ensure that subsequent folding is rapid and highly energetically
favorable. It has been suggested that these residues may be involved in non-native or
non-specific hydrophobic interactions29. Since a strict Go potential treats non-native
contacts as destabilizing, we were concerned that such a model could skew any test of
this hypothesis. As such, we also performed p analysis with an alternative potential
that does not count all non-native interactions as repulsive and which includes attractive
non-native interaction. This generalization of the model did not alter the basic result;
both with and without non-native interactions, our simulations suggest that such non-
specific hydrophobic stabilization is necessary neither for nucleation nor rapid folding.
Although negative experimental φ-values are sometimes interpreted as indicating non-
native interactions or parallel folding pathways32, nearly all residues in the hydrophobic
core have positive φ-values. Our model also suggests that the energetic contribution of
hydrophobic core formation comes only after the transition barrier.
The other major, though less pronounced, region of increased solvent accessibility
in the TSE spans the RT-loop into the diverging turn and β2 strand. This group of
residues is different from the one discussed above in that they are predominantly polar or
charged. If hydrophilic residues are exposed in the TSE, then solvation of these residues
may provide non-specific stabilization, accelerating folding. This interpretation is
consistent with the early barrier observed independently in earlier, explicit solvent MD
models that seek to determine the TSE from unfolding21. Other simple models have also
suggested the important role of solvent in SH3 folding33. From our simulations, it
appears that a fully formed hydrophobic core is not necessary for traversing the transition
barrier in SH3. In fact, the solvent exposure of these core residues may play an important
role in promoting folding past the TSE by affecting the energetic balance between
desolvation, configurational entropy loss, and hydrophobic contact formation.
Mechanistic insights. It was previously demonstrated that the order of events in protein
folding may be reliably inferred from examination of structures that precede and follow
the TSE along the folding pathway12. Figure 3 (right column) shows the contacts present
in the pre- (but not post-) TSE and post- (but not pre-) TSE structures. Double mutant
experiments show that the distal hairpin is mostly formed in the TS14 and there is some
indication that is begins to form prior to the TSE in all three domains. The minute
amount of tertiary structure present before the transition state occurs is greatly fluctuating
and varies between the different domains, which is consistent with an early TSE.
Conversely, there are a large number of structural features common to the TSE of each
domain. Despite minor differences, the common behavior we observe between all
studied SH3 domains is the formations of the turn-RT loop, β1-β2, β2-β3, and β3-β4
motifs immediately after the TSE. Contacts between the β2 and β3 strands begin
forming around the transition region to various degrees, but form largely after nucleation.
Cross linking experiments have also suggested that the N- and C-termini and RT loop
form after the rate limiting step14. This behavior is also observed in our simulation with a
slight exception in spectrin, which exhibits contacts between the 3 helix region and β1
in the TSE. The n-src loop is anchored by β2 and minimally solvent-exposed in the TSE,
but appears to adopt a native conformation late in SH3 folding.
A classic nucleation-condensation mechanism. Through simulation, we observe that
SH3 folding proceeds via a classic nucleation-condensation mechanism. A small number
of non-local contacts form the specific nucleus. Though some previous studies focused
on the β2-β3-β4 sheet as the defining characteristic of the TSE17, we observe that tertiary
contacts involving the RT-loop, turn/β2, β3 region, and the distal hairpin characterize p
= 1/2 conformations. The importance of tertiary contacts in SH3 domain transition states
has previously been observed in simplified model simulations16. However, some of the
residues they identify such as A12 (φ = 0.05) and G54 (φ = -0.08) do not appear to play a
major role in the nucleation. This highlights the advantages inherent in the increased
resolution of an all-atom model over a more coarse grained Cα/Cβ protein representation.
One computational study suggested that the β2-β3-β4 sheet is fully hydrogen bonded
with little other structure in the TSE and that folding occurs through a diffusion-collision
like model of sheet formation, followed by a separate sandwiching event and expulsion of
water from the core21. In contrast, we observe the RT loop, turn-β2 motif, β3 strand, and
the distal β-hairpin involved in a network of non-local tertiary contacts forming the site
of nucleation.
Our results are consistent across experiments on several different SH3 domains
and with independent simulations that suggest that the distal hairpin and loop are ordered
in the SH3 TSE, while the rest of the protein is largely disordered15. Experiments in α-
spectin SH3 have also shown that loop stiffness is important for restricting structural
heterogeneity in the TSE34. The nucleus is distinct from the hydrophobic core, which is
mainly unformed and solvent-exposed in the TSE34. The nucleus occurs in an early,
polarized TSE that requires relatively few native contacts. The robustness of folding to
environmental changes is evidenced in experiments that show that nucleation is
unaffected even by large changes in pH24. It has also been observed in the D48G mutant
of α-spectrin domain that the protein melts over a 20° range35. One rationalization for
this observation, may be that since hydrophobic core formation it separate from
nucleation, the non-cooperative “melting” of these contacts broadens the transition. The
highly cooperative behavior of the SH3 domain13, and the observed consistency of
folding mechanism despite drastic changes in experimental conditions, may be attributed
to the early, polarized TSE formation by a minimal number of contacts. These data
provide an atomic-level description of a conformationally restricted folding transition
state in which a small region (the RT loop, β3, β3-β4 hairpin and its contacts to β2 and
the diverging turn, a network formed largely by L24, F26, E30, L32, W43, L44, A45,
H46, and G51) is the center of nucleation and in which the rest of the protein, including
residues involved in the hydrophobic core, is largely disordered24. We observe that
nucleation comes before, and is separate from, hydrophobic collapse. Simple models
have also suggested that formation of the hydrophobic core may occur separately, and
within a distinct timescale, from structural collapse to a “near native intermediate”33. The
early nucleation we observe is the rate-limiting step and is distinct from the late native-
like structures found by others; what they refer to is not nucleation, but a separate
desolvation step30,31. MD models with explicit solvent also suggest that core formation
and packing come after β-sheet formation21. This separation of timescales may also be
explained as resulting from the kinetically distinct phase of side chain relaxation that
follows nucleation and collapse36.
Discussion.
We have presented a p verified, all-atom model of the TSE in three different SH3
domains. This allows for rigorous conclusions regarding the nature and mechanism of
nucleation. In constructing the TSE, residues were restrained, but the way in which the
minimal set of restraints was met (contacts between residues) was not predetermined.
Importantly, the true TSE was identified through (unconstrained) p analysis. It is
noteworthy that the set of available φ-values for SH3, and other proteins, is insufficient to
uniquely specify the TSE. One recent study reports an unverified TSE constructed from
φ-values in which ensembles produced under different unfolding conditions have
virtually non-overlapping RMSD/Rg distributions18. Another study acknowledged the
presence of “false positive TSE structures”, but relied on manual selection of structures
such that their model TSE was in agreement with presumed general features such as a
formed β2-β3-β4 sheet17. In the absence of a quantitative measure, it is impossible to
reliably recognize the transition state. However, with a suitable proxy for the transition
coordinate such as p 5, it is possible to identify the distinct structural characteristics of
the TSE and other stages along the folding pathway.
From these data we conclude that SH3 folds via a classic nucleation-condensation
mechanism with a highly polarized nucleus that forms early along the reaction pathway,
which helps explain the experimentally observed highly cooperative folding of SH313. In
this early TSE many residues (both hydrophobic and hydrophilic) are solvent-exposed.
Hydrophobic collapse is separate from, and subsequent to, nucleation. In this sense SH3
is the paradigm for the nature and implication of a pure nucleation-condensation protein
folding mechanism. While experimental φ-values are invaluable in helping to identify
residues of importance in folding, simulation allows for deeper interpretation by
determining the identity of residues and network of contacts that form the specific
nucleus. In this manner, kinetic φ-values are structurally interpreted as a completely
interacting set of data in the context of a 3D protein structure. We believe that similar
studies, in which computer simulations are utilized to interpret experimental data, will
play an increasingly important role in understanding protein folding.
Model and Methods
Constructing and verifying the TSE. Simulations were initiated using coordinates from
the crystal structures of the src-SH3 of tyrosine kinase37 (1FMK), fyn-SH322,23 (1FYN),
and α-spectrin SH324 domains (1BK2).. The simulation was propagated by Monte Carlo
dynamics using a move set that included rotations of backbone (φ-ψ) angles and
sidechain (χ) torsion angles, while maintaining planar peptide bonds. All non-hydrogen
atoms are represented as impenetrable hard spheres38,39 and excluded volume is
continually enforced. Energy was provided by a square-well Go potential since these
models faithfully represent many of the important features of the protein folding
landscape in a computationally efficient manner40. As in experiment13, our model of SH3
exhibits clear two-state unfolding without intermediates. The thermodynamics and
kinetics of this model (potential, move set, and protein representation) have been
extensively studied in crambin38, protein G11,39, CI210, and S612, successfully folding these
proteins from random coil to <1Å C RMS.
The SH3 folding mechanism is largely determined by native state topology, with
nonnative interactions playing a relatively small role13; thus the native-centric Go model
is especially well suited for its study. Use of the Go model is also motivated by rigorous
theoretical and experimental studies showing that the TS is robust with respect to the
selection of sequences folding into a particular structure and potentials used to design and
fold sequences41-43. Go models have been applied to the prediction of folding rates and
the interpretation and prediction of φ-values44-46. Since there is no general physics-based
(CHARMM-like) potential for fully folding α/β from random coil, the topologically-
based and computationally efficient Go potential is currently the ideal candidate40 for
protein folding studies such as these. It was recently demonstrated that Go models
compare favorably with empirical potentials, especially in representing the interaction
energies of individual residues and in interpreting φ-values47.A putative ensemble of TS
conformations was constructed through restrained unfolding simulations, and p
determined for each member in order to verify if a given structure is a TS, as earlier
described11,12. Experimental φ-values (φexp) were interpreted as the fraction of native
contacts made by a given residue in the TSE (φsim):
"sim = i (1)
and implemented as structural restraints in unfolding simulations by use of a simple
!
harmonic potential for restrained residues:
ETotal = EGo+ E"
It is intuitively and desirable to use the minimal number of restraints necessary to
!
construct the putative TSE (none are used in p simulation) and to choose those
restraints such that most straightforwardly interpretable. To this end, we exclude φ > 1
and φ < 0 (which may indicate native contacts, non-native contacts, or alternative folding
pathways). These experimental values are without doubt meaningful, however ambiguity
in their interpretation and the fact that they are not necessary to construct the TSE argue
convincingly for their exclusion. Previously published experimental φ-values19,22-24 were
used as a source of restraints. For src-SH3, we chose the 10 highest φ-values after
excluding all φ > 1 and V35, which is in a cluster of six residues for which mutation
yielded unclear results. Both fyn and spectrin, exhibited 8 classical, unambiguous values.
In the highly multi-dimensional energy landscape of protein folding, it is difficult
to define a reaction coordinate or progress variable by which to gauge the evolution of
the folding reaction. Several practical solutions to this problem have been proposed48,49.
We choose to apply p analysis which, with firm grounding in theory and simulation48,
defines a measurable universal property of chemical systems that may serve as a progress
variable. By definition, a system that exhibits a p = 1/2 is a TS. The adaptation of p
analysis to protein models systems has been detailed previously38. We initiate 100
independent restrained unfolding simulations were initiated from the src-SH3 native
coordinates. 50 unfolding runs each were conducted for the fyn and spectrin domains.
Unfolding trajectories were run at T = 2.5 ≈ T (4 for spectrin). Each independent
unfolding simulation was followed by 20 unrestrained refolding runs to determine p ,
Refolding simulations were run under stabilizing conditions at T = 1, to observe rapid
refolding of structures that have passed the transition barrier. The criteria for
commitment to folding were derived from the distribution of values of the equilibrium
ensemble at the refolding T (E < -425, N > 425, DRMS < 2.5 Å). The TSE includes
structures with 0.4 ≤ p ≤ 0.6. Structures with lower p are considered “pre-TS” and
with higher p “post-TS”. The properties of these ensembles are summarized in Table
1. In the TSE we observe a correlation of R = 0.82 between our computed and
experimental φ-values.
How does the potential influence p ? The fact that the Go potential is constructed
from knowledge of a protein’s native state and that each atom is unique may lead to the
unphysical situations where, for example, one (native) phenylalanine – phenylalanine
interaction is attractive, while another (non-native) is not. So while Go serves as an
extremely useful model that abstracts any of the fundamental theories relating to protein
folding40, alone it cannot meaningfully address non-native interactions.
If upon passing the transition barrier, descent into the native basin of attraction is
rapid and energetically downhill, then one may ask the question: how does the Go model,
with its idealized, smooth funnel-like representation of the energetic landscape, effect the
modeling of this process? In order to explore the manner in which attractive and
repulsive non-native interactions might affect our p calculations, we hybridize the Go
(which ensures folding to the native state) with the µ potential (first described in the
folding of the streptococcal protein A50), which treats all interactions as physically
attractive or repulsive. A similarly structured hybrid potential (with 90% Go) was
recently used to study the role of non-native interactions in RNA folding51.
The µ potential is calculated according to:
E = AB AB (3)
where E is contact interaction energy between atom types A and B, N is the number
!
of AB pairs found in contact and Ñ is the number of AB pairs in the database that are not
in contact. For this work, µ was chosen (0.9979) such that N ranges from –1 to +1 and
has an average value of 0. Contact statistics were collected from a database of 103 non-
homologous proteins with less than 25% sequence homology, longer than 50, and shorter
than 200 residues52. Atom types (Supplemental Table 1) were chosen such that each
unique atom (excluding hydrogen) of each residue sidechain is a unique type. Backbone
atoms are typed without regard to residue identity.
Here, we repeat the p calculations for the 100 conformations created by the
restrained unfolding simulations of src-SH3 domain with a hybrid of E (Equation 3)
and 75% E . Additionally, we set up the Go potential such that native interactions have
a -1 attraction and non-native interaction have no interaction (as opposed to the +1
repulsion of the strict Go potential). Thus, we remove the funnel-like bias towards the
native state and introduce meaningful attractive and repulsive non-native interactions. In
order to maintain uniformity in the interpretation of the results, the same criteria we used
to define a folded structure. Despite the significantly different (more frustrated) energy
landscape, the potential finds the native basin quickly in high p conformations, and
unfolds in low p conformations. In fact the correlation for 100 p values for the two
sets is R = 0.85, which strongly suggests that p is not sensitive to the details of the
potential.
Acknowledgements
We thank Dr. Brian N. Dominy for assistance with CHARMM, and Eric J. Deeds for his
comments on the manuscript. This work was supported by an HHMI pre-doctoral
fellowship (IAH).