1v0114020/htam:viXra
Number theory and dynamical systems on
foliated spaces
Christopher Deninger
1 Introduction
In this paper we report on some developments in the search for a dynamical
understanding of number theoretical zeta functions that have taken place
since my ICM lecture [D2]. We also point out a number of problems in
analysis that will have to be solved in order to make further progress.
In section 2 we give a short introduction to foliations and their cohomology.
Section 3 is devoted to progress on the dynamical Lefschetz trace formula for
one-codimensional foliations mainly due to A´lvarez L´opez and Kordyukov.
In section 4 we make the comparison with the “explicit formulas” in analytic
number theory. Finally in section 5 we generalize the conjectural dynamical
Lefschetz trace formula of section 3 to phase spaces which are more general
than manifolds. This was suggested by the number theoretical analogies of
section 4.
This account is written from an elementary point of view as far as arithmetic
geometry is concerned, in particular motives are not mentioned. In spirit the
present article is therefore a sequel to [D1].
There is a different approach to number theoretical zeta functions using dy-
namical systems by A. Connes [Co]. His phase space is a non-commutative
quotient of the ad`eles. Although superficially related, the two approaches
seem to be deeply different. Whereas Connes’ approach generalizes readily
to automorphic L-functions [So] but not to motivic L-functions, it is exactly
the opposite with our picture. One may wonder whether there is some kind
of Langlands correspondence between the two approaches.
I would like to thank the Belgium and German mathematical societies very
much for the opportunity to lecture about this material during the joint
BMS–DMV meeting in Li`ege 2001.
2 Foliations and their cohomology
A d-dimensional foliation F = F on a smooth manifold X of dimension
a is a partition of X into immersed connected d-dimensional manifolds F,
the “leaves”. Locally the induced partition should be trivial: Every point
of X should have an open neighborhood U diffeomorphic to an open ball B
in Ra such that the leaves of the induced partition on U correspond to the
submanifolds B ∩(Rd ×{y}) of B for y in Ra−d.
One of the simplest non-trivial examples is the one-dimensional foliation of
the two-dimensional torus T2 = R2/Z2 by lines of irrational slope α. These
are given by the immersions
R ֒→ T2 , t 7→ (x+tα,t) mod Z2
parametrized by x mod Z + αZ. In this case every leaf is dense in T2
and the intersection of a global leaf with a small open neighborhood U as
above decomposes into countably many connected components. It is the
global behaviour which makes foliations complicated. For a comprehensive
introduction to foliation theory, the reader may turn to [Go] for example.
To a foliation F on X we may attach its tangent bundle TF whose total
space is the union of the tangent spaces to the leaves. By local triviality
of the foliation it is a sub vector bundle of the tangent bundle TX. It is
integrable i.e. the commutator of any two vector fields with values in TF
again takes values in TF. Conversely a theorem of Frobenius asserts that
every integrable sub vector bundle of TX arises in this way.
Differential forms of order n along the leaves are defined as the smooth sec-
tions of the real vector bundle ΛnT∗F,
The same formulas as in the classical case define exterior derivatives along
the leaves:
They satisfy the relation dn
= 0 so that we can form the leafwise
cohomology of F:
Hn(X) = Kerdn/Imdn−1 .
For our purposes these invariants are actually too subtle. We therefore con-
sider the reduced leafwise cohomology
H¯n(X) = Kerdn/Imdn−1 .
Here the quotient is taken with respect to the topological closure of Imdn−1
in the natural Fr´echet topology on An(X). The reduced cohomologies are
nuclear Fr´echet spaces. Even if the leaves are dense, already H
infinite dimensional.
The cup product pairing induced by the exterior product of forms along the
leaves turns H¯•(X) into a graded commutative H¯0(X)-algebra.
The Poincare Lemma extends to the foliation context and implies that
Hn(X) = Hn(X,R) .
HereRisthesheaf ofsmoothrealvaluedfunctions which arelocallyconstant
on the leaves. In particular
consists only of constant functions if F contains a dense leaf.
For the torus foliation above with α ∈/ Q we therefore have H¯0(T2) = R.
Some Fourier analysis reveals that H¯1(T2) ∼ = R. The higher cohomologies
vanish since almost by definition we have
Hn(X) = 0 for all n > d = dimF .
For a smooth map f : X → Y of foliated manifolds which maps leaves into
leaves, continuous pullback maps
are defined for all n. They commute with d and respect the exterior prod-
uct of forms. Hence they induce a continuous map of reduced cohomology
A (complete) flow is a smooth R-action φ : R ×X → X,(t,x) 7→ φt(x). It
is called F-compatible if every diffeomorphism φt : X → X maps leaves into
leaves. If this is the case we obtain a linear R-action t 7→ φt∗ on H¯n(X) for
every n. Let
denote the infinitesimal generator of φt∗:
The limit exists and Θ is continuous in the Fr´echet topology. As φt∗ is an
algebra endomorphism of the R-algebra H¯•(X) it follows that Θ is an R-
linear derivation. Thus we have
1 2 1 2 1 2
for all h ,h in H¯•(X).
For arbitrary foliations the reduced leafwise cohomology does not seem to
have a good structure theory. For Riemannian foliations however the situ-
ation is much better. These foliations are characterized by the existence of
a “bundle-like” metric g. This is a Riemannian metric whose geodesics are
perpendicular to all leaves whenever they are perpendicular to one leaf. For
example any one-codimensional foliation given by a closed one-form without
singularities is Riemannian.
The graded Fr´echet space A• (X) carries a canonical inner product:
Here h,i is the Riemannian metric on Λ•T∗F induced by g and vol is the
volume form or density on X coming from g. Let
denote the Laplacian using the formal adjoint of d on X. Since F is Rie-
mannian the restriction of ∆ to any leaf F is the Laplacian on F with
respect to the induced metric [AK1] Lemma 3.2, i.e.
We now assume that TF is orientable. Via g the choice of an orientation
determines a volume form vol in Ad(X) and hence a Hodge ∗-operator
∗ : ΛnT∗F − ∼ → Λd−nT∗F for every x in X .
It is determined by the condition that
v ∧∗ w = hv,wi vol for v,w in Λ • T∗F .
These fibrewise star-operators induce the leafwise ∗-operator on forms:
We now list some important properties of leafwise cohomology.
PropertiesAssume that X is compact, F a d-dimensional oriented Rieman-
nian foliation and g a bundle-like metric for F.
Then the natural map
is a topological isomorphism of Fr´echet spaces. We denote its inverse by H.
This result is due to A´lvarez L´opez and Kordyukov [AK1]. It is quite deep
since∆ isonlyellipticalongtheleavessothattheordinaryellipticregularity
theory does not suffice. For non-Riemannian foliations (2) does not hold
in general [DS1]. All the following results are consquences of this Hodge
theorem.
The Hodge ∗-operator induces an isomorphism
since it commutes with ∆ up to sign. From (2) we therefore get isomor-
phisms for all n:
For the next property define the trace map
by the formula
It is an isomorphism if F has a dense leaf. Note that for any representative
α in the cohomology class h we have
Namely α−H(h) = d β and
= 0 .
Alternatively the trace functional is given by
where ∗ (1) is the transverse volume element for g c.f. [AK1], §3.
It is not difficult to see using (2) that we get a scalar product on H¯n(X) for
every n by setting:
= hH(h),H(h′)i vol .
It follows from this that the cup product pairing
is non-degenerate.
Next we discuss the Ku¨nneth formula. Assume that Y is another compact
manifold with a Riemannian foliation F . Then the canonical map
FX FY FX×FY
induces a topological isomorphism [M]:
FX FY FX×FY
Since the reduced cohomology groups are nuclear Fr´echet spaces, it does not
matter which topological tensor product is chosen in (6). The proof of this
Ku¨nneth formula uses (2) and the spectral theory of the Laplacian ∆ .
Before we deal with more specific topics let us mention that also Hodge–
K¨ahler theory can be generalized. A complex structure on a foliation F is
an almost complex structure J on TF such that all restrictions J | to the
leaves are integrable. Then the leaves carry holomorphic structures which
vary smoothly in the transverse direction. A foliation F with a complex
structure J is called K¨ahler if there is a hermitian metric h on the complex
bundle T F = (TF,J) such that the K¨ahler form along the leaves
is closed. Note that for example any foliation by orientable surfaces can be
given a K¨ahlerian structure by choosing a metric on X, c.f. [MS] Lemma
A.3.1. Let
denote the Lefschetz operator.
The following assertions are consequences of (2) combined with the classical
Hodge–K¨ahler theory. See [DS3] for details. Let X be a compact orientable
manifold and F a K¨ahlerian foliation with respect to the hermitian metric h
on T F. Assume in addition that F is Riemannian. Then we have:
(7) H¯n(X)⊗C = Hpq , where Hpq = Hqp .
Here Hpq consists of those classes that can be represented by (p,q)-forms
along the leaves. Moreover there are topological isomorphisms
with the reduced cohomology of the sheaf of holomorphic p-forms along the
leaves.
Furthermore the Lefschetz operator induces isomorphisms
FinallythespaceofprimitivecohomologyclassesH¯n(X) carriesthestruc-
ture of a polarizable indR-Hodge structure of weight n.
After this review of important properties of the reduced leafwise cohomol-
ogy of Riemannian foliations we turn to a specific result relating flows and
cohomology.
Theorem 2.1 Let X be a compact 3-manifold and F a Riemannianfoliation
by surfaces with a dense leaf. Let φt be an F-compatible flow on X which
is conformal on TF with respect to a metric g on TF in the sense that for
some constant α we have:
(9) g(T φt(v),T φt(w)) = eαtg(v,w) for all v,w ∈ T F,x ∈ X and t ∈ R .
Then we have for the infinitesimal generator of φt∗ that:
Θ = 0 on H¯0(X) = R and Θ = α on H¯2(X) ∼ = R .
the operator Θ has the form
where S is skew-symmetric with respect to the inner product (,) above.
Remark For the bundle-like metric on X required for the construction of
(,) we take any extension of the given metric on TF to a bundle-like metric
on TX. Such extensions exist.
Proof of 2.1 Because we have a dense leaf, H¯0(X) = H0(X) consists only
of constant functions. On these φt∗ acts trivially so that Θ = 0. Since
is an isomorphism and since
by conformality, we have Θ = α on H¯2(X).
For h ,h in H¯1(X) we find
1 2 1 2 1 2 1 2
By conformality φt∗ commutes with ∗ on H¯1(X). Differentiating, it follows
that Θ commutes with ∗ as well. Since by definition we have
it follows from (10) that as desired:
3 Dynamical Lefschetz trace formulas
Theformulaswewanttoconsiderinthissectionrelatethecompactorbitsofa
flow with the alternating sum of suitable traces on cohomology. A suggestive
but non-rigorous argument of Guillemin [Gu] later rediscovered by Patterson
[P] led to the following conjecture [D2] §3. Let X be a compact manifold
with a one-codimensional foliation F and an F-compatible flow φ. Assume
that the fixed points and the periodic orbits of the flow are non-degenerate
in the following sense: For any fixed point x the tangent map T φt should
have eigenvalues different from 1 for all t > 0. For any closed orbit γ of
length l(γ) and any x ∈ γ and integer k 6= 0 the automorphism T φkl(γ) of
T X should have the eigenvalue 1 with algebraic multiplicity one. Observe
that the vector field Y generated by the flow provides an eigenvector Y
for the eigenvalue 1.
Recall that the length l(γ) > 0 of γ is defined by the isomorphism:
For a fixed point x we set1
ε = sgn det(1−T φt|T F) .
This is independent of t > 0. For a closed orbit γ and k ∈ Z\0 set1
γ x x φ,x x x
It does not depend on the point x ∈ γ.
FinallyletD′(J)denotethespaceofSchwartzdistributionsonanopensubset
J of R.
Conjecture 3.1 For X,F and φ as above there exists a natural definition
of a D′(R>0)-valued trace of φ∗ on the reduced leafwise cohomology H¯•(X)
such that in D′(R>0) we have:
n=0 γ k=1 x
Here γ runs over the closed orbits of φ which are not contained in a leaf and
x over the fixed points. For a ∈ R,δ is the Dirac distribution in a and κ is
defined by the action of T φt on the 1-dimensional vector space T X/T F.
That action is multiplication by eκxt for some κ ∈ R and all t.
The conjecture is not known (except for dimX = 1) if φ has fixed points. It
may well have to be amended somewhat in that case. The analytic difficulty
This is different from the normalization in [D2] §3.
in the presence of fixed points lies in the fact that in this case ∆ has no
chance to be transversally elliptic to the R-action by the flow, so that the
methods of transverse index theory do not apply directly. In the simpler case
when the flow is everywhere transversal to F, A´lvarez L´opez and Kordyukov
have proved a beautiful strengthening of the conjecture. Partial results were
obtained by other methods in [Laz], [DS2]. We now describe their result in
a convenient way for our purposes:
3.2 Assume X is a compact oriented manifold with a one codimensional
foliation F. Let φ be a flow on X which is everywhere transversal to the
leaves of F. Then F inherits an orientation and it is Riemannian [Go] III
4.4. Fixing a bundle-like metric g the cohomologies H¯n(X) acquire pre-
Hilbert structures (4) and we can consider their Hilbert space completions
H ˆn(X). For every t the linear operator φt∗ is bounded on (H ¯n(X),k k)
and hence can be continued uniquely to a bounded operator on Hˆn(X) c.f.
theorem 3.4.
By transversality the flow has no fixed points. We assume that all periodic
orbits are non-degenerate.
Theorem 3.3 ([AK2]) Under the conditions of (3.2), for every test func-
tion ϕ ∈ D(R) = C∞(R) the operator
on Hˆn(X) is of trace class. Setting:
defines a distribution on R. The following formula holds in D′(R):
F Co 0 γ kl(γ)
Here χ (F,µ) denotes Connes’ Euler characteristic of the foliation with
respect to the transverse measure µ corresponding to ∗ (1). (See [MS].)
It follows from the theorem that if the right hand side of (12) is non-zero,
at least one of the cohomology groups H¯n(X) must be infinite dimensional.
Otherwise the alternating sum of traces would be a smooth function and
hence have empty singular support.
By the Hodge isomorphism (2) one may replace cohomology by the spaces
of leafwise harmonic forms. The left hand side of the dynamical Lefschetz
trace formula then becomes the D′(R)-valued transverse index of the leafwise
de Rham complex. Note that the latter is transversely elliptic for the R-
action φt. Transverse index theory with respect to compact group actions
was initiated in [A]. A definition for non-compact groups of a transverse
index was later given by H¨ormander [Si] Appendix II.
As far as we know the relation of (12) with transverse index theory in the
sense of Connes–Moscovici still needs to be clarified.
Let us now make some remarks on the operators φt∗ on H ˆn(X) in a more
general setting:
Theorem 3.4 Let F be a Riemannian foliation on a compact manifold X
and g a bundle like metric. As above Hˆn(X) denotes the Hilbert space com-
pletion of H¯n(X) with respect to the scalar product (4). Let φt be an F-
compatible flow. Then the linear operators φt∗ on H ¯n(X) induce a strongly
continuous operator group on Hˆn(X). In particular the infinitesimal genera-
tor Θ exists as a closed densely defined operator. On H¯n(X) it agrees with the
infinitesimal generator in the Fr´echet topology defined earlier. There exists
ω > 0 such that the spectrum of Θ lies in −ω ≤ Res ≤ ω. If the operators
φt∗ are orthogonal then T = −iΘ is a self-adjoint operator on Hˆn(X) ⊗ C
and we have
φt∗ = exptΘ = expitT
in the sense of the functional calculus for (unbounded) self-adjoint operators
on Hilbert spaces.
Sketch of proof Estimates show that kφt∗k is locally uniformly bounded in
t on H¯n(X). Approximating h ∈ Hˆn(X) by h ∈ H¯n(X) one now shows as
in the proof of the Riemann–Lebesgue lemma that the function t 7→ φt∗h is
continuous at zero, hence everywhere. Thus φt∗ defines a strongly continuous
group on Hˆn(X). The remaining assertions follow from semigroup theory
[DSch], Ch. VIII, XII, and in particular from the theorem of Stone.
We now combine theorems 2.1, 3.3 and 3.4 to obtain the following corollary:
Corollary 3.5 Let X be a compact 3-manifold with a foliation F by surfaces
having a dense leaf. Let φt be a non-degenerate F-compatible flow which is
everywhere transversal to F. Assume that φt is conformal (9) with respect
to a metric g on TF. Then Θ has pure point spectrum Sp1(Θ) on Hˆ1(X)
which is discrete in R and we have the following equality of distributions on
R:
In the sum the ρ’s appear with their geometric multiplicities. All ρ ∈ Sp1(Θ)
have Reρ = α.
Remarks 1) Here etρ,etα are viewed as distributions so that evaluated on a
test function ϕ ∈ D(R) the formula reads:
Here we have put
2) Actually the conditions of the corollary force α = 0 i.e. the flow must be
isometric with respect to g. We have chosen to leave the α in the fomulation
since there are good reasons to expect the corollary to generalize to more
general phase spaces X than manifolds, where α 6= 0 becomes possible i.e.
to Sullivan’s generalized solenoids. More on this in section 5.
3) One can show that the group generated by the lengths of closed orbits is
a finitely generated subgroup of R under the assumptions of the corollary.
In order to achieve an infinitely generated group the flow must have fixed
points.
Proof of 3.5 By 2.1, 3.3 we need only show the equation
and the assertions about the spectrum of Θ. As in the proof of 2.1 one sees
that on Hˆ1(X) we have
Hence e−α 2 tφt∗ is orthogonal and by the theorem of Stone
is selfadjoint on Hˆ1(X)⊗C, if Θ = α +S. Moreover
e−α 2 tφt∗ = expitT ,
In [DS2] proof of 2.6, for isometric flows the relation
was shown. Using the spectral theory of the ordinary Laplacian ∆1 on 1-
forms it follows that Θ has pure point spectrum with finite multiplicities on
H ¯1(X) ∼ = ker∆1 and that Sp1(Θ) is discrete in R. Alternatively, without
knowing α = 0, that proof gives:
(cid:16) (cid:17)
This also implies the assertion on the spectrum of Θ on Hˆ1(X). Now (15)
follows from (16) and the fact that the operators A are of trace class. ✷
Remark In more general situations where Θ may not have a pure point
spectrum of Hˆ1(X) but where e−α 2φt∗ is still orthogonal, we obtain:
where m(λ) ≥ 0 is the spectral density function of the continuous part of the
spectrum of Θ.
4 Comparison with the “explicit formulas” in
analytic number theory
Consider a number field K/Q. The explicit formulas in analytic number
theory relate the primes of K to the non-trivial zeroes of the Dedekind zeta
function ζ (s) of K.
Theorem 4.1 For ϕ ∈ D(R) define Φ(s) as in the preceeding section. Then
the following fomula holds:
+ logNp ϕ(klogNp)+ Npkϕ(klogNp)
!
Here ρ runs over the non-trivial zeroes of ζ (s) i.e. those that are contained
in the critical strip 0 < Res < 1. Moreover p runs over the places of K and
d is the discriminant of K over Q. For p|∞ the W are distributions
which are determined by the Γ-factor at p. If ϕ has support in R>0 then
W (ϕ) = dt
where κ = −1 if p is complex and κ = −2 if p is real. If ϕ has support on
W (ϕ) = etdt .
There are different ways to write W on all of R but we will not discuss this
here. See for example [Ba] which also contains a proof of the theorem for
much more general test functions.
Formula (17) implies the following equality of distributions on R>0:
This fits rather nicely with formula (11) and suggests the following analogies:
speco ∪{p|∞} = 3-dimensionaldynamical system (X,φt)with
a one-codimensional foliation F satisfying
the conditions of conjecture 3.1
finite place p = closed orbit γ = γ not contained in a leaf
and hence transversal to F such that l(γ ) =
logNp and ε (k) = 1 for all k ≥ 1.
infinite place p = fixed point x such that κ = κ and
ε = 1.
In order to understand number theory more deeply in geometric terms it
wouldbeverydesirabletofindasystem(X,φt,F)whichactuallyrealizesthis
correspondence. For this the class of compact 3-manifolds as phase spaces
has to be generalized as will become clear from the following discussion.
Formula (17) can be written equivalently as an equality of distributions on
R:
+ logNp δ + Npkδ
klogNp klogNp
!
(19) + W .
Let us compare this with formula (13) in Corollary 3.5. This corollary is
the best result yet on the dynamical side but still only a first step since it
does not allow for fixed points which as we have seen must be expected for
dynamical systems of relevance for number fields.
Ignoring the contributions W from the infinite places for the moment we are
suggested that
There are two nice points about this analogy. Firstly there is the following
well known fact due to Connes:
Fact 4.2 Let F be a foliation of a compact 3-manifold by surfaces such that
the union of the compact leaves has µ-measure zero, then
Namely the non-compact leaves are known to be complete in the induced
metric. Hence theycarrynonon-zeroharmonicL2-functions, sothatConnes’
0-th Betti number β (F,µ) = 0. Since β (F,µ) = β (F,µ) it follows that
The reader will have noticed that in accordance with 4.2 the left hand side
of (20) is negative as well:
−log|d | ≤ 0 for all K/Q .
The second nice point about (20) is this. The bundle-like metric g which we
have chosen for the definition of ∆ and of χ (F,µ) induces a holomorphic
structure of F [MS], Lemma A3.1. The space X is therefore foliated by
Riemann surfaces. Let χ (F,O,µ) denote the holomorphic Connes Euler
characteristic of F defined using ∆ -harmonic forms on the leaves instead of
∆-harmonic ones. According to Connes’ Riemann–Roch Theorem [MS] Cor.
A.2.3, Lemma A3.3 we have:
Therefore χ (F,O,µ) corresponds to −log |d |.
For completely different reasons this numberpis defined in Arakelov theory as
the Arakelov Euler characteristic of speco = speco ∪{p|∞}:
Ar specoK K/Q
See [N] for example. Thus we see that p
χ (O ) corresponds to χ (F,O,µ) .
Ar specoK Co
ItwouldbeverydesirableofcoursetounderstandArakelovEulercharacteris-
tics in higher dimensions even conjecturally in terms of Connes’ holomorphic
Euler characteristics. Note however that Connes’ Riemann–Roch theorem in
higher dimensions does not involve the R-genus appearing in the Arakelov
Riemann–Roch theorem. The ideas of Bismut [Bi] may be relevant in this
connection. He interpretes the R-genus in a natural way via the geometry of
loop spaces.
Further comparison of formulas (13) and (19) shows that in a dynamical
system corresponding to number theory we must have α = 1. This means
that the flow φt∗ would act by multiplication with et on the one-dimensional
spaceH¯2(X). Asexplainedbeforethiswouldbethecaseifφt wereconformal
on TF with factor et:
(22) g(T φt(v),T φt(w)) = etg(v,w) for all v,w ∈ T F .
However as mentioned before, this is not possible in the manifold setting of
corollary 3.5 which actually implies α = 0.
An equally important difference between formulas (13) and (19) is between
the coefficients of δ and of δ for k ≤ −1. In the first case it is ±1
kl(γ) klogNp
whereas in the second it is Npk = eklogNp which corresponds to ekl(γ).
Thus it becomes vital to find phase spaces X more generalthan manifolds for
which the analogue of corollary 3.5 holds and where α 6= 0 and in particular
α = 1 becomes possible. In the new context the term ε (k)δ for k ≤ −1
in formula (13) should become ε (k)eαkl(γ)δ . The next section is devoted
to a discussion of certain laminated spaces which we propose as possible
candidates for this goal.
5 Remarks on dynamical Lefschetz trace for-
mulas on laminated spaces
Inthissectionweextendthepreviousdiscussiontomoregeneralphasespaces
than manifolds. The class of spaces we have in mind are the foliated spaces
with totally disconnected transversals in the sense of [MS]. We will call
them laminated spaces for short. They also go by the name of (generalized)
solenoids c.f. [Su].
5.1 Ana-dimensionallaminatedspaceisasecondcountablemetrizabletopo-
logicalspace X which is locallyhomeomorphic tothe product of anon-empty
opensubset ofRa withatotallydisconnected space. Thenaisthetopological
dimension of X.
Transition functions between local charts ϕ and ϕ have the following form
locally:
(y)) .
Here x,y denote the euklidean resp. totally disconnected components. This
is due to the fact, that continuous functions from connected subsets of Ra
into a totally disconnected space are constant.
Because of (23) the inverse images ϕ−1(,∗) patch together, to give a parti-
tion L of X into a-dimensional topological manifolds. These leaves of the
laminated space X are exactly the path components of X. The classical
(24) S1 = R× Z = lim(... → R/Z −→ p R/Z −→ p ...)
is an example of a compact connected one-dimensional laminated space with
dense leaves homeomorphic to the real line.
A C∞,0-structure on a laminated space is a maximal atlas of local charts
whose transition functions are smooth in the euklidean component and con-
tinuous in the totally disconnected one. Furthermore all derivatives in the
euklidean directions should becontinuous in allcomponents. The leaves then
become a-dimensional smooth manifolds.
C∞,0-laminated spaces are examples of foliated spaces in the sense of [MS]
Def. 2.1.
A stronger structure that may exist on a laminated space was introduced
by Sullivan []. A C∞,∞- or TLC-structure on a laminated space X is given
by a maximal atlas whose transition functions are smooth in the euklidean
component and uniformly locally constant in the totally disconnected one.
That is, locally they have the form:
with F smooth and F locally constant. Every C∞,∞-structure gives rise to
a C∞,0-structure. It is clear that S1 is naturally a C∞,∞-laminated space.
For a C∞,0-laminated space X let TX = TL denote its tangent bundle in
the sense of [MS] p. 43. For a point x ∈ X, the fibre T X is the ordinary
tangent space to the leaf through x. A Riemannian metric on X is one on
TX. Morphisms between C∞,0-laminated spaces are continuous maps which
induce smooth maps between the leaves of the lamination. They induce
morphisms of tangent bundles.
Thetwomostprominentplacesinmathematicswherelaminatedspacesoccur
naturally are in number theory e.g. as adelic points of algebraic groups and
in the theory of dynamical systems as attractors.
5.2 We now introduce foliations of laminated spaces. Let X be an a-
dimensional laminated space. For our purposes, a foliation F of X by lam-
inated spaces is a partition of X into d-dimensional laminated spaces. The
foliation is supposed to be locally trivial with euclidean transversals. More
precisely F is given by a maximal atlas of local charts on X
with V ⊂ Rd,V ⊂ Ra−d open and Y totally disconnected, having the fol-
lowing property:
The transition maps have the form:
where G ,G are smooth in the x ,x components and G and all ∂α1,α2G
1 2 1 2 3 x1,x2 1
and ∂α2G are continuous. Setting x = (x ,x ),
F (x,y) = (G (x ,x ,y ),G (x ,y))
1 1 1 2 2 2 2
and F = G this induces a C∞,0-structure on X which is supposed to agree
with the given one.
The leaves of F are obtained by patching together the sets ϕ−1(V ×{∗}×Y).
Theyared-dimensionalC∞,0-laminatedspaceswithlocaltransitionfunctions
given by:
Their leaves are d-dimensional manifolds which foliate the a-dimensional
manifolds which occur as leaves of the lamination on X. Thus X is par-
titioned into a-dimensional manifolds each of which carries a d-dimensional
foliation in the usual sense.
Besides L and F there is a third foliated structure denoted FL on X. The
space X is foliated with leaves the d-dimensional manifolds that occur as
path components of the F-leaves. Here the transverse space is of the form
open subspace of Ra−d× totally disconnected.
The local transition maps are given by:
with z = (x ,y),H (x ,z) = G (x ,x ,y) and H (z) = (G (x ,y),G (y)).
2 1 1 1 1 2 2 2 2 3
Of the three foliated structures L,F and FL on X the first and the last fit
into the context of [MS] but not the second.
5.3 Wenowturntocohomology. ThefoliationFLgivesrisetotheintegrable
rank d subbundle TFL of TX = TL. These bundles are tangentially smooth
in the sense of [MS], p. 43 with respect to L. The leafwise cohomology of
X along FL is by definition the cohomology of the sheaf R of real valued
smooth functions on X wich are locally constant along the FL leaves. Here
a continuous function or form on an open subset of X is called smooth if
its restrictions to the L-leaves are smooth. The sheaf R is resolved by
the de Rham complex of smooth forms along FL. Using the natural Fr´echet
topology on the spaces of global differential forms, one defines the reduced
version H ¯• (X) of leafwise cohomology H• (X) as its maximal Hausdorff
quotient. By H•(X) we denote the cohomology of the sheaf R of real
valued smooth functions on X which are locally constant along the F-leaves.
5.4 A flow φ on X is a continuous R-action such that the induced R-actions
on the leaves of L are smooth. It respects F if every φt maps leaves of F
into leaves of F. It follows that φt maps FL-leaves into FL-leaves. Thus
(X,F,φt) is partitioned into the foliated dynamical systems (L,F ,φt| ) for
L ∈ L. Here
Any F-compatible flow φt induces pullback actions φt∗ on H• (X) and
H¯• (X).
5.5 Wenowstateasaworkinghypothesesageneralizationoftheconjectured
dynamical trace formula 3.1. We allow the phase space to be a laminated
space. Moreover we extend the formula to an equality of distributions on
R∗ instead of R>0. After checking various compatibilities we state a case
where our working hypotheses can be proved and give a number theoretical
example.
5.6 Working hypotheses: Let X beacompactC∞,0-laminatedspace with
a one-codimensional foliation F and an F-compatible flow φ. Assume that
the fixed points and the periodic orbits of the flow are non-degenerate. Then
there exists a natural definition of a D′(R∗)-valued trace of φt∗ on H¯• (X)
such that in D′(R∗) we have:
!
γ k≥1 k≤−1
+ W .
Here γ runs over the closed orbits not contained in a leaf and in the sums
over k’s any point x ∈ γ can be chosen. The second sum runs over the fixed
points x of the flow. The distributions W on R∗ are given by:
x R<0 x x x
Remarks 5.7 0) It may actually be better to use a version of foliation
cohomology where transversally forms are only supposed to be locally L2
instead of being continuous.
1) In the situation described in 5.8 below the working hypotheses can be
proved if H¯n (X) is replaced by Hn(X), Theorem 5.9. In those cases there
are no fixed points, only closed orbits. Thus Theorem 5.9 dictated only the
coefficients of δ for k ∈ Z\0, but not the contributions W from the fixed
points.
2) The coefficients of δ for k ∈ Z\0 can be written in a uniform way as
follows. They are equal to:
(27) = .
x x φ,x x x
Here x is any point on γ. Namely, for k ≥ 1 this equals ε (k) whereas for
k ≤ −1 we obtain
γ x x γ x x
The expression on the left hand side of (27) motivated our conjecture about
the contributions on R∗ from the fixed points x. Since Y = 0, they should
be given by:
x x !
= W .
3) One can prove that in the manifold setting of theorem 3.3 we have
By (26), our working hypotheses 5.6 is therefore compatible with formula
(12). Compatibility with conjecture 3.1 is clear.
4) We will see below that in our new context metrics g on TF can exist for
which the flow has the conformal behaviour (22). Assuming we are in such
a situation and that F is 2-dimensional, we have:
|det(T φt|T F)| = et for a fixed point x .
In the latter case, we even have by continuity:
det(T φt|T F) = et ,
the determinant being positive for t = 0. Hence by (28) the conjectured
formula (26) reads as follows in this case:
!
γ k≥1 k≤−1
+ W .
Here:
This fits perfectly with the explicit formula (19) if all ε (k) = 1 and ε = 1.
Namely if l(γ ) = logNp for p ∤ ∞ and κ = κ for p|∞, then we have:
ekl(γp) = eklogNp = Npk for finite places p
W = W on R∗ for the infinite places p .
5) In the setting of the preceeding remark the automorphisms
e−k 2 l(γ)T x φkl(γ) of T x F for x ∈ γ
respectively
e− 2 t T x φt of T x F for a fixed point x
are orthogonal automorphisms. For a real 2×2 orthogonal determinant O
with detO = −1 we have:
det(1−uO) = 1−u2 .
Theconditionε (k) = +1thereforeimpliesthatdet(T φkl(γ)|T F)ispositive
for k ≥ 1 and hence for all k ∈ Z. The converse is also true. For a fixed point
we have already seen directly that det(T φt|T F) is positive for all t ∈ R.
Hence we have the following information.
Fact In the situation of the preceeding remark, ε (γ) = +1 for all k ∈ Z\0
if and only if on T F we have:
T x φkl(γ) = e k 2 l(γ) ·O k for O k ∈ SO(T x F) .
For fixed points, ε = 1 is automatic and we have:
φt = e2 t O
F) .
In the number theoretical case the eigenvalues of T φlogNp on T F for x ∈ γ
would therefore be complex conjugate numbers of absolute value Np1/2. If
theyarerealthenT φlogNpwouldsimplybemutliplicationby±Np1/2. Ifnot,
the situation would be more interesting. Are the eigenvalues Weil numbers
(of weight 1)? If yes there would be some elliptic curve over o /p involved
by Tate–Honda theory.
6) It would of course be very desirable to extend the hypotheses 5.6 to a
conjectured equality of distributions on all of R. By theorem 3.3 we expect
one contribution of the form
The analogy with number theory suggests that there will also be somewhat
complicated contributions from the fixed points in terms of principal values
which arehardtoguess at themoment. After all, even thesimpler conjecture
3.1 has not yet been verified in the presence of fixed points!
7) If there does exist a foliated dynamical system attached to speco with
the properties dictated by our considerations we would expect in particular
that for a preferred transverse measure µ we have:
This gives some information on the space X with its FL-foliation. If K/Q
is ramified at some finite place i.e. if d 6= ±1 then χ (FL,µ) < 0. Now,
since H¯2 must be one-dimensional, it follows that
χ (FL,ν) < 0 for all non-trivial transverse measures ν .
Hence by a result of Candel [Ca] there is a Riemannian metric on TFL,
such that every FL-leaf has constant curvature −1. Moreover (X,FL) is
isomorphic to
Here O(H,X) is the space of conformal covering maps u : H → N as N
runs through the leaves of FL with the compact open topology. See [Ca] for
details.
In the unramified case, |d | = 1 we must have χ (FL,ν) = 0 for all
transverse measures by theabove argument. Hence thereis anFL-leafwhich
is either a plane, a torus or a cylinder c.f. [Ca].
5.8 In this final section we describe a simple case where the working hypoth-
esis 5.6 can be proved.
Consider an unramified covering f : M → M of a compact connected ori-
entable d-dimensional manifold M. We set
M¯ = lim(... −→ f M −→ f M → ...) .
Then M is a compact topological space equipped with the shift automor-
phism f ¯ induced by f. It can be given the structure of a C∞,∞-laminated
space as follows. Let M˜ be the universal covering of M. For i ∈ Z there
exists a Galois covering
p : M˜ −→ M
withGaloisgroupΓ
= p i+1◦f foralli. Hencewehaveinclusions:
i+1 i 0 1 0
WritingtheoperationofΓonX˜ fromtheright,wegetcommutativediagrams
for i ≥ 0:
id×proj proj f
Γy i y i y
It follows that
where Γ¯ is the pro-finite set with Γ-operation:
Theisomorphism(30)induces onM¯ thestructureofaC∞,∞-laminatedspace
with respect to which f becomes leafwise smooth.
Fix a positive number l > 0 and let Λ = lZ ⊂ R act on M¯ as follows: λ = lν
acts by f ¯ν. Define a right action of Λ on M¯ ×R by the formula
.
The suspension:
is an a = d+1-dimensional C∞,∞-laminated space with a one-codimensional
foliation F as in 5.2. The leaves of F are the fibres of the natural fibration
of X over the circle R/Λ:
X −→ R/Λ .
The leaves are also the images of M¯ × {t} for t ∈ R under the natural
projection. Translation in the R-variable
defines an F-compatible flow φ on X which is everywhere transverse to the
leaves of F and in particular has no fixed points.
gives a bijection between the closed orbits γ of the flow on X and the finite
orbits γ of the f- or Λ-action. These in turn are in bijection with the finite
orbits of the original f-action on M. We have:
Theorem 5.9 In the situation of 5.8 assume that all periodic orbits of φ are
non-degenerate. Let Spn(Θ) denote the set of eigenvalues with their algebraic
multiplicities of the infinitesimal generator Θ of φt∗ on Hn(X). Then the
defines a distribution on R and the following formula holds true in D′(R):
!
γ k≥1 k≤−1
Here γ runs overthe closed orbitsofφ andin the sum overk’s anypointx ∈ γ
can be chosen. Moreover χ (FL,µ) is the Connes’ Euler characteristic of
FL with respect to a certain canonical transverse measure µ. Finally we have
the formula:
The definition of µ and the proof of the theorem will be given elsewhere.
Example Let E/F be an ordinary elliptic curve over F and let C/Γ be a
lift of E to a complex elliptic curve with CM by the ring of integers o in
an imaginary quadratic field K. Assume that the Frobenius endomorphism
of E corresponds to the prime element π in o . Then π is split, ππ¯ = p and
for any embedding Q ⊂ C,l 6= p the pairs
are isomorphic. Setting M = C/Γ,f = π we are in the situation of 5.8 and
we find:
is the π-adic Tate module of C/Γ. It is isomorphic to the p-adic Tate module
of E.
Setting l = logp, so that Λ = (logp)Z and passing to multiplicative time, X
becomes isomorphic to
which may be a more natural way to write X. Note that pν acts on C× T Γ
by diagonal multiplication with πν. It turns out that the right hand side of
the dynamical Lefschetz trace formula established in theorem 5.9 equals the
right hand side in the explicit formulas for ζ (s). Moreover the metric g on
TF given by
satisfies the conformality condition (9) for α = 1. The proof of Theorem 2.1
can be easily adapted to X above and shows that Θ = 1 + S on H¯1 (X)
where S is skew symmetric. This gives a dynamical proof for the Riemann
hypotheses for ζ (s) along the lines that we hope for in the case of ζ(s). The
construction of (X,φt) that we made for ordinaryelliptic curves is misleading
however, since it almost never happens that a variety in characteristic p can
be lifted to characteristic zero together with its Frobenius endomorphism.
Moreover for ordinary elliptic curves the Riemann hypotheses can already
be proved using Hodge cohomology of the lifted curve. This was essentially
Hasse’s proof.
Our present dream for the general situation is this: To an algebraic sum X/Z
one should first attach an infinite dimensional dissipative dynamical system,
possibly using GL in some way. The desired dynamical system should then
be obtained by passing to the finite dimensional compact global attractor,
c.f. [La] Part I.