1v9053.3001:viXra
Number Theories
Patrick St-Amant
We will see that key concepts of number theory can be defined for
arbitrary operations. We give a generalized distributivity for hyper-
operations (usual arithmetic operations and operations going beyond
exponentiation) and a generalization of the fundamental theorem of
arithmetic for hyperoperations. We also give a generalized definition
of the prime numbers that are associated to an arbitrary n-ary opera-
tion and take a few steps toward the development of its modulo arith-
metic by investigating a generalized form of Fermat’s little theorem.
Those constructions give an interesting way to interpret diophantine
equations and we will see that the uniqueness of factorization under
an arbitrary operation can be linked with the Riemann zeta function.
This language of generalized primes and composites can be used to
restate and extend certain problems such as the Goldbach conjecture.
1 Introduction
Initially, the goal of the present study was to find interesting properties in-
volving hyperoperations beyond exponentiation. Oneobstacle isthat beyond
exponentiation it becomes very difficult to have any examples involving ac-
tual integers. However, a generalization of the fundamental theorem of arith-
metics has been isolated with the objective that eventually it will be possible
to find a ‘fundamental theorem of hyperarithmetic’. This result required a
more general definition of primes and this prompted many connections and
avenues of investigations. It is our hopethat enoughsteps have been taken to
point out the vastness of this unknown arithmetic world and enough results
have been demonstrated to indicate its approachability.
Many systems for hyperoperations have been introduced for different pur-
poses in the literature, in particular [1], [7] and [3]. Hyperoperations give rise
to immense numbers which, according to Littlewood [9], fascinated investi-
gators such as Archimedes himself. We can now construct different notations
to contemplate and manipulate incredibly large numbers. In particular, we
can write the Graham’s number [5] by using the Knuth arrow notation [7].
Another interesting application in Computer Science is the use systems of
hyperoperations to handle floating point overflow [2]. Strangely, the investi-
gation of hyperoperations has not yet become mainstream although most of
number theory and Abstract Algebra rely solely on the common operations
of addition and multiplication. By extending the study of number theory
to arbitrary operations, it becomes possible to consider a whole range of
questions, connections and applications.
The implicit goal of this article is to go back at the initial concepts of
arithmetic operations and extend them to give a richer theory which present
an opportunity to cast a new light on classical concepts by studying them in
a wider context. The explicit objective of this article is threefold. First, we
will show that the common arithmetic operations can be extended further
by the use of hyperoperations. Usually, when generalizing concepts we lose
important properties. One convenient way to keep those properties is to
generalize the properties. We will see that the concepts of distributivity and
the fundamental theorem of arithmetics, which can be seen as the property
of uniqueness of factorization, can also be demonstrated for hyperoperations
beyond the common operations.
Secondly, from those investigations naturally arises the idea of primes as-
sociated to arbitrary binary operations over the positive integers. Classically,
theextensionoftheconceptofprimesorrelatedconcept ofirreducibilityhave
beenextensively studied inmany different areaofmathematics, inparticular,
prime ideals which usually rely on operations involve in commutative rings
is to topic of a large range of investigations [8] [4]. We will see that this con-
cept of generalized primes, which is dependant on the operations themselves,
invites interesting connections with Diophantine equations and Dirichlet se-
ries. We will see that such a connection opens a door to use tools related
purely to the study of primes for questions about Diophantine equations or
Dirichlet series and vice versa.
Thirdly, in section 4 we will extend the definition of primes associated to
binary operations by defining primes associated to arbitrarypartial functions
of n variables over arbitrary sets. . All those generalizations can be seen as
introducing a language of generalized primes and composites and invites us
to rewrite and suggest diverse problems by using this language. A suggested
conjecture reminds us strongly of the Goldbach conjecture. Briefly, we will
see that these investigations prompt further generalizations and suggest a
general context for investigations which can be categorical.
The title was chosen to point out that number theory can be done based
onarbitraryoperationswhich candiffer fromthecommonoperationsofaddi-
tionand multiplication or fromanother perspective, that there is a multitude
of number theories. During the present study, many doors are opened and
it is the impression of the author that beyond those doors there is a exotic
and wide world involving giant finite numbers and fascinating entities such
as the generalized primes.
2 Hyperoperations
There are many ways to define what lies beyond exponentiations and each
possibility gives rise to very different systems. For clarity and completeness
we will present explanations and an independent definition of hyperopera-
tions.
2.1 Preliminaries
Let us take an arbitrary integer and denote it by x. In the following, we
will restrict ourselves to integers, but this does not exclude definitions which
wouldconsider othertypes ofnumbers. Wecanperformtheadditionofmany
objects x using the symbol + and write
Multiplication is defined in the following manner and can be seen as a
prefix notation since the number of occurrences of the x’s appear on the left.
...
Similarly, the exponential notation is defined in the following manner and
can be seen a suffix notation.
x·x·x = x3
...
Instead of using the power notation, we can define exponentiation in the
same format as addition and multiplication. We will take the operation ⊕
to indicate exponentiation. Note that here we will use a suffix notation. We
write:
x·x = 2⊕ x
...
We could go a step further by defining binary operations beyond expo-
nentiation in the following manner:
x⊕ x = 2⊕ x
x⊕ x⊕ x = 3⊕ x
x⊕ x⊕ x⊕ x = 4⊕ x
...
But, we see that at this point the parenthesis becomes very important
since we lose the associativity property. For example (x⊕ x) ⊕ x 6= x⊕
(x⊕ x) for x > 2. Thus, in the formal definition, we will keep track of the
parenthesis by using superscript notation on the operations.
It is possible to continue this pattern and define an infinite number of
new operations. After giving the formal definitions, we will investigate some
of the properties of those new binary operations.
This extended notation provides a way to investigate the property of
larger numbers. For example (x⊕ x)⊕ x = x(xx) = xxx becomes very large
just by taking x = 10 and ((x ⊕ x) ⊕ x) ⊕ x =
becomes very large
only by taking x = 3.
2.2 A Definition of Hyperoperations
For clarity, before giving a complete definition of hyperoperations, we for-
mally define the multiplication (⊕ ) and the exponentiation (⊕ ) notation.
NotethatwewilltakeNtobethepositiveintegerspositiveintegers{1,2,3,...}.
Definition 1. For i ∈ {1,2}, n ∈ N, an object x and assuming the knowledge
of the usual addition and its properties, we have that
i) ⊕ is the usual addition operation +
From the above definition arises the notation described informally in the
preceding section for addition, multiplication and exponentiation. For ex-
ample, using the identities of the definition, we find that x + x + x can be
written as 3⊕ x or as in the usual notation 3·x.
= (2)⊕ x+x
= (2+1)⊕ x
As noted before, already at the exponential operation we lose associativ-
ity. Hence, if we want to define operations beyond the exponential we will
need to not assume associativity in the definition of hyperoperations.
When we collect the x’s we need to devise a way for the higher operation
to keep track of the parentheses. This will be done by using a superscript
notation on the higher indexed operation as follows.
First, we devise a way to write the parentheses of a formula by using a
superscript notation on the operations.
Definition 2. We define the set of hyperoperations-formulas H as:
1. if n ∈ N then n ∈ H,
2. if x,y ∈ H and i ∈ N then (x⊕ y) ∈ H,
3. if x,y ∈ H and i,h ∈ N then x⊕h y ∈ H.
Definition 3. For x,y ∈ H and for any index name j,k, we have
1. if x and y are in N, then
2. Let m = max(n ,n ) such that n and n are the maximum integers
appearing on the superscript of the operations of x and y, respectively.
If there are no parentheses in x and y, then
The superscript indicates in what order the operation is performed and
can be used instead of parenthesis. For example, assuming that x,y,z ∈ N,
= x⊕0 x⊕1 x⊕2 x
= x⊕1 x⊕0 x⊕5 y ⊕4 z
In the two examples, all the operations are the same, but this need not
be always like this. When they are all the same we can write them using a
higher operation. We will formalize the following notation in definition 4, so
that writing a higher operation keeps track of the parentheses.
The formal definition of hyperoperations is given below and follows the
format of our definition of multiplication and exponentiation and includes
the superscript notation of the parentheses.
Definition 4. For all i,j ∈ N, an object x and assuming the knowledge of
the usual addition and its properties, we have
i) ⊕ is the usual addition operation +
ii) x = (1)⊕ x with [] an empty sequence.
iii) (n)⊕ x⊕ x = (n+1)⊕ x with n,a ∈ N and [S] is a sequence.
iv) x⊕ (n)⊕ x = (n+1)⊕ x with n,b ∈ N and [S] is a sequence.
Using this notation with superscripts we revisit a previous example which
can be written as the following. Note that since addition is associative, we
can write x+x+x as x+[0] x+[0] x.
= (2)⊕ x+x
= (1+2)⊕ x
Here are two more elaborate examples:
= x⊕0 x⊕1 x⊕2 x
= x⊕0 x⊕1 x⊕2 x⊕0 x
Sometimes we will write → instead of [0,1,2,3,...] which indicates that
the operations are composed from the left to the right and similarly we
will write ← for [...,3,2,1,0]. For exponentiation and for hyperoperations
beyond exponentiation we donot have associativity. Forexample, (4)⊕→x 6=
(4)⊕← x, since
Note that, in general, we have the following expressions:
The use of the superscript notation becomes especially important when
we want to investigate properties. In particular, we will see that sequences
of even and odd integers appear in a generalization of distributivity.
We now look at the object zero with this extended notation for x ∈ N. For
addition, we know that 0 + x = x and x + 0 = x. For multiplication we
have that 0·x = 0 and x·0 = 0. For exponentiation, we lose the property
commutativity since x⊕ 0 = 0x = 0 and 0⊕x = x0 = 1 for x 6= 0.
For the operation ⊕ it becomes a little more subtle. If the superscript
arrow is as defined in the previous section, then we have 4 ⊕→ x =
.
We can conceptualize that 0⊕→ x = 0 for all x, but what can we say about
x⊕→ 0?
In some contexts, such as Calculus, 00 is taken to be an indeterminate,
but in other contexts it is taken to be equal to 1. If we assume that 00 = 1
then we find the following equations.
2⊕→ 0 = 00 = 1
3⊕→ 0 = 000 = 0
...
Which can be summarized in the following proposition.
Proposition 5. Let n ∈ N, if we say that 00 = 1, then
0 if n is odd
(1 if n is even
Proof. By induction on even integers and by induction on odd integers.
2.4 Higher Distributivity
Inarithmetic, distributivity isoneofthefundamental identitiesregardingthe
interaction between two operations. In this section we will study identities
that combine two operations such that there is a difference of 1 between
their subscripts and that the leftmost operation has a greater subscript than
the other operation. In a few words, distributivity informs us that many
occurrences of a term can be grouped together. For example, n(x + y) =
nx+ny tells us that we can group the x and y terms together. The following
proposition generalizes this up to a pair of operations ⊕ and ⊕ . Note that
N+ will denote the non-negative integers.
Theorem 6. For all i ∈ 1,2,3, we have
i i−1 i i−1 i
with n,x,y ∈ N and for
Even = [2n−2,2n−4,...,4,2]
Odd = [1,3,...,2n−5,2n−3].
Before giving the proof, we will verify the theorem for a specific example
by making a free use of the notation. We have
3 2 3 2 2 2 3
= x⊕ x⊕ x⊕ y ⊕ y ⊕ y
yx(yx(yx))
Proof. Since we know that n(x + y) = nx + ny and because addition is
associative, the identity is also true for i = 1
By a well known property of exponents, we have (xy)n = xnyn. This can
be written as
Since multiplication is associative, we find that the statement of the theorem
is also true for i = 2.
We will prove by induction on n that the distributivity identity is true
for i = 3. We verify that it is true for n = 0 and n = 1. Suppose that it is
true for n = k then we will show that it is true for n = k +1.
[1,2,...,k]
Let A = (k +1)⊕ (x⊕ y). By definition 4 we can write
By definition of the superscript, we can write the superscript k on the right
side of the previous equation as a parenthesis.Thus we have
[1,2,...,k−1]
Another well known property of exponents is (yx)a = (ya)x. In the hy-
peroperation notation we have the identity
[1,2,...,k−1]
Using this property of exponents for a = (k)⊕ (x⊕ y) we find
[1,2,...,k−1] [1,2,...,k−1]
3 2 2 2 2 3 2 2
Since we assume that the identity is true for n = k we have that
[1,2,...,k−1]
Even′ = [2k −2,2k −4,...,4,2]
Odd′ = [1,3,...,2k−5,2k −3].
Hence, we can write
[1,2,...,k−1]
((k)⊕Even′
2 3 2 2 2 3 2 3 2
By definition 4, we can write
y in terms of the oper-
ation ⊕ only. Since the maximum integer of the Even′ and Odd′ sequences
is 2k −2, we find, by using definition 4 again, that
2 3 2 3 2 2 3 2 3 2
Thus, we find
Even = [2k,2k−2,2k −4,...,4,2]
Odd = [1,3,...,2k−5,2k−3,2k−1].
Hence, by induction, the distributive identity is true for i = 3.
Note that the above theorem is true for n ∈ N. Would it still be true if
we replace N by the real or complex numbers? Also, other relations could
be considered. In particular, relations where the difference between the sub-
scripts is k ∈ N.
2.5 Higher Fundamental Theorem of Arithmetic
The fundamental theorem of arithmetic tells us that there is a unique way
to write a positive integer n > 1 in the form
pb1 ·pb2 ·pb3 ·...·pb
a1 a2 a3 a
such that p ,p ,...,p are primes, p < p < ... < p and b ,b ,...,b
a1 a2 am a1 a2 am 1 2 m
are positive integers.
We remark that the formulation of the fundamental theorem of arith-
metic depends on the operations of multiplication and exponentiation. In
the following, we will see that a similar formulation exists for the operation
of exponentiation and the operation ⊕ .
The definition of primes relies on the binary operation of multiplication.
Let’s define the concept of primes for exponentiation.
Definition 7. We will say that q is an exponential prime or a ⊕ -prime if
q cannot be written as uv for some positive integer u,v such that u > 1 and
v > 1.
Lemma 8. q is an exponential prime if and only if the exponents b ,b ,...,b
of the unique prime factorization of q 6= 1 satisfy gcd(b ,b ,...,b ) = 1.
Proof. (⇒) Suppose gcd(b ,b ,...,b ) = k 6= 1 then we can write q = ck
for some positive integer c, hence a contradiction with the fact that q is a
⊕ -prime.
(⇐)Suppose that q 6= 1 is not an exponential prime. Hence, q = uv =
pb1pb2...pbm for v > 1 , since each p are primes, we have that p | u,
a1 a2 am i i
thus (pe1pe2...pet)v = pb1pb2...pbt. By the Fundamental Theorem of Arith-
a1 a2 at a1 a2 at
metic, for all k we must have ve = b , which contradicts the fact that
gcd(b ,b ,...,b ) = 1.
We will generalize the fundamental theorem of arithmetic in the following
theorem. Itwouldbeinterestingtogobeyondthisandfindastatementwhich
could be seen as the ‘Fundamental Theorem of Hyperarithmetic’. Note that
the exponential primes is a synonym for the ⊕ -primes and the usual primes
(primes associated to multiplication) is a synonym for the ⊕ -primes.
Due to the fact that b ⊕← q = q
becomes an immense number for
small integers input, almost all examples are out of reach. Note that in the
case where b = 1, we find that q
= q .
Theorem 9. For i ∈ {2,3} and b > 0, there is a unique way to write a
positive integer in the form
m i am i−1 i−1 3 i a3 i−1 2 i a2 i−1 1 i a1
where each q is a ⊕ -prime and q does not divide
m i am i−1 i−1 k+1 i a k+1
for all k.
Before giving the proof, to help intuition, we can write the factorization
in the statement of the theorem for i = 3 as
(q a b1 1 −1)(qa b2 2 −1 ) . . . (qa
Proof. For i = 2 we have | {z }
m 2 am 1 1 3 2 a3 1 2 2 a2 1 1 2 a1
Since ⊕ is the usual exponentiation and ⊕ is the usual multiplication we
have and because multiplication is associative, the superscript ‘←’ and the
box brackets can be ignored. Thus
am a3 a2 a1
) cannot be divided by q
. Hence, the theorem
is true for i = 2 by the fundamental theorem of arithmetic.
For i = 3, we need to show that every positive integer n can written in
the form seen in the statement of the theorem and we need to show that the
representation in this form is unique.
We will show the first part by constructing for each n such a representa-
tion. By the fundamental theorem of arithmetic we have
n = pd1pd2...pdt
Let gcd(d ,d ,...,d ) = g and gd′ = d ,gd′ = d ,...,gd′ = d , thus we have
1 2 t 1 1 2 2 t t
n = (pd′ 1pd′ 2...pd′ t)g.
t, since gcd(d′,d′,...,d′) = 1, we have by the previous
a1 c1 c2 ct 1 2 t
lemma that q is an exponential prime.
Recall that x ⊕← y can be written in usual notation as yyx−1. Take the
maximal integer b ≥ 0 such that g = qb1n for some positive integer n . We
n = q (qa b1 1 n1) = (q qa b1 1)n1,
where q ∤ n and we also have that n < n. We repeat all the previous
steps starting with n instead of n. This whole process will eventually stop
since 0 < ... < n < n < n.
We now show the uniqueness of representation. Suppose distinct repre-
sentations such that (q qa b1 1 −1 )u = (q qc d 1 1 −1 )v where q and q are exponential
a1 c1 a1 c1
primes and
m 2 am 1 1 3 2 a3 1 2 2 a2
v = [[(d m′ ⊕← 2 p cm )⊕ 1 ...]⊕ 1 (d 3 ⊕← 2 p c3 )]⊕ 1 (d 2 ⊕← 2 p c2 ).
Let r = qb1−1u and s = qd1−1v so that qr = qs .
a1 c1 a1 c1
Suppose r 6= s. Let r = kr′ and s = ks′ such that gcd(r′,s′) = 1 for
k a positive integer and r,s are not both equal to 1, thus we have
qs′ . Let q = pf1pf2...pfn and q = ph1ph2...phn, this is because the
c1 a1 e1 e2 en c1 e1 e2 en
are primes which implies that q and q must have the same factors. By
the fundamental theorem of arithmetic we also must have that f r′ = h s′
for all i. Assuming that r′ 6= 1 we can write this differently as f =
.
Since gcd(r′,s′) = 1, we have that r′ | h for all i. This indicates that
gcd(h ,h ,...,h ) 6= 1, a contradiction, by lemma 8, with the assumption
that q is an exponential prime. Similarly, if s′ 6= 1, we find a contradiction.
Therefore we must have that r′ = s′ = 1, which means that r = k = s and
we must conclude that q = q .
We now have
(q qa b1 1 −1 )u = (q qa d1 1 −1 )v
If b = d we are finished since we repeat the whole process starting with u,v
and this process must stop since the exponents gets smaller at each step.
Applying the logarithm on each side of the previous equation we find
Without loss of generality, assume b − 1 > d − 1. Define z such that
qz u = v.
Thus q must divide v, a contradiction with the assumption of the statement
of the theorem. Therefore, we can conclude that we have uniqueness of
representation.
In the following section we will formally define what is a prime associated
to an operation and find that the only prime associated to addition is 1. We
could also include the case i = 1 in theorem 9, by modifying the theorem in
the following manner:
Theorem 10. For i ∈ {1,2,3} and b > 0, there is a unique way to write a
positive integer in the form
m i am i−1 i−1 3 i a3 i−1 2 i a2 i−1 1 i a1
where each q is a ⊕ -prime and such that if
m i am i−1 i−1 k+1 i a k+1
then q does not divide it.
Proof. Since fori = 1 andi = 2 it never occurs that [(b ⊕←q )⊕ ...]⊕
m i am i−1 i−1
(b ⊕←q ) = 0, thus the theorem is true for i = 1 and i = 2 by theorem
k+1 i a k+1
9.
For i = 1, we have that every positive integer n can be written uniquely
in the form n = n⊕ 1 = n·1 and since 1 divides every positive integer, the
only possible representation is when
m i am i−1 i−1 k+1 i a k+1
Thus, the unique representation is n = 0+n⊕ 1 = 0+n·1.
The form of representation given in theorem 9 is not necessarily the only
form which gives rise to a uniqueness of representation. One other possibility
1 i a1 i−1 2 i a2 i−1 3 i a3 i−1 i−1 k i a k
where the superscript arrow has been reversed and the composition of the
⊕ is also reversed. If true, this could be seen as the ‘dual’ of theorem 9.
3 Primes, Diophantine and Zeta Connections
We will see in this section that generalizing primes to arbitrary operations
permitustoestablishlinksbetweenprimes, diophantineequationsandDirich-
let series. In this section we will limit ourselves to binary operations over
an arbitrary set M, but in section 4 we will consider n-ary functions over
arbitrary sets.
3.1 Generalized Primes and Composites
According to Hardy and Wright [6], a positive integer p is said to be prime
if p > 1 and p has no positive divisors except 1 and p. These primes can be
viewed as primes associated to the binary operation of usual multiplication.
In the following we will extend the concept of primes by defining a prime
associated to arbitrary binary operations over the set M. Note that the
notation M is used to remind us that M can be chosen to be a set such as
the positive integers N = {1,2,3,...} or the integers Z.
3.1.1 Preliminaries
For the arbitrary binary operations we will favor an infix notation to help
us keep the intuition of factorization and of primes associated to the usual
multiplication. In section 4, we will see how to define primes associated to
arbitrary n-ary operations over arbitrary sets by using a functional notation
instead.
Definition 11. Let f : M × M → M be a partial function, we define the
binary operation ⊕M over M as
a⊕M b = f(a,b).
When f(x,y) and M are not given or are clear by the context, we will write
⊕ instead of ⊕M
Remarkthat inthisdefinitionof binaryoperation, f isa partialoperation
so that operations such as division are considered to be binary operations.
This is due to the fact that if f would be restricted to functions, then by
taking M to be the non-negative integers, we would encounter a problem
with the division by 0.
Addition and multiplication are commutative and associative operations,
but not all binary operations are commutative and associative. For example:
⊕N and ⊕N are commutative and not associative.
x2y2 x2+y2
⊕Z , ⊕Z and ⊕Z are commutative and associative.
kxy x+xy+y x+y+k
⊕R abinary operationis notcommutative but is associative, since if a 6= b
we have that
a⊕R b = b 6= a = a⊕R b.
We now want to extend the concept of factors which is important for
the definition of generalized primes. For associative and non-commutative
operations it would be enough to define factors in the following way:
“Let m ∈ M, we say that d is a ⊕M-factor of m if and only if there are some
c ,c ∈ M such that c ⊕M d = m or d⊕M c = m or c ⊕M d⊕M c = m.”
1 2 1 f f 2 1 f f 2
But some operations are non-associative and non-commutative, thus we
need to first define combinations and occurrences.
Definition 12. Let f : M× M → M be a function, we define the set C of
all ⊕ -combinations and occurrences as:
1. If x ∈ M then x ∈ C and we say that x is an occurrence in x,
2. If x,y ∈ C then (x⊕ y) ∈ C and we say that x, y and (x ⊕ y) are
occurrences in (x ⊕ y) and that all occurrences in x and y are also
occurrences in (x⊕ y).
By rule 2 of the previous definition, we make sure that, for example, 3 is
an occurrence in the ⊕ -combination (4⊕ (6⊕ (((12⊕ 3)⊕ 42)⊕ 15))).
f f f f f f
Definition 13. We say that c ∈ C is a ⊕ -representation of m ∈ M if
m = c.
Definition 14. Let m ∈ M, we say that d is a ⊕M-factor of m if and only
if d is an occurrence in a representation of m.
Note that in general there might be many different representations for m
where two representations do not have the same factors.
3.1.2 Units
We now need to extend the concept of the unit. For the usual primes, 1 is
the unit since for all k we have 1·k = k = k·1. In this case, the unit 1 could
be seen as a left-unit and as a right-unit, but we do not have to make this
distinction since multiplication is commutative. In the general case, we need
to make this distinction.
What makes the unit different from the primes and the composites is the
fact that every integer k can be written as a product of that unit and another
integer b, in particular, in the case of the multiplication, the integer b is k
itself. Take the operation ⊕Z , thus a ⊕Z b = ab − 3 and we find that
every integer m can be written as k = 1⊕Z (k+3). For example, we have
that 1 = 1 ⊕Z 4, 2 = 1⊕Z 5 and 3 = 1⊕Z 6. If we would define a
xy−3 xy−3 xy−3
unit r to be such that r ⊕s = s, there are cases, such as seen above, where
all integers would be considered to be composites. In particular, although
k = 1⊕Z (k+3) we have that 1 would not be considered as a unit because
1 ⊕Z s = s − 3 6= s. This tells us that it is not the most convenient
definition. So we avoid this situation by defining the units as follows.
Definition 15. We say that
1. u ∈ M is a ⊕M-left-unit if for each k ∈ M there is some b ∈ M such
that k = u⊕M b.
2. u ∈ M is a ⊕M-right-unit if for each k ∈ M there is some b ∈ M such
that k = b⊕M u.
Sometimes, we will say that an element of M is a ⊕M-unit if it is a ⊕M-left-
unit or ⊕M-right-unit.
It is interesting to note that there are cases where the b is not unique.
For example, for the operation ⊕Z where | y | is the absolute value of y, we
have that k = 1⊕Z (−k) = 1⊕Z k
In the above example for the operation ⊕Z , we now have that 1 is
considered to be a ⊕Z -unit since k = 1⊕Z (k+3). Here, for each k the
b takes the formof the function k+3. In some cases it is possible to explicitly
find this function, so we will make a small digression before formally defining
the generalized composites. We need the following notation.
Definition 16. Let f−1 : M×M denote the inverse of the function f (y) :
M → M which is defined as f (y) = f(x ,y) for a fixed x ∈ M.
Similarly, let f−1 : M × M denote the inverse of the function f (x) :
M → M which is defined as f (x) = f(x,y ) for a fixed y ∈ M.
In other words, the function f (y) was obtained by currying the binary
function f(x,y) in x or that the unary function f (y) was obtained by fixing
the first argument of the function f(x,y).
In the above example for the operation ⊕Z , we have that f(x,y) =
xy −3. Thus, fixing the first argument, we can define the function f (y) =
x y−3. Let’s find the inverse of that function. We must have f (f−1(z)) =
z, thus z = f (f−1(z)) = x f−1(z) − 3. By isolating f−1(z) we find that
x0 x0 0 x0 x0
f−1(z) = z+3. If we take x = 1, we have that f−1(z) = z+3 and we observe
that 1 ⊕Z f−1(k) = 1 ⊕Z (k + 3) = k. From these considerations, we
xy−3 1 xy−3
can extract the following proposition.
Proposition 17. Let the notation be as given in definition 16. If f is a
bijective function and u is a ⊕M -left-unit, then for each k ∈ M there exists
a unique b ∈ M such that k = u ⊕M b. Furthermore, this b is such that
Proof. We must verify that b = f−1(k) satisfies k = u⊕M b. We have that
u⊕M f−1(k) = f(u,f−1(k)),butbydefinition16,wecanwritef(u,f−1(k))
f(x,y) u u u
as f (f−1(k)), hence we find that u⊕M f−1(k) = f (f−1(k)) = k.
u u f(x,y) u u u
Suppose there is some b′ 6= f−1(k) which satisfies k = u ⊕M b′, thus
we have k = u ⊕M b′ = f(u,b′) = f (b′).We know by assumption that
f−1(k) = b, thus k = f (b) by applying f on both sides. Hence, we have
that f (b′) = k and f (b) = k, a contradiction with f being bijective.
As a side comment, we can also formally extend the concept of zero as
follows.
Definition 18. We say that z ∈ M is a ⊕ -left-zero if for all k ∈ M we
have z ⊕ k = z and that z ∈ M is a ⊕ -right-zero if for all k ∈ M we have
k ⊕ z = z.
3.1.3 Generalized Composites
Let’snowfindanadequatedefinitionforthegeneralizedcomposites. Adirect
generalization of the usual composites definition could be:
m ∈ M is a ⊕M-composite if and only if m = c⊕M d and such that c and d
are not ⊕M-units or m itself.
But, we would encounter at least two problems with this statement. For
multiplication, we do not wonder if 1 is a composite number. For arbitrary
operations, a unit could be seen as composite. For example, taking again
⊕Z , we know that 1 is a ⊕Z -left-unit, but also, 1 = 2 ⊕Z 2 which
xy−3 xy−3 xy−3
would mean that 1 is a composite. Having a composite unit would make
all integers into composites. In the present case, since 16 6= xy − 3 has no
integer solutions for x,y 6= 1, assuming that 1 is not a composite would
make integers such as 16 into non-composites (i.e. generalized primes) which
gives a richer theory. Thus, we will include in the definition that generalized
composites are not units.
Another problem is that there are operations such that for some m′ we
have m′ = m′ ⊕b. An example is ⊕N for which 4 = 4⊕ 6 = 16−12
x2−2y x2−y
where 4 is not a left unit and 6 is not a right unit.
Thus, to avoid those issues, we define the generalized composites by mak-
ing sure that they cannot be units and that the number itself can appear as
one of its factors.
Definition 19. m ∈ M is a ⊕M-composite if and only if it is not a ⊕M-unit
and there exists some x,y ∈ M such that u is not a ⊕M-left-unit and v is not
a ⊕M-right-unit and (u⊕ v) is a ⊕M-factor of m.
It is interesting to note that a right-unit could still appear as u where
(u⊕ v) is a factor of m. For example, we have that 12 is a ⊕N -composite
since 12 = 8⊕N 4. We have that 4 is not a right-unit since 3 6= c⊕N 4
for any c ∈ N and that 8 is not a left-unit since 17 6= 8 ⊕N d for any
d ∈ N. But, we have that 8 is a right-unit since k = k ⊕N 8.
3.1.4 Generalized Primes
We define the generalized primes as:
Definition 20. m ∈ M is a ⊕M-prime if and only if it is not a ⊕M -unit
and it is not a ⊕ -composite.
By the definition of the generalized units, composites and primes, we
have that an element of M is either a unit, a composite or a prime. In other
words, the collection of the sets containing all units, composites and primes
is a partition of M.
After some logical manipulations, we find a more useful statement for
generalized primes.
Proposition 21. m ∈ M is a ⊕M-prime if and only if it is not a ⊕M-unit
and if for all x,y ∈ M we have that x is not a ⊕M-left-unit and y is not a
⊕M-right-unit implies that (x⊕M y) is not a ⊕ -factor of m.
Proof. Not being a ⊕ -composite is the negation of the statement of the
definition of ⊕ -composites.
Thus, by De Morgan’s Law ¬(p ∧ q) ⇔ (¬p ∨ ¬q) and the identity
∃x,yMP(x,y) ⇔ ∀x,yM¬P(x,y), not being a composite is equivalent to:
“is a ⊕ -unit or [for all x,y ∈ M we have that x is a ⊕ -left-unit or y is a
⊕ -right-unit or (x⊕ y) is not a factor of m].”
By the De Morgan’s Law and the identity (¬u∨v) ⇔ (u ⇒ v) we have
Thus, not being a composite is equivalent to:
“is a ⊕ -unit or [for all x,y ∈ M we have that x is not a ⊕ -left-unit and y
is not a ⊕ -right-unit then (x⊕ y) is not a factor of m].”
Therefore since
and that being a prime is equivalent by definition to:
“not a ⊕ -unit and it is not a ⊕ -composite,”
we find by replacing it’s statement “not a composite”, that being a prime is
indeed equivalent to the statement of the theorem.
As discussed before, the units are not considered to be composites, since
this would imply that all elements of M would be composites if there is a unit
in M. Also, the units are not considered to be primes either since we want
to be consistent with the definition of the usual primes. Note that adding
the restriction that the unit is not a prime becomes useful when uniqueness
factorization is discussed.
We see that the set of all ⊕N -primes, or ⊕ -primes using the hyperop-
eration notation, is the set {1}.
The set of ⊕N -primes, or ⊕ -primes using the hyperoperation notation,
are the usual primes and 1 is a ⊕N -left-unit and ⊕N -right-unit . By Euclid’s
proof, we know that the set of primes is infinite and we note that it includes
the set of ⊕ -primes.
The set of ⊕N -primes are all the positive integers that cannot be written
in the form xy for y > 1 and x > 1. This includes all the ⊕ -primes (the
usual primes) but also includes many ⊕N-composites such as 6,10,12,14,....
Here is the list of all the ⊕N -primes up to 28:
{1,2,3,5,6,7,10,11,12,13,14,15,17,18,19,20,21,22,23,24,26,28}.
For hyperoperations, the statement “the set of ⊕ -primes contains the set
of ⊕ -primes” might be an important fact regarding the development of a
‘fundamental theorem of hyperarithmetic’.
If f(x,y) = 1, we have that the set of ⊕N -primes are every integer
higher than 1.
Also, if k > 1 and f(x,y) = ky, we have that there is no ⊕Z -right-unit,
since if we suppose u to be a unit, then all m can be written as m = c⊕Z u =
ku, a contradiction since there are integers which are not multiples of k. We
also have that the set CZ of ⊕Z -composites consists of all multiples of k
since kn = b ⊕Z n for any b which is not a ⊕Z -left-unit and n ≥ 1. Note
that we can write CZ = kZ which means that CZ can also be seen as an
ideal.
3.2 Diophantine Equations
We can now associate to each binary operation a set of natural numbers that
exhibit properties similar to the usual primes. In elementary number theory,
there are many theorems and tools that uses the prime concept. We will now
show that it is possible to recast Diophantine problems as problems about
primes.
Definition 22. Let f : M×M → M be a partial function in two variables,
then a solution (x ,y ) to the equation f(x,y) = c for a fix c ∈ M and for
x ,y ∈ M is said to be trivial in x if for each z ∈ M there is an element
b ∈ M such that f(x ,b) = z.
Similarly, a solution (x ,y ) is said to be trivial in y if for each z ∈ Z
there is an element b ∈ N such that f(b,y ) = z. Every solution which is not
trivial in x and in y is said to be non-trivial.
Fix c, then an example of a trivial solution in y to the equation (x6 +
y3) 1 = c is the solution (c,0), because for all z ∈ Z we can take b = z
and find that f(z,0) = ((z)6 +(0)3) 1 = z. For the same equation, a trivial
solution in x is (0,c2), since for all z ∈ Z we can take b = z2 and find that
We now have a proposition linking generalized composites to solution of
certains diophantine equations.
Theorem 23. Fix c ∈ Z , let f : Z×Z → Z be a polynomial in two variables,
then f(a,b) = c has a non-trivial solution (a ,b ) for a ,b ∈ Z if and only
if c is ⊕ -composite.
Proof. (⇒) Let (a ,b ) be a non-trivial solution. Hence we have that c =
f(a ,b ) = a ⊕ b . If a is a ⊕ -left-unit, then a ⊕ b = k for all k,
0 0 0 f 0 0 f 0 f
a contradiction with the non-triviality of the solution. In this manner, we
have that a is not a ⊕ -left-unit and b is not a ⊕ -right-unit, thus c is a
⊕ -composite.
(⇐) Conversely, if c is a ⊕ -composite, we have c = a ⊕ b = f(a ,b )
f 0 f 0 0 0
where a is not a ⊕ -left-unit and b is not a ⊕ -right-unit, thus (a ,b ) is
0 f 0 f 0 0
not a trivial solution.
Theorem 24. Fix c ∈ Z , let f : Z × Z → Z be a polynomial in two
variables and h : Z → Z be a polynomial, then f(a,b) = h(c) does not have
a non-trivial solution (a ,b ) for a ,b ∈ Z if and only if c is ⊕ -prime.
Proof. The proof is similar to the proof of theorem 23.
The previous theorems are very simple in nature, but they have the ad-
vantage of reformulating some diophantine problems into questions about
generalized composites and primes andvice versa. Since there aremany tools
concerning the primes we can hope to extend those tools and use them to
answer some questions about diophantine equations. In particular, we could
extend certain primality tests which rely on the Fermat’s little theorem. In
section 3.4, we are taking a few steps in this direction.
Proposition 25. If f : Z × Z → Z is a polynomial in two variables and
h : Z → Z is a polynomial such that the image of Z under h is an infinite
subset of Z and if there is a finite number of ⊕Z-primes then the diophantine
equation h(z) = f(x,y) has a non-trivial solution (x ,y ,z ).
Proof. Suppose h(z) = f(x,y) has no non-trivial solution for all z ∈ Z, then
by the previous theorem, each element of the image of Z under h must be
a ⊕ -prime. Hence a contradiction, since there is only a finite number of
⊕Z-primes and the image of Z under h is an infinite subset.
We will see in section 4.1 that the concepts seen in the present section
can be constructed for a more general setting.
3.3 Uniqueness and the Riemann Zeta Function
We will define in this section a certain L-series associated to an operation
⊕M and we will see that when this L-series is equal to the Riemann Zeta
Function under certain conditions, it means that each element of M has a
unique factorization.
The Euler product formula provides a way to encode primes into a Dirich-
let series. If s > 1 and p is the kth common prime (or ⊕ -prime), then
= = ζ(s).
In general, we would also like to encode generalized primes, but we re-
mark that the Euler product formula relies on the fact that multiplication
is associative, commutative and distributive over addition. Looking at the
proof of the Euler product formula, there is an intermediary formula which
we can use.
k=1 k k=1 " i=1 (cid:18) k(cid:19) #
ps psps pspsps
1≤i i 1≤i≤j i j 1≤i≤j≤k i j k
Here, equation 2 is obtained by the geometric series formula, equation
3 is obtained by the distributive law and 3 is obtained because of the fun-
damental theorem of arithmetic. Since for an arbitrary operation ⊕ we do
not necessarily have commutativity, associativity and distributivity, it is not
clear if a higher geometric series can be found. The main focus here is to
provide a way to encode our generalized primes into a Dirichlet series, hence
we can more or less start at equation 2. We explore this possibility in the
following.
Definition 26. The set of all ⊕M-composites will be denoted by CM and the
set of all ⊕M-primes will be denoted by PM.
Definition 27. We define the set of ⊕M-prime combinations F as:
1. if u is a ⊕ -unit then u ∈ F ;
2. if p ∈ PM then p ∈ F ,
3. if x,y ∈ F and are not units then (x⊕ y) ∈ F .
Definition 28. Let f : M → M, L : C → C, M ⊆ C and T ⊆ F , then
we define the L -series L as
Here, we put the restriction M ⊆ C, since we want each t ∈ T to be in C
so that we have that each component 1 of the sum is in C. In the following,
we will mostly restrict ourselves to binary operations with f : N×N → N.
For example, take f : N → N with f(x,y) = xy and take
T = {3,5,3⊕ 5,5⊕ 3},
Proposition 29. If f : N × N → N and if c is the number of elements of
T which are equal to i, then L (s) can be rearranged as follow:
Proof. The elements of T are combinations of the ⊕ -primes and give after
computation a positive integer. For each i, we can gather all the terms of the
form 1 and write ci instead. Hence = i where c ∈ N∪{0}.
is is ts is i
In definition 28, take T = F such that the set F is the set of ⊕N -
formulas built from the usual multiplication. Thus we have
L (s) = .
Sincethec countthenumber ofelementsofF whichareequaltoiandsince
for multiplication we have the uniqueness of representation, c will count the
number of permutations of the primes and the number of associative ways
to write the brackets. Not counting these provides a way to directly connect
this L-series to the Zeta function which will be the purpose of the following
statements.
We now define the set of formulas modulo associativity and commutativ-
ity. Note that we could also define this by using quotient sets, but there is an
advantage to this approach, since it invites the construction of subsets that
are not necessarily built by using relations.
Definition 30. Let F be the set of ⊕M-prime combinations, we define the
set of ⊕M-prime combinations modulo associativity and commutativity T
as:
1. if u is a ⊕M-unit then u ∈ T ,
2. if p ∈ PM then p ∈ T ,
3. if x,y ∈ F and are not units and (x⊕ y) ∈/ T then (y⊕ x) ∈ T ,
f f AC f AC
4. if x,y,z ∈ F and are not units and (x⊕ (y ⊕ z)) ∈/ T
Proposition 31. If the operation ⊕N is commutative and associative, then
for each positive integer n there is at least an element t ∈ T such that
n = t.
Proof. Bydefinition, allthe⊕N-primesandthe⊕N-unitsareinT . Suppose
there is a composite positive integer c not in T , then by rules 3 and 4 of
the definition of T this means that if the composite is of the form (y⊕ x)
it is not in T because (x⊕ y) is in T or ((x⊕ y)⊕ z) is not in T
AC f AC f f AC
because ((x⊕ y)⊕ z) is in T . Therefore we must have that
But this is a contradiction with the commutativity or associativity of ⊕N.
Now that we know each positive integer has a ⊕ -representation in T ,
we can state the following theorem.
Theorem 32. Let ⊕N be associative and commutative, then for all real num-
bers s > 1 we have L (s) = ζ(s) if and only if for each n ∈ N there is
exactly one element c ∈ T such that n = c or, in other words, each positive
integer has a unique ⊕ -representation up to associativity and commutativity.
Proof. (⇐) We need to calculate L (s) and we know that
Since, by definition of the operation, we have that the codomain of f is N,
thus we have that each t equals a certain positive integer. Suppose that there
is a c > 1, then this means that there are t ,t ∈ T such that t = t = n.
j 1 2 AC 1 2
But this is a contradiction since, by assumption, we have that each positive
integer k has exactly one element of T which is equal to k. Hence, for all
i we have c = 1, and therefore, we find that L (s) = = ζ(s).
(⇒) Suppose there is a finite or infinite number of positive integers which
are not uniquely represented up to associativity and commutativity, say
{k ,k ,...}. Since ⊕ is associative and commutative, by the previous propo-
sition, each of those integers are in T and are not uniquely represented.
By the assumption L (s) = ζ(s), we have that
Hence, some of the components for which the c ’s are equal to 1 will cancel
out and the components of integers not uniquely represented will remain.
Let a = c −1 ≥ 0, and define R(s) as follow,
By assumption of the theorem, we must have that R(s) = 0 for all real
s > 1, thus take s > 1 a solution such that R(s ) = 0. We must also have
that s +1 is such that R(s +1) = 0, thus
= 0.
Remark that each ai are non-negative numbers and that since i is also a
positive integer, we have that
> .
Hencewehave0 = R(s +1) > R(s ) = 0,whichisacontradiction. Therefore
each positive integer must have a unique ⊕ -representation.
Oneoftherequirements ofthetheoremisthattheoperationisassociative
andcommutative. Someexamplesofassociativeandcommutativeoperations
are ⊕ and ⊕ . From these we can build other commutative and
associative operations such as ⊕ and ⊕ where f(u,v) = h ⊕ u ⊕ v
f g kxy kxy
and g(u,v) = h ⊕ u ⊕ v. The function R(s) with s > 1 can be
seen as measuring how far a commutative and associative operation f is from
inducing unique factorization.
3.4 Generalized Modulo Arithmetic
The initial idea of investigating Modular Arithmetic in the setting of gener-
alized primes was to find a general version of Fermat’s little theorem so that
we could build a factorization algorithm which would provide a useful way
to solve Diophantine problems. This objective is not met in this article, but
we hope that this working basis can be extended further in the future.
We will now construct a modulo arithmetic associated to an arbitrary
operator. Recall that when we write ⊕ we mean ⊕M.
Definition 33. We will say that ⊕
−1 is a right inverse binary operation of
the binary operation ⊕ f if (a⊕ f b)⊕ f −1 b = a. We will say that ⊕ f −1 is a left
inverse binary operation of the binary operation ⊕ f if a⊕ f −1 (a⊕ f b) = b.
For example, subtraction is the right inverse of addition and division
is a right inverse of multiplication. Furthermore, using our hyperoperation
notation ⊕ for exponentiation, the logarithm is the right inverse of expo-
nentiation since
2 log y x log y x b
For subtraction, ⊕
−1 is denoted by the symbol ‘−’. We remark that we can
write the left inverse of addition by using the right inverse, since a⊕ (a+
b) = b.
Definition 34. Let ⊕ be a binary operation and ⊕ be a binary operation
which has a right inverse binary operation ⊕ g−1 . We write c ≡ g b (mod f m)
if and only if m is a ⊕ f -factor of c⊕ g−1 b.
A trivial example is when g is addition, f is the usual multiplication (i.e.
f(x,y)=xy) and g−1 is subtraction. In the case where g is the usual addition
we will sometimes write ‘≡’ instead of ‘≡ ’ and in the case where f is the
usual multiplication we will sometimes write ‘mod’ instead of ‘mod ’.
Finding a Fermat’s little theorem associated to an arbitrary operation ⊕
can be quite challenging since useful properties, such as addition and multi-
plication respecting modulo relations and the cancellation law, will not occur
in the case of some operators. If c ≡ b (mod m) and c′ ≡ b′ (mod m)
then what are the conditions on the f and g such that we find c ⊕ c′ ≡
b⊕ b′ (mod m) or c⊕ c′ ≡ b⊕ b′ (mod m)?
g f f g f f
We will now give a simple extension of Fermat’s little theorem.
Definition 35. We will write a⊕← f p instead of (a⊕ f (a⊕ f (...⊕ f (a⊕ f a)...)))
in which a occurs exactly p times.
Theorem 36. Let M = Z. If p is a ⊕ -prime (i.e., usual prime) and
gcd(k,p) = 1, then
a⊕← kxy p ⊕ kxy 1 ≡ a⊕ kxy 1 (mod ⊕kxy p).
Proof. By induction, we can show that a⊕← kxy p = kp−1ap. Thus, we have that
a⊕← kxy p ⊕ kxy 1 = kp−1ap ⊕ kxy 1 = kkp−1ap.
Sincepisausualprime, byFermat’slittletheorem, wehavekp−1 ≡ 1 (mod p)
and ap ≡ a (mod p). Hence, by the modulo multiplication property, we find
kp−1 · ap ≡ a · 1 (mod p). We can multiply each side by k, thus kkp−1ap ≡
ka (mod p). Since gcd(k,p) = 1, p is prime and kkp−1ap −ka ≡ 0 (mod p),
we can write kkp−1ap − ka = k[kp−1ap − a] = kαp for some α ∈ Z. Since
kαp = α⊕ p then we have that p is a ⊕ -factor of kkp−1ap −ka, hence
we have that kp−1ap ≡ ka (mod ⊕kxy p). Since kkp−1ap = a⊕← kxy p ⊕ kxy 1 and
ka = a⊕ kxy 1 we find that a⊕← kxy p ⊕ kxy 1 ≡ a⊕ kxy 1(mod ⊕kxy p).
We remark that by taking k = 1, the above theorem is reduced to the
statement of Fermat’s little theorem.
In the following theorem we consider a statement where the index of
‘mod’ is the usual multiplication, but where the modulo equation resemble
Fermat’s little theorem.
Theorem 37. Let u,v ∈ Z be such that gcd(p,v) = 1 and u = h(v −1) for
h ∈ Z, if p is a usual prime, then for all k ∈ Z we have that k⊕← ux+vy p ≡
k (mod p).
Proof. By induction we can prove that
k⊕← ux+vy p = uk +vuk+v2uk +...+vp−2uk +vp−1k.
We can rewrite the right side as
and by using the geometric series formula we find
k⊕← ux+vy p = k +vp−1 .
(cid:18) (cid:19)
Hence, by subtracting by k on each side, we have
u(vp−1 −1)
k⊕← ux+vy p −k = k +vp−1 −1 .
(cid:18) (cid:19)
Since u = h(v −1) we find
Since gcd(p,v) = 1 we have by the Fermat’s little theorem that vp−1 −1 is
divisible by p. Hence we conclude that k⊕← ux+vy p ≡ k (mod p).
Euclid’s lemma (i.e.: If p is prime and p divides ab, then p divides a
or p divides b.) is classically used to prove the cancelation law and the
uniqueness of factorization. Some interesting investigations would be to find
the connections between a general Euclid’s lemma and the uniqueness of
factorization.
4 Language of the Generalized Primes
In this section we will see that the generalized primes can act as an interest-
ing and different language for addressing Diophantine problems, Goldbach
type problems and algebraic fields. We will see that this might also lead to
the interpretation of certain problems in the general perspective of category
theory.
4.1 Primes Associated to Multivariate Operations
Definition 38. We will say that f is an n-ary operation over M
if f : Mn → M is a n-ary partial function.
Definition 39. Let f be a n-ary operation, we define the set C of all f-
combinations and occurrences as:
1. If x ∈ M then x ∈ C and we say that x is an occurrence in x,
2. If x ∈ C then f(x ,x ,...,x ) ∈ C and we say that x ,x ,...,x and
i 1 2 n 1 2 n
f(x ,x ,...,x ) are occurrences in f(x ,x ,...,x ) and for all i the oc-
1 2 n 1 2 n
currences in x are also occurrences in f(x ,x ,...,x ).
Definition 40. We say that c ∈ C is an f-representation of m ∈ M if
m = c.
Definition 41. Let m ∈ M, we say that d is a f-factor of m if and only if
d is an occurrence in a representation of m.
Definition 42. We say that u ∈ M is a [f,j]-unit if for all s ∈ M there are
some b ∈ M such that
s = f(b ,b ,...,b ,u,b ,...,b ).
1 2 j−1 j+1 n
Sometimes, we will say that it is an f-unit if it is an [f,j]-unit for any j.
Definition 43. m ∈ M is an f-composite if and only if it is not a [f,j]-unit
for all j and there exists some c ∈ M such that each c is not a [f,j]-unit
and f(c ,c ,...,c ) is an f-factor of m.
Definition 44. m ∈ M is an f-prime if and only if for all j it is not an
[f,j]-unit and it is not an f-composite.
We now want to generalize proposition 24 where we established a corre-
spondence between solutions of Diophantine equations and composites. As
before, we need to define what is a trivial solution.
Definition 45. Let f : Mn → M and g : Mm → M.
1. We say that
(x′,x′,...,x′ ,y′,y′,...,y′ )
1 2 n 1 2 m
is a solution over M of the equation f(x ,x ,...,x ) = g(y ,y ,...,y )
1 2 n 1 2 m
1 2 n 1 2 m
with x′,y′ ∈ M for all i.
2. We say that the solution is trivial in x if for all c ∈ M there are some
indexed b in M such that
c = f(b ,b ,...,b ,x′,b ,...,b ).
1 2 i−1 i i+1 n
Similarly, We say that the solution is trivial in y if for all c ∈ M there
are some indexed b in M such that
c = g(b ,b ,...,b ,y′,b ,...,b ).
1 2 i−1 i i+1 m
Every solution which is nowhere trivial is said to be non-trivial.
We now have a generalization of theorem 23.
Theorem 46. Let f : Mm → M and g : Mm → M. Let C and C be the sets
of f-composite and g-composite respectively. Then, C ∩C 6= ∅ if and only
if the equation f(x ,x ,...,x ) = g(y ,y ,...,y ) has a non-trivial solution
1 2 m 1 2 n
over M.
Proof. (⇒)Takec ∈ C ∩C ,then,sincecis⊕ -compositesand⊕ -composites,
f(a ,a ,...,a ) = c = g(b ,b ,...,b )
1 2 m 1 2 n
where each a ∈ M is not a [f,i]-unit and each b ∈ M is not a [g,i]-unit
which means that
(a ,a ,...,a ,b ,b ,...,b )
1 2 m 1 2 n
is a solution which is nowhere trivial.
(⇐) Conversely, if
f(a ,a ,...,a ) = g(b ,b ,...,b )
1 2 m 1 2 n
suchthatthesolutionoverMisnowheretrivialhencewehavethatf(a ,a ,...,a )
is f-composite and g-composite, thus we have that f(a ,a ,...,a ) ∈ C ∩C
and therefore, C ∩C 6= ∅.
Another waytolookatthisisthatanequationdoesnothave anon-trivial
solution if the sets of primes satisfies a related condition.
Theorem 47. Let f : Mm → M and g : Mm → M. Let P ,P ,U and U be
respectively the sets of f-primes, g-primes, f-units and g-units. Then,
P ∪ P ∪ U ∪ U = M if and only if the equation f(x ,x ,...,x ) =
f g f g 1 2 m
g(y ,y ,...,y ) has no non-trivial solution over M.
Proof. (⇒) Suppose the equation has a non-trivial solution over M, then by
theorem 46, there is a composite number c ∈ C ∩ C . This means that c
cannot be an f-prime or a g-prime, hence we find that P ∪P ∪U ∪U 6= M,
a contradiction.
(⇐) Conversely, suppose there exists some c ∈ M such that c ∈/ P ∪
P ∪U ∪U , then this c must be an f-composite and a g-composite. By the
previous theorem the equation has a non-trivial solution over M, a contra-
diction.
In general, for we will denote the set of primes, units and composites as
follows.
Definition 48. For f : Mm → M, we denote the set of all f-primes by PM,
the set of f-composites by CM and the set of all f-units by UM
Using theorems 46, we can rephrase Fermat’s last theorem as :
If n > 2, then CZ ∩CZ = ∅
Since, for n > 2 there are no trivial solutions of xn + yn and of zn in
the sense that we defined, thus we have that UZ = UZ = ∅. Thus, by
theorem 47, we can also rephrase Fermat’s last theorem as :
If n > 2, then PZ ∪PZ = Z
To be more precise, we would need to indicate that the function xn+yn is
a binary function and that zn is a unary function. We can do this by writing
CZ instead of CZ and by writing instead of CZ . In general, we
[2,xn+xn] xn+yn [1,yn]
will not write the arity of the function when it is the same as the number of
variables or when it is clear by context.
Now, Fermat’s last theorem is stated as a problem about generalized
primes. It is interesting to see that Diophantine problems can be written
as problems about generalized primes and composites. A possible outcome
of this is to solve Diophantine equations by using tools of the theory of
prime numbers such as extensions of Fermat’s little theorem or the tools
surrounding Dirichlet series.
4.2 Goldbach Problems
Let f be a unary function over the positive integers such that f(x) = 2n
with n a fixed positive integer, then we have that CN = {2n} since the
only positive integer which can be written as 2n is 2n itself. Using the same
notation as in the previous section, we can write the Goldbach conjecture as:
If n > 2, then C P x N y ∩CN 6= ∅
Let N be the set of non-negative numbers, then another problem which
can be written as above is the Lagrange four square theorem:
If n ≥ 1, then CN0 ∩C 6= ∅.
x2+x2+x2+x2 n
By extending the concept of primes, we now have many new questions
arising. Some of those questions take the format of the Goldbach conjecture
question. For example, the ⊕N -primes are
{1,3,4,6,7,9,11,12,14,15,19,21,22,23,24,27,...}.
By inspection, we can conjecture the following:
Conjecture 49. Each integer higher or equal to 4 can be written as the sum
of two ⊕ -primes.
In our notation this can be written as:
If n > 1, then C P z 1 2+z 2 2 ∩CN 6= ∅.
We see that the introduction of the generalized primes gives us a whole
new range of questions to consider.
4.3 Algebraically Closed Fields
As seen before, it is possible to consider primes associated to a unary op-
eration. For example, define the unary operation ⊕N as ⊕N a = a2. Thus,
for any integer of the form b2 we have b2 = ⊕N b hence any square is ⊕ -
composite. Note that for unary operations over N there are no units.
If we would be over the real numbers instead of the positive integers, we
would have that every non-negative real is a ⊕R -composite. In this case,
the ⊕R -primes would be all negative reals. Over the complex numbers,
we have that all complex numbers are ⊕C -composite. This point of view
provides another way to approach different types of numbers. In particular,
the integers can be viewed as the ⊕Q-primes, that is, all the rational numbers
which cannot be written as a fraction with y 6= 1. Note that the 1 is a ⊕Q-
right-unit.
It also provides another way to define algebraically closed fields.
Proposition 50. A field F is algebraically closed if and only if for every
polynomial p(x) over F we have that 0 is a ⊕ -composite.
Proof. If F is algebraically closed then for each p(x) there is a root r ∈ F
such that p(r) = 0, but 0 = p(r) = ⊕ r. Thus 0 is ⊕ -composite since
for unary operations there are no units.
Conversely, if for every p(x) we have that 0 is ⊕ -composite, then for
some v ∈ F we have 0 = ⊕ v = p(v), hence F is algebraically closed.
4.4 Diophantine Category
Roughly, elementary number theory can be viewed as the study of integers
and formulas which use the usual arithmetic operations. From this comes
the concept of the usual primes which give rise to useful tools and deep
problems. Since the primes are so fundamental and that we now have a
generalized concept of primes it seems worthwhile to consider the theory
that would arise from a different set of operations over the integers.
It would be quite some work to formally define what is an elementary
number theory associated to a set of operations and it would result in a
restrictive concept. The next best thing seems be to the following.
Definition 51. We will call the core of a number theory a finite or infinite
collection of operations where each operation is of an arbitrary arity and is
over an arbitrary set.
An example of a core is the set of all hyperoperations ⊕ for j ∈ N.
Here each higher operation depend on the previous, but we do not ask for
this condition in every core. A reason is that if we want to study a certain
equation consisting of unrelated operations we can still define a core out of
those operations and investigate the number theory surrounding that core
which could give us interesting insights into the equation.
As seen previously, it is possible to associate to each operation⊕ a single
set of ⊕ -primes and of ⊕ -composites. Conversely, we could choose a subset
of the positive integers and find an operator associated to it, but it need not
be unique. For example, take the operator ⊕M defined as 2⊕M d = 3 for all
d ∈ M and b⊕M c = 2 for all b,c ∈ M such that b 6= 2, then only 2 and 3
are composites. If we define the operator ⊕M as 3 ⊕M d = 2 for all d ∈ M
and b⊕M c = 3 for all b,c ∈ M such that b 6= 3, then also only 2 and 3 are
composites. This means that we can define two different operators for the set
of composites {2,3}. It would be interesting to find if for some subset of the
positive integers there is a unique operation (of a certain type) associated to
the subset.
In the following, we briefly consider the context of category theory. For
details regarding category theory, [10] is the definitive introduction. If we
choose a core, to each operation ⊕ of the core we can associate the set C of
all ⊕ -composites. Collecting all those sets and ordering them by inclusions,
we build a composites core category, which is actually a poset category, where
theobjectsarethesetsof⊕ -compositesandthearrowsarethesetinclusions.
In a similar manner, we define the primes core category and the units core
category.
We could now study Diophantine equations by using categorical tools.
For example, in the previous section, we saw that the intersection of com-
posite sets C ∩C gives us information about the solutions of the associated
diophantine equation. From a categorical point of view this intersection is
equivalent tothepullbackC × C . Furthermore, wenowhavethepossi-
bility to investigate the functors between core categories which could be built
from different classes of operations such as linear or quadratic operations.
Definition 52. Let D be a core composed of all polynomials over Z, we will
call its composite core category the composites diophantine category. In a
similar manner, we define the primes diophantine category and the units
diophantine category.
InanyDiophantinecategory, itisinterestingtonoticethatZisconsidered
to be a terminal object because there is a unique arrow, or set inclusion,
between any subset of Z and Z. Note that in the composites diophantine
category, for each fixed h ∈ Z, we have that CZ is a terminal object since
CZ = Z. This is because any integer n can be written as n = ⊕Z n−h.
Similarly, a terminal object in the units diophantine category is given by
UZ = Z for each k ∈ Z.
5 Conclusion
Primes have often been seen as mysterious entities and have fascinated many.
The generalization of primes has been approached through algebra and al-
gebraic geometry. As seen above, another way to generalize the concept of
primes is through the operations themselves. Perhaps that this point of view
can eventually be used to include the algebraic view or vice versa.
Regarding the topics presented here, we see that there seem to be many
interesting discoveries to be uncovered. One objective is to find a fully gen-
eralized ‘fundamental theorem of hyperarithmetic’. We have seen that the
‘hyperarithmetics’ presented in 2.2 can be seen as a core. A step further
would be to find the fundamental theorem associated to an arbitrary core.
A good understanding of algebraic relations will be needed since generalized
distributivity and exponential laws will probably be needed for the proof of
such a general theorem.
A second objective is to clarify the links between Diophantine equations,
generalized primes and the theory of Dirichlet series. It would be quite
remarkable to move freely between each of these domains, where a problem
in one of these domains can be solved in the language of the other two. It is
still unclear what will be the input of category theory, but one can hope that
its general perspective will help answer deep questions in number theory.