ESAIM: PROCEEDINGS, Vol. ?, 2021, 1-10
Editors: Willbesetbythepublisher
NUMERICAL METHODS IN THE CONTEXT OF COMPARTMENTAL MODELS
IN EPIDEMIOLOGY
Peter Kratz1, Etienne Pardoux1 and Brice Samegni Kepgnou1
Abstract. Weconsidercompartmentalmodelsinepidemiology. Forthestudyofthedivergenceofthe
stochasticmodelfromitscorrespondingdeterministiclimit(i.e.,thesolutionofanODE)forlongtime
horizon, a large deviations principle suggests a thorough numerical analysis of the two models. The
aim of this paper is to present three such motivated numerical works. We first compute the solution
of the ODE model by means of a non-standard finite difference scheme. Next we solve a constraint
optimizationproblemviadiscrete-timedynamicprogramming: thisenablesustocomputetheleading
terminthelargedeviationsprincipleofthetimeofextinctionofagivendisease. Finally,weapplythe
τ-leaping algorithm to the stochastic model in order to simulate its solution efficiently. We illustrate
these numerical methods by applying them to two examples.
R´esum´e. On consid`ere des mod`eles comportementaux en ´epid´emiologie. Afin d’´etudier l’´ecart en
temps long entre le mod`ele stochastique et sa limite loi des grands nombres (qui est la solution d’une
EDO),onsebasesurunprincipedesgrandesda´viations,quinousconduita`menerune´etudenum´erique
desdeuxmod`eles,surtroisaspectsdiff´erents. Toutd’abord,nouscalculonsunesolutionapproch´eede
l’EDO a` l’aide d’une m´ethode num´erique dite “non–standard”. Ensuite une r´esolvons num´eriquement
un probl`eme de controˆle sous contrainte, afin de calculer le terme principal des grandes d´eviations
du temps de sortie d’une situation end´emique. Enfin nous mettons en oeuvre l’algorithme du “τ–
leaping”poursimulerefficacementlasolutiondusyst`emestochastique. Nousillustronscessimulations
num´eriques en les appliquant a` deux exemples.
Introduction
It is well-known that deterministic ODE models of population dynamics (such as the evolution of diseases)
are not appropriate for small population sizes N (i.e., N <103,106). Recently, it has been shown (see [1]) that
insomecasestheODEmodelscandivergefromthecorrespondingstochasticmodelsevenforlargerpopulation
sizes (N >106).
We consider the “natural” stochastic extensions for many compartmental ODE models in epidemiology:
individual based Poisson driven models. The ODE models can be recovered from these models as the law
of large numbers limit as the population size N approaches infinity. Hence, the deterministic model can be
consideredanappropriatefirstapproximationofthestochasticmodelforlargeN. Whilethedynamicsofmany
oftheunderlyingdeterministicmodelsarewell-understood, theanalysisofthecorrespondingstochasticmodels
is often difficult.
We are interested in the long-term behavior of the epidemic process. For many deterministic models, the
disease will finally either die out or become endemic, depending on the parameter choice and/or the initial
1Aix-MarseilleUniversit´e,CNRS,CentraleMarseille,I2M,UMR737313453Marseille,France;e-mail:kratz@mathematik.hu-berlin.de;
etienne.pardoux@univ-amu.fr; skbrice@yahoo.fr
©EDPSciences,SMAI2021
1v54630.1051:viXra
2 ESAIM:PROCEEDINGS
sizes of the compartments, i.e., the solution of the ODE converges to an asymptotically stable equilibrium.
The theory of Large Deviations (also called the large deviations principle (LDP)) allows us to quantify the
time taken by the stochastic model to diverge significantly from its deterministic limit. In particular, one can
compute asymptotically, for large N, the expected time which is needed to transfer the epidemic process from
the domain of attraction of one equilibrium to the one of another equilibrium. For the simplest models, this
helps,e.g.,toanswerthequestionofwhenanepidemicbecomesextinctalthoughitshouldbeendemicaccording
to the deterministic approximation. Particularly interesting cases are epidemiological models where the ODE
has several stable equilibria (usually a disease-free equilibrium and an endemic equilibrium as, e.g., in [2,3]).
The remainder of this article is structured as follows. In section 1, we formulate stochastic and deterministic
compartmental models and introduce two specific models which we analyze throughout this article by means of
numericalmethods(section1.1). Wefurthermoredescribehowthetimeofexitfromthedomainofattractionof
a stable equilibrium can be computed (section 1.2). This motivates three different numerical projects which we
outlineinsection1.3. Weaddressthesequestionsinsections2-4asfollows. Firstweapplyanon-standardfinite
difference scheme due to [4] in order to compute the solution of the deterministic model numerically. Second,
in section 3, by solving a control problem via dynamic programming, we compute the leading coefficient in the
large deviations analysis of the time of exit τN by the solution of the SDE from the domain of attraction of a
locally stable equilibrium of the ODE. Finally, we simulate the stochastic process using the so-called τ-leaping
algorithm.
1. Compartmental models in epidemiology
1.1. Stochastic and deterministic models
We consider diseases in large populations of (initially) N individuals which are split up into different groups
(or compartments) according to the disease status of the individuals. Such groups are, e.g., the group of
individuals susceptible to the disease, the group of infectious individuals and the group of immune individuals.
In order to better compare the population dynamics for different values of N, we normalize the compartment
sizes by dividing by N; instead of considering the number of individuals in the different groups, we hence
rather consider their “proportions” with respect to the total size of the population (note that for models with
non-constant population size, these are only initially truly proportions).
ForaclosedsetA⊂Rd,wedefinethed-dimensionaljumpprocessZN viaasetofk jumpdirectionsh ∈Zd
and respective Poisson rates β (z), j =1,...,k; ZN(t) denotes the “proportion” of individuals in compartment
i=1,...,d at time t≥0:
1 (cid:88) k (cid:16)(cid:90) t (cid:17)
(cid:90) t (cid:88) k 1 (cid:88) k (cid:16)(cid:90) t (cid:17)
j j N j j j
0 j=1 j=1 0
here x ∈ A, (P ) are i.i.d. standard Poisson processes and M (t) = P (t)−t, j = 1,...,k, are the
j j=1,...,k j j
associated martingales. The jump directions h and their respective rates are chosen in such a way that
ZN(t)∈A almost surely for all t.
The dynamics of the deterministic model corresponding to the stochastic process in (1) are given by the
solution of the following ODE:
(cid:90) t k
ESAIM:PROCEEDINGS 3
The two models are connected via a Law of Large Numbers (LLN) (see [5]): if the rates β are Lipschitz
continuous, we have
lim ZN,x(t)=Zx(t) a.s. uniformly on compact time intervals [0,T]. (3)
Note also that in the case of Lipschitz continuous rates, equation (2) admits a unique solution on [0,T].
Example 1.1. SIS model. WefirstconsiderasimpleSISmodelwithoutdemography(S(t)beingthenumber
of susceptible individuals and I(t) = N −S(t) the number of infectious individuals at time t) . For β > 0,
we assume that the rate of infections is βS(t)I(t)/N.1 In a similar way, we assume for γ > 0 that the rate
of recoveries is γI(t). We ignore immunity due to earlier infection and assume that an infectious individual
becomes susceptible after recovery. As population size is constant, we can reduce the dimension of the model
by solely considering the proportion of infectious at time t, that is d = 1 and Z = I . Using the notation of
equations (1) and (2), we have
ItiseasytoseethattheODE(2)hasadiseasefreeequilibriumx¯=0. Thisequilibriumisasymptoticallystable
if R =β/γ <1.2 If R >1, x¯ is unstable and there exists a second, endemic equilibrium x∗ =1−γ/β which
is asymptotically stable. While in the deterministic model the proportion of infectious individuals converges to
the endemic equilibrium x∗, the disease goes ultimately extinct in the stochastic model.
Example 1.2. A model with vaccination. We consider a (deterministic) model with vaccination and
demography described in [2] and its stochastic counterpart. We illustrate the different transitions in Figure 1;
here, S and I denote the number of susceptible respectively infectious individuals as before and V denotes the
numberofvaccinatedindividuals. Weassumethatindividualsarevaccinatedatacertainratebutcanlosetheir
protection again; the vaccine is not perfect but decreases the rate of infection by a factor σ ∈ [0,1]: if σ = 1,
the vaccine is useless, if σ = 0 it protects the individuals perfectly. Furthermore, we assume that individuals
are born susceptible and die (at the same rate) independently of their disease status. This ensures that the
population size remains constant in the deterministic model. For simplicity, we ensure constant population size
by synchronizing births and deaths in the stochastic model. Hence, we can again reduce the dimension of the
models; thefirstcoordinateoftheprocessdenotestheproportionofinfectiveindividuals,thesecondcoordinate
denotes the proportion of vaccinated individuals. Using the notations of equations (1) and (2), we obtain
1 1 1 1 2 2 2 1 2
3 3 1 4 4 2 5 5 1 2
6 6 1 7 7 2
The basic reproduction number of this model is given by
β µ+θ+ση β
R = , R˜ := ;
here, R˜ denotes the basic reproduction number without vaccination, i.e., V(0)=0 and φ=0 (see [2]). There
exists a disease-free equilibrium x¯ (x¯ =0) which is asymptotically stable for R <1 and unstable for R˜ >1.
1Thereasoningbehindthisisthefollowing. Eachindividual(inparticulareachinfectedindividual)meetsotherindividualsat
rateα. TheprobabilitythattheencounteriswithasusceptibleisS(t)/N. Denotebyptheprobabilitythatsuchaneventyields
anewinfection. HencethetotalrateofnewinfectionsisβS(t)I(t)/N,ifβ=pα.
2R0 istheso-calledbasic reproduction number. Itdenotestheaveragenumberofsecondarycasesinfectedbyoneprimarycase
duringitsinfectiousperiod,atthestartoftheepidemic.
4 ESAIM:PROCEEDINGS
µN (cid:45) βSI/N (cid:45)
(birth rate) (infection rate) µI (cid:45)
(cid:27)µS (cid:27)γI
(death rate) (recovery rate)
(cid:83) (cid:19)(cid:55)
(cid:83)(cid:111) (cid:19)
(cid:83) (cid:83)θV (cid:19)
ηS (cid:83) (cid:83) (cid:83)(loss of vaccination) (cid:19)σβVI/N (σ∈[0,1])
(vaccination rate) (cid:83) (cid:83) (cid:19) (infection of vaccinated)
(cid:83) V
(cid:83)(cid:119) (cid:19) µV(cid:45)
Figure 1. Schematic representation of the disease transmission for the model with vaccination by [2].
ForR <1<R˜ (andadditionalassumptionsontheparameters,see[2]again),twoendemicequilibriax∗ andx˜
(x∗,x˜ >0) exist: one (say x∗) is locally asymptotically stable and one is unstable; the disease-free equilibrium
is locally asymptotically stable.
1.2. Large deviations
Inordertoquantifythedeviationofthestochasticmodelfromthedeterministicmodel, anLDPisdesirable.
For the models we have in mind (cf. Examples 1.1 and 1.2), some of the rates β : A → R tend to zero as x
approaches the boundary of A (this ensures that the process does not leave the domain A). For this reason,
general results for LDPs for Markov jump processes (see [6–8]) do not apply. [9] provides a large deviations
principle which allows for such diminishing rates; however, their assumptions do often not apply to the more
complicated models in epidemiology.3 [10] provides an LDP on the space D([0,T];A)4 for a large class of
epidemiological models with compact domain A by generalyzing the results from [9]; the rate function I of
the LDP is given as follows:5
(cid:40)(cid:82)T
L(φ(t),φ(cid:48)(t))dt if φ is absolutely continuous and φ(0)=x
where L denotes the Legendre-Fenchel transform:
L(x,y):= sup (cid:96)(p,x,y) (4)
(cid:96)(p,x,y)=(cid:104)p,y(cid:105)− β (x)(e(cid:104)p,hj(cid:105)−1).
By [9], we have that
I (φ)=0 if and only if φ solves the ODE (2). (5)
We interpret I (φ) as the action required to follow a trajectory φ, or in other words the action required to
deviate from the solution of the ODE.
3Theassumptionsin[9]applytotheSISmodel(Example1.1)butnottothemodelwithvaccinationinExample1.2.
4Here, D([0,T];A) denotes the space of c`adl`ag functions on [0,T] with domain A equipped with an appropriate metric such
thattheresultingspaceisPolish(see,e.g.,[11]).
5See,e.g.,[12]foranintroductiontothetheoryoflargedeviationsandadefinitionoftheratefunction.
ESAIM:PROCEEDINGS 5
We are particularly interested in the Freidlin-Wentzell theory (see, e.g., [12,13]). First, we want to compute
thetime τN,x atwhichtheprocessZN,x leavesthedomainofattractionofanasymptoticallystableequilibrium
In the case of the SIS model (and R >1) we consider the set O =(0,1]; for the model with vaccination (and
appropriate parameter choice, in particular R <1<R˜ ), we consider the set
In other words, we are interested in time of extinction of the disease7 which should eventually become endemic
according to the deterministic model.
If A is compact, it can be deduced from the LDP that for all δ >0,
where V¯ is given by the solution of the following optimization problem:
Second, we are interested in the place, where ZN leaves the domain O. Although existing Freidlin-Wentzell
theory cannot be applied to the epidemiological models in Examples 1.1 and 1.2, we strongly believe that the
following holds (see [12,13] again for corresponding results for other processes): for any compact set C ⊂
lim P(cid:2) ZN,x(τN,x)∈C (cid:3) =0.
In particular, if there exits a z∗ ∈∂O∩(A\O) with V(x∗,z∗)<V(x∗,z) for all other z ∈∂O∩(A\O), then
for all δ >0,
1.3. Research questions
In order to better understand the differences between deterministic and stochastic compartmental models
in epidemiology, the theoretical results above suggest a thorough numerical analysis of the specific models of
Examples 1.1 and 1.2. In the remainder of this article, we address the following questions.
1. In order to analyze the deviation of the stochastic model from its Law of Large Numbers limit, we first
have to compute the solution of the deterministic models in a reliable way in section 2. In order to
avoid instabilities of the solution (such as components becoming negative), we apply a non-standard
finite difference scheme developed in [4].
6Wewanttoremarkherethatwecannotconsidertheexitfromthedomainofattractionofthedisease-freeequilibriumx¯,i.e.,
ThereasonforthisisthattheabsorbingsetA˜={z∈A|z1=0}(wherez1 isthefirstcoordinateofz)cannotbeleftbothbythe
solutionoftheODEandbythesolutionoftheSDE.
7Respectively in the time when the process is no longer attracted by the endemic equilibrium and hence the probability of
extinctionissignificantlyincreased,cf.theLLN,equation(3).
6 ESAIM:PROCEEDINGS
2. Thecomputationofthetime(andplace)ofexitfromdomaindependsonthesolutionoftheoptimization
problem (7). We use dynamic programming to solve the optimization problem numerically and hence
deduce the results about the time of exit according to (6) in section 3.
3. Finally,wesimulatetheprocessZN insection4. Itisnotdifficulttosimulatetheprocessinanexactway
by using Gillespie’s stochastic simulation algorithm (SSA) (see, e.g., [14,15]). However, the simulation
is rather slow as soon as N becomes large, and we hence adapt the τ-leaping algorithm (see, e.g., [16]).
2. Computation of the solution of the ODE
Thelargedeviationstheorywilltellusaboutthedeviationsbetweenthelong–termbehaviorsofthesolution
of the SDE and of its ODE LLN limit. Hence we are interested in the long-term behavior of the deterministic
epidemiological models described by equation (2). Consequently we need a numerical scheme to compute the
solution of the ODE (2) in a “reliable” way. By reliable, we mean in particular that the fixed points of the
solution of the (discrete) numerical scheme are the same as the equilibria of the ODE (with the same local
stability), which forces the long time bahavior of the numerical scheme to resemble that of the solution of the
ODE.ExplicitfinitedifferenceschemesforthesolutionofODEscanhaveundesirableinstabilities. Insection2.2
below, we consider the SIS model from Example 1.1 and illustrate that the solution of such a scheme can be
oscillating around zero (and in particular become negative) if the parameters (particularly the step-size h) are
notchosenwithgreatcare. Forthisreason,weapplyanon-standardfinitedifference(NSFD)methodformodels
inepidemiologywhichrespectsthequalitativebehaviorofthesolutionoftheODE(see[4]). ThisNSFDmethod
follows two basic rules for NSFD methods (for a detailed description of the NSFD method see, e.g., [17,18]).
First, quadratic terms of the ODE are approximated in a non-local way (by mixed explicit/implicit terms).
Second, non-trivial denominator functions are used for the discrete derivatives.
The remainder of this section is structured as follows. In section 2.1, we describe the specific NSFD method
for epidemiological models from [4] and outline in which sense the qualitative long-term behavior of the ODE
is respected. In section 2.2, we apply the method to the SIS model (Example 1.1) and compare it to the
corresponding explicit scheme. Finally, we apply the method to the model with vaccination (Example 1.2)
and compute the boundary separating the domains of attraction of the stable endemic equilibrium and the
disease-free equilibrium.
2.1. A NSFD method for epidemiological models
We consider deterministic models for which the ODE (2) can be rewritten in the following form
where A(Z) = (a (Z)) ∈ Rd×d is a non-linear Metzler matrix8 and f ∈ Rd; usually, f represents the
i,j i,j=1,...,d
rates of birth and immigration into the different compartments (if they exist, cf. Example 1.2).
Wefollow[4]anddiscretizetimebyfixingthetimesteph>0;wewritet =mhform∈Nandapproximate
the solution Z of the ODE (9) at the discrete time points t by the solution Z˜ of the following implicit NSFD
scheme (i.e., Z˜m ≈Z(t )):
Z˜ i m+1−Z˜ i m = (cid:88) d a (Z˜m)Z˜m+1+f (i=1,...,d), Z˜0 =x;
ψ(h) i,j j i
the denominator function ψ is specified below and satisfies ψ(h) = h+o(h2). We first note that this scheme
can equivalently be written as
8AMetzlermatrixisamatrixA=(ai,j)
i,j=1...,d
whichsatisfiesai,j ≥0fori(cid:54)=j.
ESAIM:PROCEEDINGS 7
(I−ψ(h)A(Z˜m))isanM-matrix9andhenceinvertible(see[4]). Forthedefinitionofthedenominatorfunction,
we assume that all equilibria of the ODE (9) are hyperbolic. With ϕ:R→R satisfying ϕ(h)=h+o(h2) and
Q 2|Re(λ)|
wherethemaximumistakenovertheeigenvaluesλoftheJacobianoftherighthandsideof (9)attheequilibrium
points. In particular, we have ψ(h)=h+o(h2) as desired.
The NSFD scheme (10) is elementary stable in the sense that it has exactly the same fixed points as the
continuous ODE (2) it approximates, with the same local stability for all values of h (see [4]). In addition, it
can be ensured that the components of the solution of the scheme remain positive by choosing h and hence
φ(h) small enough (see [4] again). For the examples we consider, the solution of the scheme always stays in the
“natural domain” of the solution of the ODE (2).
2.2. The SIS model
For the SIS model of Example 1.1, the ODE (2) becomes
(cid:90) t (cid:90) t
recall that in this case Z(t) denotes the number of infectious individuals at time t. This is a Riccati differential
equation with constant coefficients which admits an explicit solution:
x else.
We nevertheless compute the solution of the ODE (12) numerically by a standard (explicit) difference scheme
and by the NSFD scheme introduced in section 2.1 in order to illustrate possible instabilities of the explicit
scheme.
Let us first consider the following explicit scheme:
or equivalently
We note that if, e.g., β = 1/h and γ = 2/h, Z˜m < 0 for all m ≥ 1 which is obviously undesirable. If, e.g.,
β = 1/h and γ = 4/h, the solution is oscillating around zero with Z˜m < 0 for m odd and Z˜m > 0 for m even.
We illustrate the solution for the latter case in the left picture of Figure 2.
Let us now apply the NSFD scheme to the model. We represent the ODE in the form (9) by setting
A(Z)=−βZ+β−γ anddefinethedenominatorfunctionψaccordingtoequation(11)(forϕ(z)=1−exp(−z)).
Thesolutiondoesnotsufferfromthesameinstabilitiesasthesolutionoftheexplicitschemeasillustratedinthe
middlepictureofFigure2. WecomparethesolutionsofthetwoschemeswiththeexactsolutionoftheODEas
given in equation (13) (right picture of Figure 2). We want to remark here that the NSFD scheme is of course
by no means the only possible scheme which avoids instabilities in this simple case. However, [4] provides us
with a theoretical basis which ensures that instabilities do not occur even for much more complicated models.
9AnM-matrixisamatrixAwithai,j ≤0fori(cid:54)=j whichisinvertiblesuchthatallentriesofitsinversearenon-negative.
8 ESAIM:PROCEEDINGS
Figure2. Theleftpicturedenotesthesolutionoftheexplicitfinitedifferencescheme(14). The
middle picture denotes the solution of the NSFD scheme. The right picture denotes the exact
solution of the ODE according to equation (13). Z(0) = 0.3, T = 4, h = 0.1, β = 4/h = 40,
γ = 2/h = 20. We choose here a large step size h on purpose, to show how the two schemes
behave for large step size. Of course, both improve if we reduce h.
2.3. The model with vaccination
We now consider the model with vaccination from Example 1.2. We denote the proportions of susceptible,
vaccinated and infectious individuals at time t by Z (t), Z (t) and Z (t)=1−Z (t)−Z (t), respectively. Note
that we cannot reduce the dimension from three to two if we want to represent the ODE in the form (9) (with
appropriate Metzler matrix A). We set
and choose the denominator function ψ according to equation (11) for ϕ(z)=1−exp(−z). We readily observe
that the relevant assumptions for the NSFD scheme are satisfied and apply the scheme for time step h = 0.1
to different initial values Z(0) and a set of parameters (cf. Figure 3) such that there exists a stable disease-
free equilibrium (x¯ = (0.14,0.86,0)(cid:62)), a stable endemic equilibrium (x∗ = (0.24,0.45,0.31)(cid:62)) and an unstable
endemic equilibrium (x˜ = (0.23,0.59,0.18)(cid:62); cf. the corresponding discussion in Example 1.2). We illustrate
the evolution of the proportions of vaccinated and infectious individuals for different initial values in Figure 3.
While the disease eventually dies out in the left picture, it becomes endemic in the right picture.
The NSFD scheme also allows us to approximately compute the characteristic boundary, i.e., the boundary
separating the domains of attractions of the two stable equilibria x¯ and x∗ (in other words: the set of points
for which the solution of the ODE converges to the unstable equilibrium x˜). We illustrate the characteristic
boundary in Figure 4.
3. Computation of V ¯
In order to answer the question of when the disease dies out, we have to compute the quantity V¯ (cf. equa-
tions (6) and (7)). In other words, we have to solve a control problem. We first fix the time horizon T > 0.
We recall that we only have to consider absolutely continuous trajectories (as else I (φ)=∞) and hence we
control the trajectory φ via its “derivative”; for t∈[0,T), s∈[t,T] and an integrable function α, we write
(cid:90) s
ESAIM:PROCEEDINGS 9
Figure 3. Evolutionoftheproportionsofvaccinatedindividuals(dashedlines)andinfectious
individuals (solid lines) for initial values Z (0)=0.5, Z (0) = 0.05 (left picture) respectively
Z (0)=0.5, Z (0) = 0.2 (right picture). T = 600, β = 3.6, γ = 1, η = 0.3, θ = 0.02, µ = 0.03,
σ =0.1.
Figure 4. Thecharacteristicboundaryseparatingthedomainsofattractionsofx¯=(0,0.86)(cid:62)
(on the left) and x∗ =(0.31,0.45)(cid:62) (on the right). The unstable equilibrium x˜=(0.18,0.59)(cid:62)
is on the characteristic boundary. Note the slight abuse of notation due to the reduction from
dimension three to two. The parameters are as in Figure 3.
for x∈O, we define the set of admissible controls starting from (t,x) by
(cid:110) (cid:12) (cid:90) s (cid:90) T (cid:111)
The cost of an admissible control α starting from (t,x) is given by
(cid:90) T
10 ESAIM:PROCEEDINGS
and thus the value function of the optimization problem becomes (t∈[0,T))
0 if x(cid:54)∈O
∞ else.
The value function thus has a singularity at the terminal time T which is due to the constraint φ(T)(cid:54)∈O. For
the models we have in mind (cf. Examples 1.1 and 1.2), it is possible to move on ∂O∩(A\O) by following the
solution of the ODE (2) (which is free of cost, cf. (5)).10 For this reason, we have vT(t,x)≤vT˜(t,x) for T˜ <T
and therefore
We want to remark here that any admissible control α with φα(T) (cid:54)∈ (A\O)∩∂O (cf. (5) again) cannot be
optimal. Therefore, it would be equivalent to require the weaker restriction x+ α(r)dr ∈A for s∈[0,T] in
equation (15).
In the following, we describe a discrete dynamic programming algorithm for the numerical approximation
of V¯ (section 3.1) and apply this algorithm to the models from Example 1.1 (section 3.2) and Example 1.2
(section 3.3).
3.1. Approximation by discrete-time dynamic programming
In order to numerically compute the solution of the optimization problem (16), we apply discrete-time
dynamic programming. To this end, we discretize time and consider n+1 (n∈N) equidistant time points
0=t <···<t =T, i.e., tn =t =m∆t for ∆t= .
For j =0,...,n−1 let α˜ =(α˜(t )) , where α˜(t )∈Rd. We consider piecewise constant trajectories
m m=j,...,n−1 m
and define recursively for x∈O,
j j m+1 m m
We define the set of admissible controls by
(cid:110) (cid:12) (cid:111)
j (cid:12) m n
The cost of an admissible control α˜ ∈A˜T,n(t ,x) is given by
and the value function is given by
v˜T,n(t ,x):= inf J˜T,n(t ,x,α˜). (17)
10FortheSISmodel,wehave∂O∩(A\O)={0}. Forthemodelwithvaccination,wehave
(recallthatx˜istheunstableendemicequilibrium).
ESAIM:PROCEEDINGS 11
The constraint implies that
Furthermore, for j <n−1, the dynamic programming principle implies the following Bellman equation:
(cid:110) (cid:111)
Hence the solution of the optimization problem can be computed backward in time.
Weneednexttodiscretizespace. NotealsothatintheSISmodel,thefunctionalLisexplicitlyknown,while
this is not the case in the vaccination model. For that reason we now distinguish between the two cases.
3.2. The SIS model
We discretize space via a grid of the set A = [0,1] with fineness ∆x = 1/n¯, for some new integer n¯. Hence
the grid points are given by
xi :=i∆x for i=0,...,n¯.
Given a function f which is only defined on the grid points, we define values of the function for arbitrary
x∈A by its linear interpolation f . In other words, we obtain for x∈A,
(cid:88) (cid:110) (cid:111)
We obtain the following (backward in time) algorithm for the solution of the optimization problem (17).
1. For x on the grid,
We denote the solution of this minimization problem by α˜∗(t )=α˜∗(t ,x).
2. For m<n−1, x on the grid,
(cid:110) (cid:111)
We denote the solution of this minimization problem by α˜∗(t )=α˜∗(t ,x).
Note that this algorithm involves the solution of n×n¯ minimization problems. We recover an approximation
φ˜∗ = (φ∗(t )) of the optimal trajectory starting from the stable equilibrium x∗, by the following
m m=0,...,n
procedure (including another linear interpolation).
3. For m=0,...,n−1,
0 m+1 m int m m
Itiswell-knownthatunderappropriateassumptions,thesolutionofthisprocedureconvergestothesolution
of the optimization problem (16) (see, e.g., [19,20]); the optimal coupling of time and space discretization is
∆t = ∆x. We want to remark here that standard assumptions do not apply to our model. For instance, the
function L is not Lipschitz continuous, even L(x,y)→∞ for x→∂A is possible.11 Furthermore, the terminal
11Thisise.g. thecasefory<0andx→0. Notehoweverthattheactionrequiredtoapproachtheboundary,e.g.,atconstant
speedoneisfiniteandwehave
(cid:82)tL(t−s,−1)ds→0ast→0.
12 ESAIM:PROCEEDINGS
Figure 5. Optimaltrajectoryφ˜∗ forT =5(leftpicture), T =20(middlepicture)andT =60
(right picture); ∆t=∆x= 1 , β =1.5 and γ =1.
constraint results in a singularity of the value function at terminal time T. We are not aware of any analytical
results including our set–up. We nevertheless have reasons to believe that
V¯ ≈v¯T,n,n¯(t ,x∗) for large enough T.
It is not in the scope of this article to provide a thorough analytical proof of the convergence of the algorithm.
We readily observe that for the SIS model, the Legendre-Fenchel transform is given explicitly by
(cid:16)1 (cid:17)
θ˜:= .
Furthermore, the boundary consists of the single point {0}; hence equation (18) becomes
We consider the following parameters: β = 1.5, γ = 1; in particular, we have R = 1.5 > 1 and the endemic
equilibrium x∗ = 1/3 is stable. We apply the dynamic programming algorithm described in section 3.1 with
∆t=∆x=1/100 and T =5,10,20,40,60 (i.e., n¯ =100 and n=500,1000,2000,4000,6000). We obtain
v5,n,n¯(t ,x∗)=0.0953, v10,n,n¯(t ,x∗)=0.0757, v20,n,n¯(t ,x∗)=0.0705,
int 0 int 0 int 0
v40,n,n¯(t ,x∗)=0.0702, v60,n,n¯(t ,x∗)=0.0702.
int 0 int 0
We hence deduce that V¯ ≈0.0702 and thus E[τN,x]≈exp(0.0702N) for large N. We illustrate the solution of
the optimization problem in Figure 5 for T =5,20,60. We observe that it is the cheapest to move slowly near
the stable equilibria x∗ and the unstable equilibrium x¯=0.
3.3. The model with vaccination
Unlike in section 3.2, the place of exit from O is a priori not clear for the model with vaccination (cf. Exam-
ple 1.2). It seems plausible that it is cheapest to exit O at the unstable endemic equilibrium x˜. Indeed, if T
is chosen large enough, an optimal (or near optimal) trajectory φ can move on the boundary towards x˜ after
the exit time without generating any extra cost (cf. (5)); in this case we have lim φ(t)=x˜. Hence, we can
assumethatx˜isindeedtheplaceofexitforthenumericalcomputationofV¯. Therefore,equation(18)becomes
ESAIM:PROCEEDINGS 13
However, the Legendre-Fenchel transform L cannot be computed explicitly. Here we use the following defi-
nition of L, which is equivalent to (4) (see [10]):
inf (cid:96)˜(µ,x) if B (cid:54)=∅
L(x,y):= µ∈Bx,y x,y
where for µ∈B ,
j j j βj(x)
(cid:110) (cid:88) (cid:111)
B := µ∈Rk|µ >0 only if β (x)>0 and y = µ h .
x,y + j j j j
Since we seek to minimize
(cid:90) T
our discretized dynamic programming equation reads: for each x∈G (the space grid),
(cid:110) (cid:18) x(cid:48)−x (cid:19) (cid:111)
v(t ,x)= inf L x, ∆t+v(t ,x(cid:48))
k x(cid:48)∈G ∆t k+1
(cid:110) (cid:111)
x(cid:48)∈G
where µˆ(x,x(cid:48)) is the argument which realizes the following minimum
µjhj=x(cid:48)
Note that here we avoid to consider interpolation between points on the grid. We have implemented this
algorithm on a grid whose one of the axis is the line passing through x∗ and x˜, with the following values of the
parameters : β =3.6, θ =0.02, µ=0.03, η =0.3, σ =0.1 and γ =1.
The approximation of V¯ which we have found is 0.3891, with ∆t = 0.05, and the ∆x = ∆x = 0.005.
This means that E[τN,x∗] ≈ exp(0.3891N) for large N. Note that if ∆t is not small enough compared to ∆x,
since we restrict the above minimization to x(cid:48) ∈ G, we cannot allow small speed, and we get larger values of
V¯. We expect that more accurate results could be obtained, by doing the minimization over x(cid:48) on a finer grid,
which necessitates to interpolate v(t ,·) between points on the grid. We have not been able to implement
this refinement, by lack of time. This will be done in the future. It should improve the numerical estimate of
V¯. The above quantity should be considered as an upper bound of the true value.
4. Simulation of ZN
In this section, we describe known exact and approximate simulation methods for the simulation of the
solutionZN ofequation(1). Tothisend,wefixN;withthenotationsν = hj anda (z)=Nβ (z),equation(1)
can be rewritten as
(cid:88) k (cid:16)(cid:90) t (cid:17)
14 ESAIM:PROCEEDINGS
Note that our ultimate goal would be to simulate the value of τN which, from the above Large Deviations
results, is huge, as soon as N is large. This may be seen as impossible. However, this is similar to the problem
of rare event simulation, for which there exist specific techniques, which we intend to implement in the future.
See also the discussion below in section 4.7.2. In the framework of this paper, we present some preliminary
numerical work, which aims only at simulating the stochastic process ZN over a given finite time horizon.
In the following, we first introduce the so-called stochastic simulation algorithm (SSA) proposed in [14,15]
(section 4.1). The SSA allows for the exact simulation of the process ZN. Unfortunately, this algorithm is
rather slow in some circumstances, typically when there are too many jumps of the Poisson processes on a
fixed time interval. Therefore, we discuss faster approximate simulation methods in the subsequent sections: in
section4.2, weintroducetheexplicitτ-leapingalgorithm(see[16])intheformof[21]; insection4.3, wediscuss
modifications of the τ-leaping algorithm: implicit and mid-point τ-leaping (section 4.3.1) and the algorithm
from [22] which ensures that the simulated process remains in its domain, e.g., by preventing the components
of the process from becoming negative (section 4.3.2). We apply the SSA and the modified τ-leaping algorithm
from section 4.3.1 to the specific models from Examples 1.1 and 1.2 in sections 4.4 and 4.5, respectively. We
conclude by addressing open research questions concerning the simulation of the process ZN in section 4.7.
4.1. The stochastic simulation algorithm
A mathematically exact procedure for simulating the evolution of the process ZN given by equation (19) is
the stochastic simulation algorithm (SSA) first proposed in [14,15]. The SSA changes the value of the solution
at each jump time of one of the Poisson processes. The simplest implementation of the SSA is the so-called
direct method:
Whenever t<T:
1. While in state z at time t, evaluate all functions a (z) and their sum a (z):=
a (z).
2. Generate the time increment τ as the realization of an exponential random variable with parameter
a (z).
3. Choose an index j ∈{1,...,k} according to the probability distribution aj(z) (j =1,...,k).
ii. z ←z+ν .
5. Record (t,z). Return to 1. if t+τ <T; else stop.
Carrying out step 3. is mathematically straightforward: we draw one realization r of a uniform random
variable on [0,1]; then, j is the smallest positive integer for which
The SSA is mathematically exact. However, the task of explicitly simulating each jump makes the SSA too
slow for practical implementation in some circumstances. The reason is that for large N, there are too many
jumps on any fixed time interval.
4.2. The explicit Poisson τ-leaping algorithm
AfasterbutapproximatestochasticsimulationprocedureistheexplicitPoissonτ-leapingalgorithm(see[16]).
The basic idea of this procedure is to advance the system by a preselected time increment τ (in contrast to the
randomly generated time increment τ in the SSA). On the one hand, τ should be chosen large enough in order
to ensure that “many” jumps occur during this length of time (as else, the savings in computation time are not
significant); on the other hand, it should be small enough such that the values of the functions a are unlikely
tochange“significantly”(aselse,theprocedureisnotaccurateenough). Thelatterrestrictioniscalledtheleap
condition. A strategy due to [21] for satisfying this condition is to require that the changes of the functions a
ESAIM:PROCEEDINGS 15
during a leap τ are “likely” to be bounded by (cid:15)a (z); here, (cid:15) (0 < (cid:15) (cid:28) 1) is the error control parameter. In
other words,
|a (ZN(t+τ))−a (ZN(t))|≤(cid:15)a (ZN(t)) for j =1...,k with high probability.
We estimate the largest value of τ that meets this particular requirement as follows. First, we compute
(cid:88)∂a
ν for j,j(cid:48) =1,...,k; (20)
jj(cid:48)
ij(cid:48)
here ν denotes the i-th component of the vector ν . Subsequently, we calculate
(cid:88) (cid:88)
j jj(cid:48) j j jj(cid:48) j
j(cid:48)=1 j(cid:48)=1
(cid:40) (cid:41)
(cid:15)a (z) (cid:15)2a2(z)
Note that for a standard Poisson process P,
(cid:16)(cid:90) t+τ (cid:17) (cid:16)(cid:90) t (cid:17) (cid:18)(cid:90) t+τ (cid:19)
This procedure for the selection of τ yields the following τ-leaping algorithm.
Whenever t<T:
1. While in state z at time t, evaluate the functions a and their sum a (z)=
a (z).
2. Compute τ via the formulas (20)-(22).
3. Fix a small integer n (typically, e.g., n=10) and a moderate integer n¯ (typically, e.g, n¯ =100).
i. If τ < n , reject τ and execute n¯ iterations of the SSA. Then, return to step 1.
ii. If τ ≥ n , proceed to step 4.
4. For j =1,...,k, generate p as a Poisson random variable with mean a (z)τ.
p ν .
6. Record (t,z). Return to 1. if t+τ <T; else stop.
Let us shortly comment on this algorithm. p represents an approximation of the number of jumps of type j
duringthetimeinterval[t,t+τ[. Weremarkagainthattheapproximationbyp instep4.isjustifiedaslongas
a (z)remainsmoreorlessconstantoverthesubsequenttimeintervaloflengthτ. Thereasonforstep3.i.isthe
following. 1 is the mean time step to the next jump when applying the SSA. If τ is not significantly larger
than 1 , the computation of τ (via equations (20)-(22)) is no more efficient then applying the SSA directly
(which is also of course more accurate); as this property is likely to persist for a while, it is more appropriate
to apply the SSA for some time before returning to the τ-selection procedure again.
16 ESAIM:PROCEEDINGS
The explicit τ-leaping algorithm above has been shown to provide accurate simulation results; furthermore,
it is substantially faster than the SSA for many “not-too-stiff” systems12 (see [22]; see also [24] for theoretical
evidence for this). We illustrate the gain of computation time by numerical experiments in sections 4.4 and 4.5
below for a modification of this algorithm (cf. section 4.3.2).
4.3. Modifications of the τ-leaping algorithm
There exist several variants of the above described explicit τ–leaping algorithm. We now describe some of
these.
4.3.1. Implicit and mid–point τ-leaping algorithms
One may want to freeze the rates not at the value of the solution at the beginning of the discretization
interval, butratheratanapproximatevalueofthepositionattheendofthatinterval, orelseatthemid-point.
The “implicit” τ-leaping algorithm is obtained by replacing a (ZN(t))τ with
and the mid–point τ-leaping algorithm consists in replacing the same quantities by
In [24] it is proved that the error in the mid-point τ-leaping algorithm is less than the one produced by the
explicit τ–leaping algorithm.
4.3.2. A modified τ-leaping algorithm
As most numerical schemes, the τ-leaping algorithm has the disadvantage that the approximate solution
might very well jump over the boundaries which the solution of the stochastic equation (19) can never cross.
More precisely, the solution of (1) satisfies certain constraints. For example, in the case of constant total
population, we have that ZN(t) ≥ 0, 1 ≤ i ≤ d, and ZN(t) := 1− (cid:80)d ZN(t) ≥ 0. We would like that the
approximate solution satisfies these constraints as well. However, this might not be the case with a standard
τ-leaping algorithm. In particular, if for some 0≤i≤d, ZN(t) is very small, then some of the Poisson driving
processes may push it over to a negative value during the next time interval of length τ. Because of that, at
the beginning t of each time step, we define
L := min ZN(t), where ν :=− ν ,
and choose a critical value n . The critical directions will be chosen by comparing L to n .
ThemodifiedPoissonτ-leapingprocedurerequiresthatacriticalPoissonprocesscannotjumpmorethanonce
inatimeintervaloflengthτ. ThatmakesitimpossibleforacriticalPoissonprocesstodriveanycomponentof
ZN to a negative value. The theoretical justification for each step in this modified τ-leaping procedure is given
in [22].
Whenever t<T:
1. While in state z at time t, evaluate the functions a (z) and their sum a (z)=
a (z).
2. Identify the currently critical Poisson processes as those P for which
a (z)>0 and L <n .
12I.e.,systemsforwhichthedifferencebetweenthesmallestandthelargestjumpratesisnottoolarge(see,e.g.,[22]).
ESAIM:PROCEEDINGS 17
3. Modify the τ-selection procedure from equations (20)-(22) by only taking into account those jump
directions j(cid:48) corresponding to the non-critical Poisson processes. Denote the resulting time step by τ(cid:48).
If there is no non-critical Poisson process, set τ(cid:48) =∞.
4. Fix a small integer n (typically, e.g.,n=10) and moderate integer n¯ (typically, e.g, n¯ =100).
i. If τ(cid:48) < n , reject τ(cid:48) and execute n¯ iterations of the SSA. Then, return to step 1.
ii. If τ(cid:48) ≥ n proceed to step 5.
5. Compute the sum ac(z) of the functions a (z) of the critical Poisson processes. Generate τ(cid:48)(cid:48) as a
realization of the exponential random variable with parameter ac(z).
6. i. If τ(cid:48) <τ(cid:48)(cid:48), set τ =τ(cid:48). For all the critical Poisson processes P , set p =0. For all the non-critical
PoissonprocessesP ,generatep asarealizationofthePoissonrandomvariablewithmeana (z)τ.
ii. Ifτ(cid:48)(cid:48) ≤τ(cid:48), setτ =τ(cid:48)(cid:48). Generateanintegerj accordingtotheprobabilitydistributiona (z)/ac(z)
(i.e., j runs over the index values of the critical Poisson processes). Set p = 1, and for all the
other critical Poisson process, set p =0. For all the non-critical Poisson processes P , generate p
as a realization of the Poisson random variable with mean a (z)τ.
p ν .
8. If z is not in its domain, replace τ(cid:48) ←τ(cid:48)/2, and return to step 6.
9. Record (t,z). Return to 1 if t+τ <T; else stop.
Remark 4.1. It may seem strange to use a uniform critical value n , independent of the value of the rate
of each Poisson process. It would be natural to compare each L with the corresponding a (ZN(t))τ, which
however would require to compute a first value of τ. We intend to search for improvements in that direction in
the future.
Remark 4.2. Although the modified τ–leaping algorithm is designed so as to reduce the chance of a negative
value of any of the ZN(t), it cannot completely rule them out. This is the reason for step 8. of the algorithm.
We suspect that this step might introduce a bias in the simulation, in that it tends to delete simulations
with exceptionally large values of some of the Poisson process increments, and also to reduce the chance of
approaching or hitting any of the boundaries, which is specially annoying for our purposes.
Weintendtochecktwootherpossibleapproaches. Thefirstoneconsistsinprojectingthecomputedpoint,if
itisoutsidethedomain. Thesecondconsistsinreplacingτ byτ/2,butwithoutresimulatinganewindependent
valueofthePoissonprocessincrement,butratherbysimulatingthenewincrementsaccordingtotheconditional
lawofP (t+τ(cid:48))−P (t),giventhepreviouslysimulatedvalueofP (t+τ)−P (t),which,ifP (t+τ)−P (t)=k,
j j j j j j
follows a binomial law with parameters k and τ(cid:48)/τ.
4.4. The SIS model
Inthissection,weapplythesimulationalgorithmsfromsections4.1and4.3.2totheSISmodel(Example1.1).
We consider an endemic situation (β = 1.5, γ = 1, hence R = 1.5 > 1 and x∗ = 1/3) and compare the
performanceoftheSSAtothemodifiedτ-leapingalgorithm. Ifthepopulationsizeisrelativelysmall,N =2000,
weobservethatthecomputationtimesaresimilarforbothalgorithms(evensmallerfortheSSA).Acloserlook
at the realized trajectory of the τ-leaping procedure confirms that almost all jumps are of size 1/2000. This
suggests that in most cases, the selected time step τ(cid:48) is rejected and the SSA is applied (cf. steps 3. and 4. i. of
the algorithm). Hence, there is no significant gain in computation time. If we let N = 20000, the number of
jumps (and hence the computation time) for the SSA increases approximately by a factor ten. The τ-leaping
algorithm is significantly faster which suggests that the time step τ(cid:48) is now rarely refused. While the SSA
becomes inefficient for very large time horizons (e.g., T = 600) and population sizes (e.g., N = 200000), the
process can still be simulated efficiently by the τ-leaping algorithm.
18 ESAIM:PROCEEDINGS
Figure 6. Realized trajectories of the SSA for N =2000 (left picture) and N =20000 (right
picture). Z(0)=0.1, T =50, β =1.5, γ =1.
Figure7. Realizedtrajectoriesofthemodifiedτ-leapingprocedureforN =2000(leftpicture)
and N =20000 (right picture). The parameters are as in Figure 6.
We illustrate realized trajectories of the SSA and the modified τ-leaping algorithm in Figures 6 and 7,
respectively (left pictures: N =2000, right pictures: N =20000). We observe that they approach the solution
of the ODE as N increases for both algorithms as predicted by the LLN (cf. (3); see [5]).
4.5. The model with vaccination
We now apply the same algorithms to the model with vaccination (Example 1.2). We consider the bistable
situationfromsection2.3(cf.Figure3fortheparameters)andobservethesamequalitativepropertiesconcerning
computationtimesasfortheSISmodelinsection4.4. InFigures8and9, weillustratetherealizedtrajectories
for the SSA and the modified τ-leaping algorithm, respectively (left pictures: N = 2000, right pictures: N =
20000). For simplicity, we only display the proportions of infectious individuals. As in section 4.4, we observe
that the trajectories approach the solution of the ODE as N →∞.
It is tempting to compare those figures, in order to obtain the error induced by the tau–leaping scheme,
compared to the exact SSA scheme. However, this would require that the two schemes are computed using the
ESAIM:PROCEEDINGS 19
Figure 8. Realized trajectories for the proportion of infectious individuals simulated by the
SSA (left picture: N =2000, right picture: N =20000). Z (0)=0.2, Z (0)=0.7, T =50. All
other parameters are as in Figure 3.
Figure 9. Realized trajectories for the proportion of infectious individuals simulated by the
τ-leaping algorithm (left picture: N =2000, right picture: N =20000). All parameters are as
in Figure 8.
same realization of the Poisson processes. This is not what we have done here. We intend to do this in a near
future, in order to confront simulations with the predictions of the theory concerning the error induced by the
tau–leaping algorithm, see e.g. [23], [24].
4.6. Computation time
In the next table we present the computation times (in seconds) of the SSA and modified tau-leaping for
different population sizes in the SIS model. All programs were written and executed in Matlab. We remark
that from N =20000 on, the computation time of the tau-leaping scheme is spectacularly smaller than that of
the SSA scheme. We also note that the computation time of the tau–leaping scheme seems to be a decreasing
function of N. The reason is probably that the larger N, the less frequently the scheme uses SSA steps.
20 ESAIM:PROCEEDINGS
SSA Population size N Time horizon T Computation time
2000 50 2.8
20000 50 24.66
200000 50 225.44
Modified tau-leaping
2000 50 2.3
20000 50 3.02
200000 50 1.05
The next table presents the computation times of the SSA and modified tau-leaping for different population
sizes in the SIV model. The same comments as for the SIS model apply.
SSA Population size N Time horizon T Computation time
2000 50 4.51
20000 50 36.4
200000 50 352.64
Modified tau-leaping
2000 50 2.95
20000 50 1.04
200000 50 0.67
4.7. Open questions
We conclude by describing two further open questions concerning the simulation of the process ZN. We
discuss briefly the simulation of models where some jump types are significantly more frequent than others
(section 4.7.1). Finally, we discuss the simulation of rare events with the help of large deviations theory
(section 4.7.2).
4.7.1. Models with different time scales
The simulation algorithms described in sections 4.1-4.3 tend to become inefficient or inaccurate if some of
the jump rates are much larger than others (cf. also Footnote 12). In epidemiology, this is typically the case for
so-calledhost-vectordiseases(e.g.,malaria),wherethediseaseistransmittedfromvectors(mosquitoes)tohosts
(humans) and vice versa. In the particular case of malaria, the jumps concerning only the mosquito population
have a much shorter time scale than those also concerning the human population (see, e.g., the model in [3]).
It is hence time consuming to simulate a significant number of jumps within the human population.
In order to overcome this problem, we simulate only the jumps with small rates via τ-leaping. Within the
interval [t,t+τ[13, the jumps with large rates are approximated by the solution of the ODE (cf. section 2).14
We intend to analyze the efficiency and accuracy of this procedure. In particular, we are interested in whether
the large deviations behavior (cf. section 1.2) is changed by this partial ODE approximation significantly.
4.7.2. Simulation of rare events
We are particularly interested in sampling the probability of the event that the process ZN exits the domain
of attraction of a stable equilibrium before a given time T (cf. section 1.2). If N is large and T is relatively
small, the probability of this event is typically extremely small. Applying a na¨ıve Monte Carlo (MC) approach
is therefore inefficient and we rely on rare events simulation techniques. In [25], the application of Importance
Sampling is explained in the context of diffusion processes. We intend to adapt this method in the following
way. Via a change of measure, we transfer the process ZN to a jump process Z˜ (see, e.g., [6] for a Girsanov
theoremforprocessesofthetypeofZN)forwhichtheeventofinterestismuchmoreprobable. Then,weapply
MC simulation to the process Z˜ and associate a weight with each realization (hence the average in the MC is
13Here,τ isthetimestepchosenbytheτ-selectionprocedureappliedtoonlythesmallrates.
14The initial value z for this computation can either be chosen explicitly, i.e., z=ZN(t) or implicitly/at the mid-point of the
interval(cf.thesomehowrelatedissueinsection4.3.1).
ESAIM:PROCEEDINGS 21
replaced by a weighted average). In order to choose the process Z˜ appropriately (i.e., such that the probability
of exit is “maximized”), we use the theory of large deviations: the “cheapest” way to exit the domain is given
by the trajectory φ∗ (cf. sections 1.2 and 3); hence, we change the rates of the process in such a way that the
corresponding rate function I(φ∗) becomes small (ideally, φ∗ is approximately the solution of the ODE for the
modified rates).
Acknowledgements: This research was supported by the ANR project MANEGE, the DAAD, the Labex Archim`ede
and CEMRACS.
We thank Nicolas Champagnat and Tony Leli`evre for useful discussions concerning the τ–leaping algorithm.