Numerical algebraic geometry for model selection and its
application to the life sciences
Elizabeth Gross1 Brent Davis2, Kenneth L. Ho3, Daniel J. Bates2, Heather A. Harrington4
1Department of Mathematics, San Jos´e State University,
2Department of Mathematics, Colorado State University,
3Department of Mathematics, Stanford University,
4Mathematical Institute, University of Oxford
September 24, 2018
Researchers working with mathematical models are often confronted by the related problems of
parameterestimation,modelvalidation,andmodelselection. Thesearealloptimizationproblems,well-
known to be challenging due to non-linearity, non-convexity and multiple local optima. Furthermore,
the challenges are compounded when only partial data is available. Here, we consider polynomial
models(e.g.,mass-actionchemicalreactionnetworksatsteadystate)anddescribeaframeworkfortheir
analysisbasedonoptimizationusingnumericalalgebraicgeometry. Specifically,weuseprobability-one
polynomialhomotopycontinuationmethodstocomputeallcriticalpointsoftheobjectivefunction,then
filtertorecovertheglobaloptima. Ourapproachexploitsthegeometricstructuresrelatingmodelsand
data,andwedemonstrateitsutilityonexamplesfromcellsignaling,syntheticbiology,andepidemiology.
1 Introduction
Across the physical, biological, and social sciences, mathematical models are formulated and studied to
better understand real-world phenomena. Often, multiple models are developed to explore alternate hy-
potheses. It then becomes necessary to choose between different models, for example, based on their fit
withnoisyexperimentaldata. Thisistheproblemofmodelselection,afundamentalscientificproblemwith
practical implications (1–3).
Thestandardapproachtomodelselectionistofirstestimateallmodelparametersandhiddenvariables
fromthedata,thenselectthemodelwiththesmallestbest-fiterror,uptosomepenaltyonmodelcomplexity
(4,5). Thus,atitscore,modelselectionisintimatelytiedtoparameterestimation,which,foragivenmodel
f(a,x)=0intheparametersaandvariablesxwithmeasurable“outputs”y=g(x),say,canbewrittenas
the following optimization problem:
f(a,x) = 0
2 s.t.
where y denotes the observed data, i.e. measured outputs. Unless f and g are convex, solving (1) is a
nonconvex problem, which can be challenging as standard local solvers run the risk of getting trapped in
local minima (especially in high dimensions). This can be mitigated somewhat with techniques such as
simulatedannealing(6,7)orconvexrelaxationwhichhasbeensuccessfulformodelinvalidation(8–10),but
there is generally no guarantee that a global minimum will be found.
When f and g are polynomial, however, problem (1) can be solved globally by finding all roots of an
associated polynomial system. In this case, ideas from computational algebra and algebraic geometry can
beeffective;see,e.g.,(11–14)forapplicationsofGr¨obnerbasesinsystemsbiologyand(15)forapplications
ofalgebraicgeometrytostatisticalinference. Suchsymbolicmethodstendtobecomputationallyexpensive,
]MQ.oib-q[
3v13340.7051:viXra
which limits their use in practice. Thus, although they provide a solution in principle, new algorithms and
techniques are yet desired.
In this paper, we aim to fill this gap by proposing a framework for global parameter estimation for
polynomialdeterministicmodelsusingnumericalalgebraicgeometry(NAG),asuiteoftoolsfornumerically
approximatingthesolutionsetsofmultivariatepolynomialsystemsviaadaptivemulti-precision,probability-
onepolynomialhomotopycontinuation(16,17). Ourapproachscaleswellindimensionrelativetoclassical
symbolic methods (18), and, while it comes with a higher computational cost than standard local opti-
mization,ithasaprobability-oneguaranteetorecovertheglobaloptima,solvingproblem(1)inthestrong
sense. This allows us to reason rigorously about model fit and to address the related problems of model
selection and parameter estimation from a maximum-likelihood perspective.
We demonstrate our techniques on examples from biology, where polynomial models often arise as the
steady-state descriptions of mass-action chemical reaction networks. Although some limitations remain,
we believe that this work achieves its primary purpose of introducing NAG as a valuable complement to
existingtoolsformodelevaluationandanalysis. Additionally,thispaperhighlightsspecificchallengesthat
arise when using polynomial methods for model inference, such as dealing with positivity constraints and
non-isolated solutions, and provides guidance for tackling these challenges.
Theremainderofthepaperisorganizedasfollows. Inthenextsection, westatepreciselytheproblems
withwhichweareconcerned: modelvalidation,modelselection,andparameterandhiddenvariableestima-
tion. WethenpresentNAGalgorithmsforsolvingeachproblem. Finally,weshowcaseourapproachonafew
examples including cell death activation, synthetic bio-circuits, HIV progression, and protein modification.
2 Problem Statement
Consider a model whose dynamics are described by the system of polynomial differential equations
where a=(a ,...,a ) are parameters (e.g. rate constants in a deterministic mechanistic model, such as a
chemical reaction network with mass-action kinetics), x = (x ,...,x ) are variables, and f = (f ,...,f )
are polynomials in x and a with measurable outputs y = g(x) where y = (y ,...,y ), m n, and
g = (g ,...,g ) are polynomials in x. While the parameters a ,...,a are treated as fixed variables in
our exposition, we separate them from x ,...,x to respect how such variables are treated differently in
experimental and computational settings.
In algebraic geometry a variety is a solution set of a system of polynomial equations; we use this
terminology for our next two definitions. The real model variety is the solution set of the system
y g(x)=0, that is, (4)
corresponding to the steady states of the model. Now, consider, for simplicity, the case of a single data
point yˆ=(yˆ ,...,yˆ ). (See SI Appendix for multiple data points.) The real data variety is then the affine
linear space
( VD ) R := { (a,x,y) ∈ R k+n+m :y i =yˆ i , ∀ i=1,...,m } ,
with dim( ) =k+n. We consider the case when the data includes some extrinsic (measurement) noise;
weassumetheerrors (cid:15) ,...,(cid:15) ontheobserveddatavariablesareuncorrelatedrandomvariablesandeach
error (cid:15) is normally distributed with known variance σ (which can be obtained by instrument calibration).
Using this geometric framework, the problems of (1) model validation, (2) model selection, and (3) pa-
rameter estimation, can be described precisely in terms of the real algebraic varieties ( ) and ( ) .
2.1 Problem 1: Model Validation
For model validation, we want to determine whether a deterministic polynomial model is compatible
withthedataaccordingtoagivensignificancelevelα. Thisisakintoaskingwhetherthemodelisa“good
fit” for the data. A natural goodness-of-fit statistic is:
d2 :=min i − i subject to (a,x,y) ( ) . (5)
Whenthevariancesdiffer,d2 istheminimumsquaredweightedEuclideandistancebetween( ) and
( ) . Whenallvariancesareequaltoone,thevalueof (5)isjusttheminimumsquareddistance. Forthe
remainder of the text, we will assume the latter, knowing that we can simply rescale.
Optimization problem 5 can be derived directly from the log-likelihood function
m 1 (yˆ y )2
logL(a,x,y)= log2πσ2 i − i
i=1(cid:18) i (cid:19)
asdemonstratedinSection2.1oftheSI.Thisprovidesabridgetostandardstatisticalmodelselectiontools
such as AIC (19) and BIC (20).
If the data are generated from the model with normally distributed extrinsic noise, the distribution
function of d2 is dominated by that of the chi-squared distribution with m degrees of freedom, χ2 , where
m is the number of measurable outputs. Thus, if p is the upper α-percentile for χ2 , then Pr(d2 p )
Pr(U p )=α where U χ2 . We reject the model as incompatible if d2 >p ; otherwise we say that
the model is compatible.
Iftherealmodelanddatavarietiesintersect,thatis,( ) ( ) = ,thend2 =0,andwealsosay
VM R ∩ VD R 6 ∅
thatthemodeliscompatiblewiththedata. Iftherearerestrictionson(a,x,y),forexampleifallparameters
and variables are required to be non-negative, then finding d2 becomes a constrained optimization problem
(see SI Appendix).
2.2 Problem 2: Model Selection
For model selection, we are given a set of models ,..., and want to determine the model of best
fit. Inthissetting,weusethestatisticd2tomakeaselection,eitherbychoosingthemodelwiththesmallest
goodness-of-fit statistic or by using d2 in conjunction with a complexity penalty, similar to the Bayesian or
Akaike information criteria (2).
If the statistic d2 evaluates to zero for all (or even multiple) models, then we are unable to make a
selection between the models. This can be remedied by designing experiments that yield more informative
data. For example, measuring more variables can reduce the dimension of ( ) ( ) ; the most
VM R ∩ VD R
informative situation is when ( ) ( ) = for all models. This indeterminacy can also be resolved
VMi R∩ VD R ∅
by taking multiple measurements and minimizing the joint squared distance (see SI Appendix).
2.3 Problem 3: Parameter Estimation
Parameter estimation can be achieved by finding the point (a ,x ,y ) ( ) that minimizes the value
of (5). The point (a ,x ,y ) is the maximum likelihood estimate under the given noise assumptions. The
parameterestimateisthena ;theestimateofthehiddenvariables,x ;andtheestimateofthe“de-noised”
outputs,y . Ofcourse,ifthedataandmodelvarietiesintersect,therewillbeoneormore(possiblyinfinite)
choices for (a ,x ,y ). Otherwise, it is a matter of solving a polynomial system that yields the point(s) on
( ) nearest ( ) . This is described in more detail in the next section.
3 Geometry
In each of the problems stated above, we seek to minimize the distance between (V ) and (V ) or to
find the intersection of these two sets. Standard methods for solving non-linear optimization problems are
local in nature, i.e., only guaranteed to converge to a local minimum which may or may not be the global
minimum. However,usingNAG,wefindalllocalextremaoverC,necessarilyincludingtheglobalminimum.
Duetothisglobalbenefit,NAGhasbeenusedbeforeinstatisticalinferenceinthefieldofalgebraicstatistics
(21, 22).
Let V Ck+n+m be the (complex) Zariski closure of (V ) and V Ck+n+m be the (complex)
M ⊆ M R D ⊆
Zariski closure of (V ) . We will refer to V and V as the model variety and data variety, respectively.
The problem of determining the intersection of V V is simply a matter of solving the polynomial
system obtained by taking the union of the polynomials defining V and the polynomials defining V .
ThisishandleddirectlybyNAG.Iftheintersectionisnonemptyandpositive-dimensional(complexcurves,
surfaces,etc),realpointscanbefoundusingthepolynomialhomotopymethoddescribedin(23),amethod
based on symbolic algorithms in (24), and, more classically, on the decision method in (25).
Theproblemoffindingthepointsonthetwovarietiesnearestoneanothercanalsobestatedintermsof
apolynomialsystem,onwhichwethencallNAGsolverstofindsolutions. Awell-knownnecessarycondition
for local extrema is given by Lagrange multipliers. In the main text we assume that r+m= codim ;
however, when this is not the case, the number of equations can be reduced (see SI Appendix).
Proposition 1 (EquationsgivenbyLagrangemultipliers). Let c= codim V and let f =(f ,...,f )=0
on a Zariski open set of V . If (a,x,y) ( ) is a local minimum of
then there exists λ:=(λ ,...,λ ), such that (a,x,y,λ) is a solution to the system
f0 =0, (7)
λ 1 ∇ f 10 +...λ c ∇ f c0+ y yˆ =0. (9)
(cid:20) − (cid:21)
SolvingthissystemwithNAGwillprovideuswithalllocalextremaof (6)over ,fromwhichwemay
easily select the pair of nearest points. The geometry of zero sets of systems such as (7)-(9) are described
in (26).
3.1 Numerical Algebraic Geometry
GivenapolynomialsystemF consistingofr polynomialsandN variables,NAGpackages,suchasBertini
(17), PHCpack (27), HOM4PS-2.0 (28), use polynomial homotopy continuation to provide probability-one
numerical methods for finding approximations of all isolated complex solutions of F = 0 (points) as well
as witness points on all positive-dimensional irreducible components of the solution set of F = 0. These
methodsareprobability-oneinthatthecomputationsincludesomerandomization,andthisrandomization
will yield theoretically correct results so long as the random numbers are not chosen from some measure
zero set in the parameter spaces of potential choices (16, 29).
If x RN is a real solution of F = 0, it is either isolated among the complex solutions or it lies on a
positive-dimensional complex irreducible component. In the former case, the methods of NAG will find x
and recognize it as real. In the latter case, x can be difficult to uncover. However, for our purposes, we
usually only need to verify the existence of a real solution. In this case, we can find witness points on all
positive dimensional components and then use the procedure in Section 2.1 of (23) to verify the existence
of real points.
3.2 Algorithms
Wepresentthreerelatedalgorithmstoaddressmodelvalidation,modelselection,andparameterestimation
(see Fig. 1).
The aim of the first algorithm, Algorithm 1, is to find the pair of points that minimize the distance
between ( ) and ( ) . If ( ) ( ) = , then this is obtained by solving (7)-(9); otherwise,
VM R VD R VM R ∩ VD R ∅
additional techniques are required.
We note also simply that these techniques are indeed probability-one algorithms. The computations
will necessarily be carried out in finite time and the steps proceed linearly (no loops), so the methods will
necessarily finish.
3.2.1 Algorithm 1: Model validation
Input Model , data = yˆ , tolerance α
Output yes or no
1 If = , goto Step 3.
2 If dim( ) 0 and
( ) ( ) = , return yes,
VM R∩ VD R 6 ∅
else, goto Step 3.
3 Find a pair (z ,z ) ( ) ( ) that minimizes (6) (using NAG software such as
Bertini or PH
).
VM R× VD R
4 If z z 2 <p , return yes; else no.
The computation of the intersection in Steps 1 and 2 can be determined in several ways. The
simplest way is by considering dimensions: if dim( )+dim( ) exceeds the ambient dimension, they
will almost surely intersect. If the ambient dimension is larger than the sum of the variety dimensions,
they typically do not intersect. To compute the intersection (or check to see if it is nonempty), one could
substitute yˆ g(x) for (8) in the system (7)-(8).
InStep2,ifdim( )=0,thentheintersectionofthetwovarietiesconsistsoffinitelymanypoints;
the condition ( ) ( ) = indicates that at least one of the points is real, which is straightforward
VM R∩ VD R 6 ∅
todetermine. Ifdim( )>0,tocheckif( ) ( ) = ,oneneedsmoresophisticatedmethods,
VM∩VD VM R∩ VD R 6 ∅
such as those in (23).
To find the pair (z ,z ) in Step 3, one may solve the polynomial system (7)-(9). If there is a positive-
dimensionalsetof(complex)extremalpoints,thentheproceduresin(23)couldbeusedtodetermineifthe
set contains a real point.
If there are constraints on the variables or parameters, for example, if we seek to minimize (6) over
the non-negative part of ( ) , then the algorithm is updated as follows: if the dim( ) = 0 or
VM R VM ∩VD
= thentheKarush-Kuhn-TuckerequationsasdescribedinSection3.1oftheSIAppendixshould
be used, while if dim( )>0, or if there is a positive-dimensional set of extremal points at Step 3,
then the algorithm should return possibly. There are methods (30–32) for finding real points, curves, and
surfaces within complex components of dimension 2 or less, but little is known about higher dimensions.
3.2.2 Algorithm 2: Model selection
In this case, there are several competing models, each with its own polynomial system. The algorithm
proceeds much as in Algorithm 1, but iterated for the several models under consideration. If a threshold α
is provided, one should first reject models that do not adequately support the data (d2 p ), then choose
the model yielding the minimum value of d2 (up to some complexity penalty). Various conclusions may be
drawn,e.g.,no model adequately fits the dataorthree models adequately fit the data and model provides
the best fit.
3.2.3 Algorithm 3: Parameter estimation
Again, this algorithm is similar to the first. The input consists of only one model and data . It is
assumed that there are unknown parameters and the goal is to find values of these parameters producing
thebestfitbetween and . TheoutputofSteps2and3needtobeadjustedappropriately. Theoutput
ofStep4issimplyz sincethereisnoαtobeusedforrejection. Themethodalsosimultaneouslyestimates
hidden/unknown variables and “de-noised” outputs.
3.2.4 Simple Example
To illustrate Algorithm 1, consider a simple model with three variables x,y,z and three parameters a,b,c
satisfying
+ + =1.
Let α=0.1 and assume, for this example, that the variances on the errors are σ2 =0.1 for i=1,2,3. The
modelvariety issimplyanellipsoid(Fig.2A)wherea,b,cdescribetheprincipalaxes. Supposeweknow
that a,b,c=1. For the case when the outputs are x and y and xˆ=0, yˆ=0 and α=0.1, Step 2 indicates
thatthedatadoesfitthemodel,i.e. themodeliscompatiblewiththedata. Inthiscase,therearetworeal
points in the 0-dimensional intersection (see Fig. 2B). For the same set-up, but with data xˆ=0,
Step 3 indicates that this data possibly fits this model. Since there is a positive-dimensional intersection
(Fig.2C),itispossiblycompatible(dependingonconstraintsimposedbytheuser). Forthesamemodeland
α,butdifferentdataxˆ=1.7,yˆ=0,Step4yieldspoints(1,0,0)and(1.7,0,0),so z z 2 >0.4605=p ,
and the model is rejected (Fig. 2D). However when the data are xˆ = 1.01,yˆ = 0, Algorithm 1 indicates
model compatibility (Fig. 2E). Previous algebraic methods that required Gr¨obner basis calculations would
result in a zero set and thus those approaches are not useful here.
Wedemonstrateourmethodsonproblemsinbiomedicine: celldeathactivation,syntheticbiology,epidemi-
ologyandmultisitephosphorylation. Eachoftheforthcomingapplicationscanbewrittenasamass-action
chemical reaction network, which has the form x˙ = f(a,x), studied at steady state: f(a,x) = 0 as in the
problemstatement. Throughoutthesereal-worldexamples,weemphasizethepivotalcomputationsinthese
methods,suchasdeterminingthedimensionoftheintersectionV V andfindingpointsintheintersec-
tion (see Fig. 1B). Our first two examples, cell death signaling and genetic toggle bio-circuits, demonstrate
how to handle positive dimensional intersections using two different approaches, while the remaining two
examples, HIV and MAP kinase signaling, highlight analysis of zero-dimensional and empty intersections.
In the following examples, we are interested in results that can be interpreted biologically, therefore we
restrict our analysis to non-negative real solutions.
4.1 Cell death activation
Wedemonstratemodelcompatibility(Algorithm1)onanexamplefromreceptor-mediatedprogrammedcell
death,whichisinitiatedbytheactivationofdeathreceptorsuponthedetectionofextracellulardeathligands
(33–36). We consider, in particular, the “cluster” model of (12), which was inspired by crystallographic
data (37) and describes the recruitment of receptors by ligands into local self-activating clusters capable of
bistability.
The cluster model is a system of 3 degree-4 polynomials in the form of (2) in 3 variables (representing
various receptor states) and 6 rate parameters, supplemented by ligand and receptor conservations (see SI
Appendix). We assume that we can measure the total ligand and receptor concentrations, which may be
considered experimental inputs, as well as the concentration of active receptors. We do not assume access
to the concentrations of other individual receptor states nor to any of the rate parameters.
A steady-state data point was simulated from the model with all parameters and initial concentrations
drawn independently and identically from the log-normal distribution ln (0,4), then combined and cor-
rupted with i.i.d. noise from (0,0.1) to obtain yˆ. The real model and real data varieties intersect in the
positive orthant with a distance zero and hence the model is indeed compatible with the data.
4.2 Synthetic biology and experimental design
Wedemonstrateanexamplefromsyntheticbiologywithexcessintersection(dim( )>0). Agoalin
synthetic biology is to design or modify existing biological systems with new features according to specific
designcriteria. Reverseengineeringofbiologicalsystemsoftenincludesmodules(suchasfeedbackloops)and
howtheseareinterconnectedaredescribedbydifferentcircuits(models). Understandingdifferencesbetween
bio-circuit implementations is crucial; therefore we compare three bistable bio-circuits models analyzed in
(38): monomer-dimertogglecircuit( ),dimer-dimertogglecircuit( ),andsingleoperatorgenecircuit
( ), which were initially presented in (39–41). The model variables include genes (X ) and proteins (P )
where i=1 for or i=1,2 for , , as well as these species complexes (e.g., P P ,X P P ). These
3 1 2 i i j i i
variablesinteractfollowingmass-actionkineticsandformsystemsofpolynomialdifferentialequationswhere
, , and have 7, 8 and 6 model variables, respectively, and 10, 12, and 9 kinetic parameters,
respectively. Themodelscanbereduced(giveninSIAppendix)byassumingthatthetotalamountofgene
1 (X ) and gene 2 (X ) is conserved.
SupposethatthetotalamountsX andX andspecificproteinsynthesisanddegradationparame-
ters k , k , k , and k are known. Sinceprotein concentrations areoften measurable, we assume
bas1 bas2 deg1 deg2
that our data are P , P , and their complexes P P , and P P . The aim is to select the best model ,
1 2 1 1 2 2 1
, and given the data. We simulate steady-state data from the dimer-dimer toggle model ( ) and
add Gaussian noise from (0,0.1). We find that all three have positive dimensional intersections, where
the dimension of the intersections are:
VM1 R∩ VD R
VM2 R∩ VD R
VM3 R∩ VD R
Clearly, all three models are compatible with the data, thus one can only select a “best fit” model using
data-independent measures, e.g. number of parameters, dimension, etc.
Infact,thedimensionsofthemodelanddatavarietiescanhelpusdesignmoreinformativeexperiments
for model selection. For example, the variety associated to the monomer-dimer toggle model lives in a 15
dimensionalambientspace, C15,andhasdimension6,whilethedatavariety C15hasdimension
VM1 ⊆ VD ⊆
12;thusbytheDimensionTheorem,wecandeterminethatdim( ) 6+12 15=3. Thisdimension
VM1∩VD ≥ −
calculationprovidesguidancetowardsthenumberofminimaladditionalvariableandparametervaluesthat
mustbemeasuredtoensure = , i.e., atleastfourmorevariablesandparametervaluesmustbe
known.
Supposewecanexperimentallymeasurefourforwardbiochemicalreactionrateconstants(e.g.,k ,k ,
k ,andk ),then iscutdownbyfourdimensionsanddoesnotintersect . Wegetsimilarresults
nF kR VM1 VD
for the model varieties associated to and provided we measure rate constants specific to these
models (see SI Appendix). Now that all the intersections are empty, we run Algorithm 2 and find that the
sum of squares (Eq. (5)) for each model are as follows: d2 = 0.2262, d2 = 7.34 10 7, and d2 = 0.3040.
Therefore, we select the model, which is indeed the true model.
4.3 HIV Progression
We demonstrate parameter estimation (Algorithm 3) on an example coming from epidemiology. We use a
modelthatincludeslong-termHIVdynamicsfrominitialviremia,latency,andvirusincrease(42),basedon
(43). In the model (see SI Appendix), the HIV virus inhibits the CD4+T cell population while promoting
macrophageproliferation,whichinturnhousesthereplicatingvirus. Asmacrophagesproliferate,thevirus
reservoir increases, so the model offers a description of HIV patient progression to AIDS. Model variables
x are uninfected CD4+T cells (T), infected CD4+ T cells (T ), uninfected macrophages (M), infected
macrophages (M ), and HIV virus population (V).
Hernandez-Vargasetal.showthatthemodelcanhavetworealequilibria, oneofwhichisstable, repre-
sentingpatientsthatare“long-termnon-progressors”(42). Theparametersaare(s ,s ,k ,...,k ,δ ,...,δ ),
1 2 1 6 1 5
where s represents synthesis of T cells and macrophages, k are rate constants describing interactions be-
tween variables x, and δ represents natural death. For this example, y = x. We estimated the natural
death of the virus, parameter δ , using the long-term non-progressors steady-state value (Table 3 of (42))
and adding noise to each variable (0,1). By Algorithm 3, the data variety and model variety do not
intersect. We find the closest point and estimate δ =2.99876 (true value of δ =3).
4.4 Multisite phosphorylation with experimental data
We examine phosphorylation mechanisms of cellular signaling with experimental data, and demonstrate
model selection (Algorithm 2) and parameter estimation (Algorithm 3). We focus on phosphorylation,
a key cellular regulatory mechanism that has been the subject of extensive study, both experimentally
and theoretically ((44) and references therein). An area of interest is the mechanism by which a kinase
phosphorylates a two-site substrate, either distributively, where the kinase can add at most one phosphate
before dissociating, or processively, where it can add both phosphates in sequence. The MAPK/ERK
pathwayisawell-knownsystemforstudyingphosphorylation,wherebyMEK(kinase)phosphorylatesERK
(itssubstrate). Aokietal.(45)showedexperimentalevidence,whileworkingwithpolynomialmodels,that
the mammalian MAPK/ERK pathway acts distributively in vitro but processively in vivo.
We compare these distributive and processive models against the in vivo data reported in the same
study. The distributive model consists of 12 molecular species and 17 mass-action reactions, while the
processivemodelhas14speciesand18reactions(speciescorrespondtovariables,eachreactioncorresponds
toaparameter). Thedatataketheformof36concentrationmeasurementsofthreeaggregatephosphoforms
over a range of 12 EGF stimulation levels. All model parameters are calibrated using in vitro estimates
by (45), except the parameter k representing EGF loading, which we estimate for both models (see SI
Appendix).
Next we perform model selection by running Algorithm 2 on each data point individually and select
independently for each run the preferred model (more details in SI Appendix). Under low EGF stimula-
tion, the best model estimates are nearly identical with a slight preference for distributive. At high EGF
stimulation, themodelsareidenticalwithnopreferenceforonemodelovertheother. Theseresultscanbe
justified by noting that the main distinction between distributivity and processivity is nonlinear switching
behavior (i.e., a sigmoidal response curve), and this only occurs at intermediate stimulations. However, at
medium EGF stimulation (see Fig 3), there is a preference for the processive model, which supports the
findings in (45).
5 Conclusion
The problem of determining whether given real-world data fits one or more given mathematical models is
challenging. When a model is defined by algebraic (polynomial) functions, the methods of NAG may be
employed to study the geometry underlying the model and data. In particular, these methods are useful
for model variables observed at steady-state. We demonstrated this numerical and geometric framework
forcomparingmodelswithexperimentaldose-responsedatainMAPK/ERKpathwayandhighlightedthat
the intermediate EGF doses were the most informative for model selection, complementing another finding
that model selection results can be very sensitive to experimental parameters (46).
Despite the difficulties associated with positive dimensional components, and limitations in analysis,
we can reproduce compatible models, and furthermore can predict additional information, such as mea-
surements of parameters, that are necessary for selecting models. Our geometric investigations of positive
dimensional components may perhaps relate to algebraic analyses for biochemical models, such as model
identifiability or matroids for experimental design (14, 47, 48).
Therearefurtherdirectionstobeconsideredinthisvein,asidefrommakingtheexistingcomputational
methods more efficient. First, there would be great value in developing strictly real geometric methods for
solving polynomial systems such as those that appear in this article. Some such techniques exist, but only
inveryspecialcircumstances. Second,therewouldbemuchvalueindevelopingeffectivenumericalmethods
for treating inequalities. It should be noted that the methods described in (49) and the references therein
will incorporate such constraints, though the cost of such computations restricts their use to relatively low
dimensions. Finally,thereislikelymuchtobegainedfromconsideringthegeometryunderlyingmodelsnot
defined by algebraic functions. Algebraic geometry provides very clean, well-understood structures, paving
the way for numerical methods. Differential geometry or topology could lead to similarly useful techniques
for model selection and parameter estimation.
6 Materials and Methods
6.1 Numerical algebraic geometry
General references for NAG include (16, 29), with the latter doubling as a user manual for the software
package Bertini. For computations, we used Bertini 1.4 and Macaulay2 version 1.6.
6.2 Data generation
Data simulated from cell death activation, synthetic biology and HIV models were performed in MATLAB
R2014b using ode15s.
7 Acknowledgements
We thank Kazuhiro Aoki for discussions and providing model and data files for the MAP Kinase example.
EG, KLH, and HAH acknowledge funding from the American Institute of Mathematics (AIM). EG was
supported by the US National Science Foundation grant DMS-1304167. BD was partially supported by
NSF DMS–1115668. KLH acknowledges support from NSF DMS-1203554. DJB gratefully acknowledges
partialsupportfromNSFDMS–1115668andtheMathematicalBiosciencesInstitute(MBI).HAHgratefully
acknowledges funding from AMS Simons Travel Grant, EPSRC Fellowship EP/K041096/1, King Abdullah
UniversityofScienceandTechnology(KAUST)KUK-C1-013-04andMPHStumpfLeverhulmeTrustGrant.
A Model variety Data variety Intersection?
VM i VD VM i∩VD
B Given 1 , 2 ,..., r and
Comput V e M dim V e M nsion o V f i M ntersect V ioDn
Empty Zero Positive
Find closest points Find point in
between and ( ) V M ( ∩ ) V D ?
VM i VD VM R∩ VD R
(Could recover parameters)
Ex: MAP kinase, HIV
Compute distance d
between ( V ) and ( V )
Is d less tha M n to R lerance D ? R No, reject
Yes, model compatible Yes, model compatible
Ex: Cell death
Compare d for all Selection requires
models and select more information
Ex: Syn Bio, MAP kinase Ex: Syn Bio
Figure S1: Schematic of numerical algebraic geometry framework corresponding to Algorithms I–III. (A)
Inputtoalgorithmsincludemodel(systemofpolynomials)translatedintoamodelvariety(red),andsteady-
statedatatranslatedintoadatavariety(blue). (B)Flowchartofmodelcompatibility,parameterestimation
and model selection methods. Examples (green) are described in Results section.