2v1726.9041:viXra
ON THE NUMBER OF ODD VALUES OF THE KLEIN j-FUNCTION
AND THE CUBIC PARTITION FUNCTION
FABRIZIO ZANELLO
Abstract. In this note, using entirely algebraic or elementary methods, we determine a
new asymptotic lower bound for the number of odd values of one of the most important
modularfunctionsinnumbertheory,theKleinj-function. Namely,weshowthatthenumber
of integers n x such that the Klein j-function — or equivalently, the cubic partition
function — is odd is at least of the order of
for x large. This improves recent results of Berndt-Yee-Zaharescu and Chen-Lin, and ap-
proachessignificantlythebestlowerboundcurrentlyknownfortheordinarypartitionfunc-
tion, obtained using the theory of modular forms. Unlike many works in this area, our
techniques to show the above result, that have in part been inspired by some recent ideas
of P. Monsky on quadratic representations, do not involve the use of modular forms.
Then, in the second part of the article, we show how to employ modular forms in order
to slightly refine our bound. In fact, our brief argument, which combines a recent result of
J.-L.NicolasandJ.-P.SerrewithaclassicaltheoremofJ.-P.Serreontheasymptoticsofthe
Fourier coefficients of certain level 1 modular forms, will more generally apply to provide a
lower bound for the number of odd values of any positive power of the generating function
of the partition function.
1. Introduction and past work
One of the most interesting, and still poorly understood, problems in partition theory is
the study of the parity of the partition function p(n). It is widely believed (see e.g. [18])
that p(n) is both even and odd with density 1/2; i.e., if f0(x) (respectively, f1(x)) denotes
the number of integers n x such that p(n) is even (respectively, odd), then f0(x) and
f1(x) are conjectured to be both asymptotic to x/2, for x large. However, despite important
efforts by many researchers using a variety of combinatorial, algebraic or analytic tools, this
conjecture still appears to be out of reach for today’s mathematics. The current best lower
bounds for f0(x) and f1(x) are due to J. Bella¨ıche and J.-L. Nicolas [5], who refined results
2010 Mathematics Subject Classification. Primary: 11P83;Secondary: 05A17, 11F03, 11F33, 11N37.
Key words and phrases. Klein j-function; cubic partition function; binary q-series; density odd values;
four-square theorem; sum-of-divisor function; modular forms modulo 2.
2 FABRIZIO ZANELLO
by S. Ahlgren, D. Eichhorn, K. Ono, and J.-P. Serre, among many others (see, as a sample,
[1, 10, 14, 16, 21]). Namely, using the theory of modular forms, Bella¨ıche and Nicolas proved:
f0(x) √xloglogx, and f1(x) .
p ≫ p ≫ (logx)7/8
Twocloselyrelatedfunctions, whoseparityseemsequallyhardtounderstand, aretheKlein
j-function, j(n), and the cubic partition function, c(n). The Klein j-function, a modular
function playing a central role in several areas of number theory (see e.g. [4]), is defined by:
(cid:16) q
qi)24 (cid:17)
The cubic partition function denotes the number of partitions of n into parts of two kinds,
where those of the second kind can only be even. Thus, the generating function for c(n) is:
c(n)qn = .
W.Y.C. Chen and B.L.S. Lin [7] and, in different but equivalent terms, K. Ono and N.
Ramsey [17] have conjectured that, like for p(n), a “50% density” result also holds for c(n).
From an algebraic perspective, it is easy to see that, in the ring of series Z [[q]], the gen-
erating function for c(n) is the multiplicative inverse of the series of the triangular numbers
n+1 , and that it coincides with the cube of the generating function for p(n). The generating
function for j(n) is essentially the inverse of the series of the odd squares (shifted by one
(cid:0) (cid:1)
degree), or of the Ramanujan Tau function. Similarly to p(n), determining optimal bounds
on the parity of j(n) and c(n) is considered a nearly intractable problem today. We just
remark here that the difficulty of this parity problem appears to be shared by many series
that, modulo 2, are the inverse of a quadratic series in Z [[q]] — including indeed p(n),
because of the Pentagonal Number Theorem (see [8, 13] for more).
However, a large amount of work has recently been done on the parity of j(n) and c(n),
by a variety of methods; for some important contributions, see e.g.: C. Alfes [2], who proved,
among other facts, a lower bound of the order of √x/logx for the even values of j(n) when
n 7 (mod 8), and thus for the even values of c(n) (as we will see below, these two bounds
are essentially equivalent); W.Y.C. Chen and B.L.S. Lin [7], who proved the infinity of both
the even and the odd values; and K. Ono and N. Ramsey [17], who refined some of Alfes’s
results. The best existing bounds, both for the even and the odd values, are due to B.
Berndt, A.J. Yee and A. Zaharescu [6]. They proved that f0(x) (for n 7 (mod 8)) and
f0(x) √x, while f1(x) and f1(x) x1/2−α/loglogx, for some constant α.
ODD VALUES OF THE KLEIN j-FUNCTION AND THE CUBIC PARTITION FUNCTION 3
In this brief note, our main goal is refine the above bound for the number of odd values
of j(n) and c(n), using only algebraic or elementary methods. We will show that
f1(x) and f1(x) ,
j c ≫ logx
which is just a factor of (logx)1/8/loglogx away from the current best bound for p(n) [5].
Unlike many works in this area, our approach will completely avoid the complex-analytic
machinery of modular forms. Interestingly, we will also relate this problem to the study of
integer representations by quadratic forms; though it may not be immediately obvious from
our proof, thiswork was inpart inspired by a recent comment ofP. Monsky onMathOverflow
in response to a question by J. Bella¨ıche [12], as well as by paper [13], again by Monsky.
In the final portion of the paper, we will then see how to slightly improve the above bound
with another brief argument that employs the theory of modular forms, by combining a
classical result of J.-P. Serre [20] and a recent one by J.-L. Nicolas and J.-P. Serre [15] on
the asymptotics of the number of odd Fourier coefficients of those modular forms of level
1 that can be expressed as a pure power of the modulo 2 reduction of the Ramanujan Tau
function. In fact, more generally, we will show that the same refined lower bound holds for
any positive power b of the generating function of the partition function (the cubic partitions
and the Klein j-function correspond to the case b = 3).
2. The lower bound
We begin with a key lemma on integer representations as sums of four squares.
Lemma 1. Let R(n) be the number of representations of n as n = X2 + Y2 + Z2 + 4W2,
for odd positive integers X,Y,Z and W, and let f1(x) denote the number of integers n x
such that R(n) is odd. Then
f1(x) .
Proof. Notice that we can assume in the proof that n 7, n 7 (mod 8), otherwise
R(n) = 0. Therefore, if we can express n as n = X2 +Y2 +Z2 +T2, for arbitrary integers
X,Y,Z and T, then exactly three of X,Y,Z and T must be odd and one must be congruent
to 2 modulo 4; say T = 2W, with W odd. In particular, none of them is zero, and the
positive and the negative solutions are symmetric for each variable. It easily follows that, if
M(n) is the number of arbitrary integer representations of n = X2 +Y2 +Z2 +T2, then
By the four-square theorem, we know that M(n) = 8 d, where the sum is taken over
the divisors d of n that are not divisible by 4. Since n 7 (mod 8) is odd, this immediately
4 FABRIZIO ZANELLO
gives us that
where as usual σ denotes the sum-of-divisor function. It is folklore that σ is multiplicative
and that, if we write the prime factorization of n as n = r pai, then
Notice that, by (2), R(n) is odd if and only if σ(n) is not divisible by 16. In other words,
showing the lemma is tantamount to proving that, for at least the order of xloglogx/logx
positive integers n x, n 7 (mod 8), we have the 2-adic valuation v (σ(n)) = 3. But if
n is the product of exactly two prime factors, say n = pq, where p 3 (mod 8) and q 5
(mod 8), then by (3),
The result now follows by observing that, by an elementary generalization of the prime
number theorem for arithmetic progressions to 2-almost primes (see e.g. [11]), the number
of the above integers n = pq is asymptotic to a constant multiple of xloglogx/logx. (cid:3)
Our main result of this section is the following asymptotic lower bound for f1(x) and
f1(x). As usual, we say that two series a(n)qn b(n)qn (mod m) if a(n) b(n)
(mod m), for all n.
Theorem 2. We have:
f1(x) and f1(x) .
j c ≫ logx
Proof. We first notice that it suffices to show the result for c(n). Indeed, working modulo 2
(here and in all congruences throughout this proof), by (1) the generating function for j(n)
is the multiplicative inverse of the Ramanujan Tau function; i.e.,
j(n)qn .
≡ q (1 qi)24
n≥−1 i≥1 −
j(n)qn = q−1 c(n)q8n.
≡ q (1 q8i)3 ≡ q (1 q8i)(1 q8·2i)
Therefore, it is clear that a lower bound for f1(x) is equivalent, up to a multiplicative
constant, to the same lower bound for f1(x), as we claimed.
ODD VALUES OF THE KLEIN j-FUNCTION AND THE CUBIC PARTITION FUNCTION 5
Thus, let us now prove the theorem for f1(x). Recall that, in Lemma 1, we have shown
the existence of xloglogx/logx integers n x having an odd number of representations,
R(n), of the form n = X2 +Y2 +Z2 +4W2, for odd positive integers X,Y,Z and W.
Translating this in terms of generating functions, one moment’s thought gives us that, if
we define ∆(q) =
to be the generating function of the odd squares, then
Butbythefollowing well-known modulo2identity (itfollows, forinstance, fromtheJacobi
triple product identity),
we easily have:
q (1 q8i)3 q (1 qi)24.
n≥0 n≥0 i≥1 i≥1
(This fact was already known to S. Ramanujan; see [3], page 84. We thank the referee for
suggesting this reference.) Therefore, (4) yields:
R(n)qn q (1 qi)24 q4 (1 q4i)24
!
n≥0 i≥1 i≥1
q7 (1 qi)72 (1 qi)96 = q7 (1 qi)168 q7 (1 q8i)21.
i≥1 i≥1 i≥1 i≥1
Thus, if we set (1 qi)21 = b(n)qn, we have b(n) R(8n+7) for all n. Hence,
it promptly follows from Lemma 1 that there are xloglogx/logx odd coefficients of
q (1 qi)21 in degree x.
Now notice that, by (6),
Therefore, since there are clearly the order of √x odd coefficients of ∆(q) in degree x,
we easily deduce that
xloglogx 1 √xloglogx
c ≫ logx · √x logx
and the proof is complete.
6 FABRIZIO ZANELLO
3. The modular form refinement
As we have mentioned in the introduction, our goal in this section is to slightly refine our
lower bound of Theorem 2 using the theory of modular forms. We will briefly recap here
the necessary terminology and results, referring e.g. to [4, 9] for an introduction to modular
forms, and to [19] for more on those of level 1 modulo 2, which are the topic of this section.
Let M be the algebra of all modular forms of level 1 with integer coefficients. A nice
result of P. Swinnerton-Dyer says that, modulo 2, M = Z [∆]. In other words, the reduction
modulo 2 of any modular form of level 1 can be expressed as a polynomial in ∆(q) =
. A classical result of J.-P. Serre [20] then gives, asymptotically, the order of
magnitude of the number of odd Fourier coefficients of any modular form m of level 1 having
order of nilpotency g(m) 2; in particular, all positive powers ∆k of ∆, where k is not a
power of 2, can be proven to satisfy g(∆k) 2. Serre’s result can be phrased as follows:
Theorem 3 (Serre [20]). Let m be a modular form of level 1 with integer coefficients such
that g(m) 2. With a slight abuse of notation, denote by f1(x) the number of odd Fourier
coefficients of m up to degree x. Then the order of magnitude of f1(x) is asymptotic to a
constant multiple of
.
Noticethat, indeed, Serre’stheoremcannotapplytom = ∆k fork = 2t, becauseobviously,
working modulo 2, f1 (x) has the order of magnitude of f1(x), namely √x. We also remark
that an asymptotic equivalent of f1(x) has been given in [5], as pointed out to us by the
referee.
For any integer k 1, write the binary expansion of k as k = β 2i (hence β 0,1
for all i). Define now the height of k as h(k) = n (k)+n (k), where
n (k) = β 2i and n (k) = β 2i.
3 2i+1 5 2i+2
A recent crucial result of J.-L. Nicolas and J.-P. Serre [15] says (among other facts) that,
for any odd integer k 3,
Therefore, by Serre’s theorem and Identity (7), we can easily deduce that, for any k 3
odd, the number of odd coefficients of ∆k up to degree x is, asymptotically, of the order of
magnitude of
(8) .
ODD VALUES OF THE KLEIN j-FUNCTION AND THE CUBIC PARTITION FUNCTION 7
Example 4. Let k = 7. We have 7 = 1 20+1 21+1 22, and therefore n (7) = n (7) = 1
and n (7)+n (7) 1 = 1. Thus, by (8), the order of magnitude of f1 (x), or equivalently,
of the number of odd coefficients of (1 qi)21 up to degree x, is xloglogx/logx. This
also proves that our lower bound of Lemma 1 is optimal.
The next theorem is the main result of this section, where we employ the modular form
machinery developed in [15, 20] to refine the elementary lower bound given in the previous
section for the number of odd coefficients of the Klein j-function and the cubic partition
function, by a factor of (loglogx)K, for any K > 0. In fact, our result will more generally
hold for any positive power b of the generating function of the partition function, that we
P (n)qn = .
(Notice that P (n) = p(n), and modulo 2, P (nQ) = c(n).)
We only remark here that, though it will not be part of this note, by a much longer and
more technical analysis involving a similar modular form approach, and entirely along the
lines of Theorem 6 of a recent paper of J. Bella¨ıche and J.-L. Nicolas [5], one could further
slightly improve the lower boundof Theorem 5 below. In fact, also the lower bound of √xfor
the even coefficients obtained by Berndt-Yee-Zaharescu [6] could be slightly refined (again
for all powers of the generating function of the partition function) exactly with the same
type of argument given in [5], Theorem 5. However, unfortunately, we have not yet been
able to reach, by any approach (either involving or avoiding modular forms), a lower bound
of at least the order of √x for the number of odd coefficients of the generating function of
the partition function or of any of its powers.
Theorem 5. For any given integer b 1, the following lower bound holds, for any K > 0:
√x(loglogx)K
f1 (x) .
Proof. First notice that it is a simple exercise on binary expansions to show that, if we set
α(k) = n (k)+n (k) 1, then lim α(k) = . Also, we claim that we may assume in the
proof that b is odd. Indeed, working modulo 2 (here and in all of the following congruences),
if b = 2s b for some odd integer b , then
.
(1 qi)b ≡ (1 q2s·i)b0
Therefore, f1 (x) is (alwaysQup to a constanQt factor) of the same order of magnitude of
f1 (x), as desired.
8 FABRIZIO ZANELLO
We begin with the case b 1 (mod 3). Fix K > 0. Since α(k) goes to infinity for k
large, it is easy to see that there exists an integer k such that α(k) K and 3k = 2t b, for
some t. (The integer t will be even if b 1 (mod 3), and odd if b 1 (mod 3).)
Therefore, by congruence (6), we get:
∆k(q) = q(2n+1)2 q (1 qi)24 = qk (1 qi)24k
! !
n≥0 i≥1 i≥1
qk (1 q8i)2t qk (1 q2t+3·i)
qk (1 q8i)3k i≥1 − i≥1 − .
i≥1 Qi≥1 − Qi≥1 −
Notice that, by (8), f1 x(loglo Q gx)K/logx. Thus, si Q nce by the Pentagonal Number
Theorem there are the order of √x odd coefficients of qk (1 q2t+3·i) in degree x, we
easily conclude that
x(loglogx)K 1 √x(loglogx)K
Pb ≫ logx · √x logx
as desired.
The case b 0 (mod 3) can be treated in a rather analogous fashion, though now, fixed
K, we want to choose our integer k such that α(k) K and 3k = 3 2t b. Then, by (5)
and (6), we have (skipping some of the steps similar to the previous case):
qk (1 q8i)3·2t
i≥1 Qi≥1 −
qk (1 q2t+3·i)3 qk q2t+3·(n+ 2 1)
i≥1 − n≥0 .
≡ (1 q8i)b ≡ (1 q8i)b
Since, by (8), f1 x(loQglogx)K/logx, and thQere are of course the order of √x odd
coefficients of qk
in degree x, we can again conclude that
P √x(loglogx)K
and the proof of the theorem is complete.
4. Acknowledgements
We thank the anonymous referee for helpful suggestions, and William Keith for comments
and for several insightful conversations of partition theory. This work was done while the
author was partially supported by a Simons Foundation grant (#274577).
ODD VALUES OF THE KLEIN j-FUNCTION AND THE CUBIC PARTITION FUNCTION 9