On Partial Identification of the Pure Direct Effect
Caleb Miles, Phyllis Kanki, Seema Meloni, and Eric Tchetgen Tchetgen∗
In causal mediation analysis, nonparametric identification of the pure (natural) direct effect
typicallyrelieson,inadditiontonounobservedpre-exposureconfounding,fundamentalas-
sumptionsof(i)so-called“cross-world-counterfactuals"independenceand(ii)noexposure-
induced confounding. When the mediator is binary, bounds for partial identification have
been given when neither assumption is made, or alternatively when assuming only (ii). We
extend existing bounds to the case of a polytomous mediator, and provide bounds for the
case assuming only (i). We apply these bounds to data from the Harvard PEPFAR program
inNigeria, whereweevaluatetheextenttowhichtheeffectsofantiretroviraltherapyonvi-
rologicalfailurearemediatedbyapatient’sadherence,andshowthatinferenceonthiseffect
issomewhatsensitivetomodelassumptions.
Keywords: Cross-world counterfactual, Mediation, Natural direct effect, Partial identification,
Puredirecteffect,SingleWorldInterventionGraph
∗CalebMilesisPostdoctoralFellow,DepartmentofBiostatistics,UniversityofCalifornia,Berkeley94720-7358.
Phyllis Kanki is Professor and Seema Meloni is Research Associate, Department of Immunology and Infectious
Diseases,HarvardSchoolofPublicHealth,Boston,MA02115. EricTchetgenTchetgenisProfessor,Departments
of Biostatistics and Epidemiology, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, MA 02115. The authors gratefully
acknowledgethehardworkanddedicationoftheclinical,data,andlaboratorystaffatthePEPFARsupportedHar-
vard/AIDSPreventionInitiativeinNigeria(APIN)hospitalsthatprovidedsecondarydataforthisanalysis.Thiswork
wasfunded,inpart,bygrantsfromtheU.S.NationalInstitutesofHealth. Thecontentsaresolelytheresponsibility
oftheauthorsanddonotrepresenttheofficialviewsofthefundinginstitutions.
1v25610.9051:viXra
1. INTRODUCTION
Causalmediationanalysisseekstodeterminetherolethatanintermediatevariableplaysintrans-
mittingtheeffectfromanexposuretoanoutcome. Anindirecteffectreferstotheeffectthatgoes
through the intermediate variable in mediation analysis; a direct effect is a measure of the effect
that does not. The study of causal mediation has in recent years enjoyed an explosion in popu-
larity (Robins and Greenland, 1992; Robins, 1999, 2003; Pearl, 2001; Avin et al., 2005; Taylor
et al., 2005; Petersen et al., 2006; Ten Have et al., 2007; Albert, 2008; Goetgeluk et al., 2008;
van der Laan and Petersen, 2008; VanderWeele, 2009; VanderWeele and Vansteelandt, 2009,
2010; Imai et al., 2010a,b; Albert and Nelson, 2011; Tchetgen Tchetgen, 2011; VanderWeele,
2011; Albert, 2012; Tchetgen Tchetgen and Shpitser, 2012; Wang and Albert, 2012; Shpitser,
2013; Tchetgen Tchetgen, 2013; Tchetgen Tchetgen and Shpitser, 2014; Wang et al., 2013; Al-
bert and Wang, 2015; Hsu et al., 2015), not only in terms of theoretical developments, but also
in practice, most notably in the fields of epidemiology and social sciences. This strand of work
is based on ideas originating from Robins and Greenland (1992) and Pearl (2001) grounded in
the language of potential outcomes (Splawa-Neyman et al., 1990; Rubin, 1974, 1978) to give
nonparametric definitions of effects involved in mediation analysis, allowing for settings where
interactionsandnonlinearitiesmaybepresent.
Consideraninterventionwhichsetstheexposureofinterestforallpersonsinthepopulation
to one of two possible values, a reference value or an active value. The total effect of such
an intervention corresponds to the change of the counterfactual outcome mean if the exposure
were set to the active value compared with if it were set to the reference value. Robins and
Greenland(1992)formalizedtheconceptofeffectdecompositionofthetotaleffectintodirectand
indirect effects by defining pure direct and indirect effects. Pearl (2001) relabeled these effects
as natural direct and indirect effects. The pure direct effect (PDE) corresponds to the change in
thecounterfactualoutcomemeanunderaninterventionwhichchangesaperson’sexposurestatus
fromthereferencevaluetotheactivevalue,whilemaintainingtheperson’smediatortothevalue
itwouldhavehadundertheexposurereferencevalue. Incontrast,thenaturalindirecteffect(NIE)
corresponds to the change in the average counterfactual outcome under an intervention that sets
a person’s exposure value to the active value, while changing the value of the mediator from the
valueitwouldhavehadunderthereferenceexposurevalue,toitsvalueundertheactiveexposure
value. The PDE and NIE sumtogivethetotaleffect.
Identification of these natural effects has been somewhat controversial as it requires as-
sumptions that may be overly restrictive for many applications in the health sciences. First,
identification invokes a so-called cross-world-counterfactuals-independence assumption, which
byvirtueofinvolvingcounterfactualsunderconflictinginterventionsontheexposure,canneither
be enforced experimentally nor tested empirically (Pearl, 2001; Robins and Richardson, 2010).
Secondly, a necessary assumption for identification rules out the presence of exposure-induced
confoundingofthemediator’seffectontheoutcome,evenifallconfoundersareobserved. While
this assumption is in principle testable provided no unmeasured confounding, more often than
not, post-exposure covariates are altogether ignored in routine application, in which case medi-
ation analyses may be invalid. These issues have recently been considered, and some work has
been done on partial or point identification under a weaker assumption. Specifically, on the one
hand Robins and Richardson (2010) and Tchetgen Tchetgen and VanderWeele (2014) provide
conditionsforpointidentificationofthepuredirecteffectwhenaconfounderisdirectlyaffected
by the exposure. On the other hand, Robins and Richardson (2010) give bounds for the pure
direct effect for binary mediator without making the cross-world-counterfactual-independence
assumption, but assuming no exposure-induced confounding of the mediator-outcome relation,
and Tchetgen Tchetgen and Phiri (2014) extend these bounds to account for exposure-induced
confounding. Bounds are commonly employed in causal inference when structural assumptions
are not sufficiently strong to give point identification of a causal parameter of interest (Robins,
1989; Balke and Pearl, 1997; Zhang and Rubin, 2003; Kaufman et al., 2005; Cheng and Small,
2006;Caietal.,2008;Sjölander,2009;TaguriandChiba,2015). Webuildonthispreviouswork
to provide a number of new nonparametric bounds for the pure direct effect allowing for a poly-
tomous mediator when either (i) exposure-induced confounding is present, or (ii) one does not
assumethatcross-worldcounterfactualsofthemediatingandoutcomevariablesareindependent,
or(iii)both(i)and(ii)hold.
We apply these bounds to data from the Harvard PEPFAR program in Nigeria, where we
evaluate the extent to which the effects of antiretroviral therapy on virological failure are me-
diated by a patient’s adherence. We show that PEPFAR results are sensitive to the choice of
Figure 1: (a) The three-node mediation directed acyclic graph in a setting with no confound-
ing. The nodes represent random variables, and the arrows represent possible causal effects of
one random variable on another. (b) The single-world intervention graph in the setting of (a)
under the intervention setting A to a˜ and M to m˜. The black nodes represent random variables
under this intervention, the red nodes represent the level an intervened random variable takes
underthisintervention,andthearrowsrepresentpossiblecausaleffectsofonevariableunderthis
interventiononanother.
assumptions made, consequently, we counsel investigators employing these effects to exercise
caution in considering the basis for point identification and to explicitly state the assumptions
required for them to be valid. Where assumptions are empirically untestable, they should be ar-
gued for on the basis of scientific understanding, and ideally the alternative should be explored
by employing partial identification bounds given both here and elsewhere. While some work
hasbeendonetodevelopsensitivityanalysesforunmeasuredconfoundingofthemediator(Tch-
etgen Tchetgen, 2011; Tchetgen Tchetgen and Shpitser, 2012; Vansteelandt and VanderWeele,
2012), sensitivity analyses for ranges of plausible associations between cross-world counterfac-
tuals remain undeveloped. Further development of sensitivity analyses of both forms would be
highly beneficial for practical use, and is fertile ground for future work. We hope that the work
presented here will inspire deeper consideration and transparency regarding underlying identify-
ingassumptionsinthepracticeofmediationanalysis.
2. PRELIMINARIES
By way of introduction, the directed acyclic graph (DAG) displayed in Fig. 1.(a) illustrates the
simplest possible mediation setting, where A is defined to be the exposure taking either baseline
value a∗ or comparison value a, M is defined to be the (potential) mediator, and Y is defined
to be the outcome. This DAG assumes randomization of the exposure, which for expositional
simplicity we maintain throughout. The graph also encodes no unobserved confounding of the
effectofM onY givenA. TheeffectalongthepathA → Y onthediagramisgenerallyreferred
to as direct with respect to M, and the effect along the path A → M → Y on the diagram is
generallyreferredtoasindirectwithrespecttoM.
Further elaboration of the specific type of direct and indirect effect under consideration
necessitates counterfactual definitions. Let Y(a) denote a subject’s outcome if treatment A were
set, possibly contrary to fact, to a. In the context of mediation, there will also be potential
outcomesfortheintermediatevariable. CounterfactualsM(a)andY(m,a)aredefinedsimilarly.
Inordertolinkthesewiththeobserveddata,weadoptthestandardsetofconsistencyassumptions
ifA = a,thenM(a) = M withprobabilityone,
ifA = aandM = m,thenY(m,a) = Y withprobabilityone,and
ifA = a,thenY(a) = Y withprobabilityone.
In terms of counterfactuals, the randomization assumption encoded by the DAG in Fig. 1.(a) is
{Y(a,m),M(a)}⊥⊥Aforallaandm;theassumptionofnounobservedconfoundingofM given
AisY(a,m)⊥⊥M(a) | A = aforallaandm. Finally,wewillconsideraswelldefinedthenested
counterfactual Y{a,M(a∗)}, i.e., the counterfactual outcome under an intervention which sets
the exposure to the comparison value a, and the mediator to the value it would have taken under
theconflictingbaselineexposurevaluea∗.
We may now define the pure/natural direct effect and natural indirect effect (Robins and
Greenland, 1992; Pearl, 2001), which form the following decomposition of the average causal
effect:
totaleffect
(cid:122) (cid:125)(cid:124) (cid:123)
naturalindirecteffect puredirecteffect
(cid:122) (cid:125)(cid:124) (cid:123) (cid:122) (cid:125)(cid:124) (cid:123)
The terms E{Y(a)} = E[Y {a,M(a)}], for all a, are identified under randomization of A. The
parameterγ
≡ E[Y{a,M(a∗)}]wouldbeidentifiedifoneweretointerprettheDAGinFig. 1.(a)
as a nonparametric structural equation model with independent errors (NPSEM-IE). Structural
equations provide a nonparametric algebraic interpretation of this DAG corresponding to three
equations, one for each variable in the graph. Each random variable on the graph is associated
with a distinct, arbitrary function, denoted g, and a distinct random disturbance, denoted ε, each
withasubscriptcorrespondingtoitsrespectiverandomvariable. Eachvariableisgeneratedbyits
correspondingfunction,whichdependsonlyonallvariablesthataffectitdirectly(i.e.,itsparents
onthegraph),anditscorrespondingrandomdisturbance,asfollows:
A = g (ε )
Y = g (A,M,ε ).
Underparticularinterventions,thesestructuralequationsnaturallyencodedependenciesofcoun-
terfactuals. Consider, for example, two interventions, one setting A = a∗, and another setting
A = aandM = m. Thestructuralequationsthenbecome
A = a∗ A = a
This formulation places no a priori restriction on the distribution of counterfactuals. The
keyassumptionofthe NPSEM-IE isthattherandomdisturbancesaremutuallyindependent. This
allows us to make independence statements regarding counterfactuals under various, possibly-
conflictinginterventions. Inparticular,thismodelimpliesthatforallm,(i){M(a),Y(a,m)}⊥⊥A,
(ii)Y(a,m)⊥⊥M(a) | A = a,and(iii)Y(a,m)⊥⊥M(a∗) | A = a,whichinturnsufficeforiden-
tification of γ (Pearl, 2001). Independence statements such as (iii) are known as cross-world
counterfactual statements if a is not equal to a∗, due to their comparison of interventions that
could never occur in the same world simultaneously. Independence condition (iii) can be seen
to hold under the model by considering the NPSEM-IE under a specific intervention and noting
that the only source of randomness in Y(a,m) = g (a,m,ε ) is ε and the only source of
randomness in M(a∗) = g (a∗,ε ) is ε . Thus, the cross-world-counterfactual-independence
statement follows directly from independence of exogenous disturbances. However, such an in-
dependenceisneitherexperimentallyverifiablenorenforceable(RobinsandRichardson,2010).
This issue has been discussed extensively (Robins and Richardson, 2010; Richardson and
Robins, 2013), and in large part motivated the development of the single-world intervention
graphs (SWIGs) of Richardson and Robins (2013). These causal graphs manage to elucidate this
issue by graphically representing the counterfactuals themselves, allowing independence state-
ments of counterfactuals to be read directly from the graph. Consider the SWIG in Fig. 1.(b). By
d-separation, it is clear that (i) Y(a,m)⊥⊥M(a) for all a and m, however no such statement can
bemadefromthegraphaboutY(a,m)andM(a∗)whena (cid:54)= a∗. UnderthisSWIG,independence
between Y(a,m) and M(a∗) is not assumed, and hence γ is not point identified. Robins and
Richardson(2010)providethefollowingboundsforitspartialidentificationinthesettingwhere
M isbinaryand SWIG independenceassumptionsM(a)⊥⊥AandY(a,m)⊥⊥{M(a),A}holdfor
allaandm:
InSection2,weextendthisresulttothesettingofapolytomousM.
As previously mentioned, another often-overlooked condition required for identification of
γ is that there is no confounder of the mediator’s effect on the outcome that is affected by
the exposure. Such a confounder is present in the setting illustrated in the DAG in Fig. 2.(a).
Generally, even under an NPSEM-IE interpretation of this DAG, γ
will not be identified in this
setting. This is readily seen by considering the following representation under this model given
Figure2: (a)AmediationdirectedacyclicgraphinwhichR isanexposure-inducedconfounder.
The nodes represent random variables, and the arrows represent possible causal effects of one
random variable on another. (b) The single-world intervention graph in the setting of (a) that
has been intervened on to set A to a˜ ∈ {a,a∗} and M to m˜. The black nodes represent random
variablesunderthisintervention,therednodesrepresentthelevelanintervenedrandomvariable
takes under this intervention, and the arrows represent possible causal effects of one variable
underthisinterventiononanother.
byRobinsandRichardson(2010):
Clearlythejointprobabilitytermcanneverbeidentifiedfromobserveddata,sincewewillnever
beabletoobserveR(a)andR(a∗)forthesameindividual.
Afewconditionsforidentificationhavebeenproposed. RobinsandRichardson(2010)give
two. ThefirstisthatR(a)⊥⊥R(a∗),inwhichcasethetroublesometermin(1)willfactor,giving
Itseemsbiologicallyunlikely,however,thatinascenarioinwhichAaffectsR,thecounterfactual
R under A = a would not be predictive of the counterfactual R under A = a∗. The other
conditionisthatthecounterfactualoutcomeunderoneexposurevalueisadeterministicfunction
ofthecounterfactualfortheothertreatment,i.e.,R(a) = g{R(a∗)}. Inthiscase,
The above assumption is implied by rank preservation (Robins and Richardson, 2010), which is
unlikely to hold in social and health sciences as it rules out individual-level effect heterogeneity
(Tchetgen Tchetgen and VanderWeele, 2014). As none of these conditions are experimentally
verifiable, the authors themselves “do not advocate blithely adopting such assumptions in order
topreserveidentificationofthe PDE in[thissetting]"(RobinsandRichardson,2010).
Tchetgen Tchetgen and VanderWeele (2014) give two testable conditions for identification
ofγ whenRispresent. ThefirstisofA–Rmonotonicity,i.e.,forBernoulliR,R(a) ≥ R(a∗). If
R is a vector of Bernoulli random variables whose structural equations have independent errors,
andifmonotonicityholdsforeachelement,
(cid:88) (cid:89)
pr(R = 1 | A = a∗) ifr∗ = r = 1,
  pr(R = 1 | A = a)−pr(R = 1 | A = a∗) ifr∗ = 0andr = 1,
f (r ,r∗,a,a∗) = j j j j
 0 ifr∗ = 1andr = 0,
 pr(R = 0 | A = a) ifr∗ = r = 0.
TheirsecondconditionisnoM–R additivemeaninteraction,i.e.,
foralllevelsmandm∗ ofM andr andr∗ ofR. FordiscreteM andR,thisyields
Eschewing the cross-world-counterfactual assumptions of the NPSEM-IE , Tchetgen Tch-
etgen and Phiri (2014) extend the bounds of Robins and Richardson (2010) to allow for the
presenceofanexposure-inducedconfounderwhenthemediatorisbinary:
(cid:40) (cid:41)
max 0,pr(M = 0 | A = a∗)+ E(Y | M = 0,R = r,A = a)pr(R = r | A = a)−1
(cid:40) (cid:41)
+max 0,pr(M = 1 | A = a∗)+ E(Y | M = 1,R = r,A = a)pr(R = r | A = a)−1
(cid:40) (cid:41)
min pr(M = 0 | A = a∗), E(Y | M = 0,R = r,A = a)pr(R = r | A = a)
(cid:40) (cid:41)
+min pr(M = 1 | A = a∗), E(Y | M = 1,R = r,A = a)pr(R = r | A = a) .
We extend these bounds as well to allow for polytomous M in Section 3. Additionally, we con-
structboundsforγ
underanNPSEM-IEthataccountforadiscreteexposure-inducedconfounder,
butrequirenofurtherassumption.
3. NEW PARTIAL IDENTIFICATION RESULTS
We begin by extending the bounds of Robins and Richardson (2010) and Tchetgen Tchetgen
and Phiri (2014) to settings with discrete mediator and outcome. Proofs can be found in the
Appendix.
Theorem 1. Under the SWIG in either Fig. 1.(b) or Fig. 2.(b) with discrete M and Y and
arbitraryR,
The upper and lower bounds coincide when Y(a,m) or M(a∗) is degenerate, which fol-
lowsfromthepropertiesofjointprobabilitymassfunctions. Theupperboundisachievedonlyif
(cid:2) (cid:3)
Y(a,m)andM(a∗)arecomonotoneforeachm,i.e.,ifF (y,m) = min F (y),F (m)
for each m, where F (·) denotes the joint (or marginal) cumulative distribution function of the
random vector (or scalar) X. The lower bound is achieved only if they are countermonotone
(cid:8) (cid:9)
for each m, i.e., if F (y,m) = max 0,F (y)+F (m)−1 for each m. A
straightforward application of the g-formula under the DAGs in Fig. 1 and 2 yields the following
corollaries:
Corollary 1. For polytomous M and Y, γ 0 is partially identified under the SWIG in Fig. 1.(b)
by the bounds in Theorem 1 with pr{M(a∗) = m} = pr(M = m | a∗) and pr{Y(a,m) =
y} = pr(Y = y | m,a). It is partially identified under the SWIG in Fig. 2.(b) by the same
bounds, but with pr{M(a∗) = m} = pr(M = m | a∗) and pr{Y(a,m) = y} = (cid:80) pr(Y = y |
m,r,a)pr(R = r | a).
Thesecondpartofthecorollarycontinuestoholdeveniftherewereahiddencommoncause
of R and Y as in Fig. 3, since the same g-formula applies in this setting. Whereas the previous
results invoked no cross-world-counterfactual independences under the SWIG interpretation of
the DAG in Fig. 2.(a), sharper bounds are available under Pearl’s NPSEM-IE interpretation of
these DAGs,asderivedinthefollowingresult.
Figure3: (a)AmediationdirectedacyclicgraphinwhichanunobservedvariableH affectsR,an
exposure-inducedconfounder,andY. Theblacknodesrepresentobservedrandomvariables,and
the arrows represent possible causal effects of one random variable on another. (b) The single-
world intervention graph in the setting of (a) that has been intervened on to set A to a˜ ∈ {a,a∗}
and M to m˜. The black nodes represent random variables under this intervention, the red nodes
represent the level an intervened random variable takes under this intervention, and the arrows
representpossiblecausaleffectsofonevariableunderthisinterventiononanother. Ineachpanel,
thegraynoderepresentsahiddenrandomvariable
Theorem2. FordiscreteR takingvaluesin{1,...,p},letB bethep2 ×(p−1)2 matrix
I 0 ··· 0 0
 −1T 0T ··· 0T 0T 
 0T −1T ··· 0T 0T 
. .
.
. .
.
... . .
.
. .
.
 0T 0T ··· −1T 0T 
 0T 0T ··· 0T −1T 
p−1 p−1 p−1 p−1
dbethep2-dimensionalvector
.
and x be the vectorization of the matrix [E{E(Y | M,R = r,A = a) | R = r∗,A = a∗}] .
Undera NPSEM-IE correspondingtothe DAG inFig. 2.(a)whereM andY canbeeithercontin-
(cid:2) (cid:3)
uousordiscrete,γ ispartiallyidentifiedby xT(Bδ +d),xT(Bδ +d) ,whereδ andδ are
the minimizing and maximizing solutions respectively to the linear programming problem with
objectivefunctionxTBδ subjecttotheconstraints
.
andδ ≥ 0.
Similar to the previous result, these bounds coincide if either R(a) or R(a∗) is degenerate.
TheupperboundisachievedwhenR(a)andR(a∗)arecomonotone;thelowerboundisachieved
whentheyarecountermonotone. Whiletheseboundsarenotavailableinclosedform,theycanbe
readilysolvedusingstandardsoftware,suchaswiththelp_solvefunction,whichusestherevised
simplex method and is accessible from a number of languages, including R, MATLAB, Python,
and C. While the method used by this software is not guaranteed to converge at a polynomial
rate (Klee and Minty, 1970), it is quite efficient in most cases (Schrijver, 1998). The following
corollaryshowsthattheseboundsreducetoaclosedformwhenR isbinary.
Corollary2. Undera NPSEM-IE correspondingtothe DAG inFig. 2.(a)withbinaryR,
whereΠistheset
π ifr∗ = r = 1,
  pr(R = 1 | A = a)−π ifr∗ = 0andr = 1,
 pr(R = 1 | A = a∗)−π ifr∗ = 1andr = 0,
UnderA−RmonotonicitywithbinaryR,theidentifyingfunctionalgivenbyTchetgenTch-
etgen and VanderWeele (2014) is recovered at the upper bound in Corollary 2. All results given
here can be extended to settings with observed pre-exposure confounders, which we denote C.
In Corollary 1, one must first perform conditional inference given C, then subsequently average
over the conditional bounds. This is in fact valid due to Jensen’s inequality, because the con-
straints on the marginal joint probabilities are already implied by the constraints enforced on the
conditional joint distributions, so no further constraints need be considered. However, Jensen’s
inequality does not apply in the case of Theorem 2, so controlling for C requires estimating two
pairs of candidate bounds and selecting the larger of the lower bounds and the smaller of the
upper bounds. When p is of moderate size, δ can be solved for each covariate pattern of C, i.e.,
without modeling the dependence of the cross-world-counterfactual joint distribution on C. Av-
eraging the resulting conditional bounds gives the first pair of bounds. The second pair results
fromreplacingeachprobabilityinthetheoremwithanaverageovertheprobabilitiesconditional
onC anddoingthesamewithx.
4. APPLICATION TO HARVARD PEPFAR DATA SET
WenowconsideranapplicationtoadatasetcollectedbytheHarvardPresident’sEmergencyPlan
forAIDSRelief(PEPFAR)programinNigeria. Thedatasetconsistsofpreviouslyantiretroviral
therapy(ART)-naïve,HIV-1infectedadultpatientswhobeganARTintheprogramandwerefol-
lowedatleastoneyearfollowinginitiation. Patientswithoutreliableviralloaddataattwoofthe
hospitalswereexcluded. OnlycompletecasesinitiallyprescribedtoeitherTDF+3TC/FTC+NVP
orAZT+3TC+NVP1 wereconsideredforthisanalysis. Thus,thedatasetweconsiderconsistsof
6627 patients, 1919 of whom were prescribed to TDF+3TC/FTC+NVP, and the remaining 4708
prescribedtoAZT+3TC+NVP.
There has accumulated evidence of a differential effect on virologic failure between these
two first-line antiretroviral treatment regimens (Tang et al., 2012). Virologic failure is defined
by the World Health Organization as repeat viral load above 1000 copies/mL. We base this on
measurementsat12and18monthsofARTdurationinouranalysis.
Anaturalquestionofscientificinterestiswhatroleadherenceplaysinmediatingthisdiffer-
entialeffect. Weareprimarilyinterestedinlearningaboutthescientificmechanismofthiseffect
ontheindividuallevel. Thenaturalindirecteffectbestcapturesthismechanisminthatitcaptures
13TC=lamivudine,AZT=zidovudine,FTC=emtricitabine,NVP=nevirapine,TDF=tenofovir
anisolatedeffectdifferencemediatedbyadherenceby,inasense,deactivatingeffectdifferences
along all other possible causal pathways. We specifically examine the effect through adherence
over the second six months since treatment assignment, i.e., the six months prior to the first vi-
ral load measurement. Identification is complicated by the presence of treatment toxicity, which
clearly affects adherence directly, and has the potential to modify the effect of the treatment as-
signment on virologic failure. Thus, toxicity measured at six months after treatment assignment
isanexposure-inducedconfounderoftheeffectofthemediatorontheoutcome. Further,toxicity
and virologic failure are likely to be rendered dependent by unobserved underlying biological
common causes as in Fig. 3, where H represents these hidden biological mechanisms. Because
we define the mediator to be adherence over the second six months, adherence over the first six
months is also an exposure-induced confounder along with toxicity, and must be accounted for.
Hadwedefinedthemediatortobeadherenceoverthefullyear,measurementofthemediatorand
toxicitywouldhaveoverlapped,violatingtheprincipleoftemporalordering.
Let C denote the vector consisting of baseline covariates sex, age, marital status, WHO
stage, hepatitis C virus, hepatitis B virus, CD4+ cell count, and viral load. Let A be an indicator
of ART assignment taking levels a∗ for TDF+3TC/FTC+NVP and a for AZT+3TC+NVP; R be
a vector of two indicator variables, one of the presence of any lab toxicity, and one of adherence
exceeding 95%, both over the first six months following initiation of therapy; M be an indicator
of adherence exceeding 95% over the subsequent six months; and Y be an indicator of virologic
failureatoneyear,i.e.,repeatviralloadabove1000copies/mLatoneyearandat18months.
Here we estimate the natural indirect effect of A on Y through M, as defined above, on the
risk difference scale using the various sets of identifying assumptions given above. Throughout,
inference is performed using maximum likelihood for point estimation and a weighted bootstrap
(Rao and Zhao, 1992; van der Vaart and Wellner, 1996) for confidence intervals, which appro-
priately accounts for the rare outcome. The results are summarized in Fig. 4. It is immediately
apparent that inference is sensitive to which identifying assumptions are made. Consider an
investigator who might be willing to rely on cross-world-counterfactual independences. If she
decides to ignore the presence of toxicity, she might likely conclude that there is a very small,
yet significant negative indirect effect. Conversely, were she to make the no M–R interaction
assumption, she would find a significant positive indirect effect with considerable uncertainty.
Ignore, IE Ignore, None Monoton., IE No M*R, IE None, None None, IE
Assumptions regarding R, Assumptions regarding cross−world counterfactuals
Figure 4: A plot showing the estimated natural indirect effect of ART assignment on virologic
failurewithrespecttoadherenceunderthevariousassumptions. Theassumptionsvaryacrossthe
horizontal axis, with the first part of the label indicating the assumption regarding the exposure-
induced confounder, R, and the second part indicating the assumption regarding cross-world
counterfactuals. For the assumptions regarding R, “Ignore" means that the presence of R is ig-
noredaltogether,“Monoton."meanstheA–R monotonicityassumptioninSection1,“NoM*R"
meansthenoM–RinteractionassumptioninSection1,and“None"meansthatRwasaccounted
for without additional assumptions. For the assumptions regarding cross-world counterfactuals,
“IE" means a NPSEM-IE was assumed, and “None" means no cross-world-counterfactuals inde-
pendences were assumed. When the assumptions give partial identification, the two dots rep-
resent the point estimates of the upper and lower bound for the natural indirect effect, and the
vertical bar represents the bootstrap 95% confidence interval for the interval. When the assump-
tions give full identification, the single dot represents the point estimate of the natural indirect
effect,andtheverticalbarrepresentsitsbootstrap95%confidenceinterval.
In fact, an empirical test of this assumption reveals that it is unlikely to apply. Likewise, the
data suggest that the required assumption of independent errors of the components of R is also
unlikely to hold. Nonetheless, we present both results for the sake of comparison. Results are
fairlyimpreciseundermonotonicity,anddonotshowasignificanteffect.
Anotherinvestigatorunwillingtoimposecross-world-counterfactual-independenceassump-
tions is left with little to say as the bounds are wide, and include the null hypothesis of no NIE,
regardless of how toxicity is handled. Interestingly, the bounds that result from making no as-
sumptionsaboutthejointdistributionofthecross-worldR counterfactualsarenarrowerthanthe
bounds that result from ignoring R. That is, the bounds themselves appear narrower; the vari-
ances of the interval estimates appear to be comparable. This is because even though we do not
impose any restrictions on the distribution of R or its counterfactuals a priori, observing R is
clearly informative. The bounds accounting for R have the added advantage of being the only
identifyingformulathatremainsvalidwhentoxicityandvirologicsuppressionareaffectedbyan
unobservedcommoncause,asinFig. 3.
Finally,incorporatingRresultsinnarrowerintervalestimatesthannotimposingtheNPSEM-IE,
evenifRwereignored. Thus,cross-world-counterfactual-independencesappeartohavestronger
empiricalimplicationsinthecurrentanalysisthanassumptionsregardingexposure-inducedcon-
founders. Thegeneraltrendintheseresultsisthatlittleisgainedintermsofprecisionbyassump-
tions regarding R. In fact, the confidence interval for the bounds resulting from the independent
errorsassumptionandnoassumptionregardingRisnarrowerthantheconfidenceintervalforthe
estimatethat resultsfrom assumingmonotonicity, despite thefact thatthe NIE ispoint-identified
in the latter case. The naïve assumption that R is not a confounder is the only assumption about
R underwhichprecisionisgained.
Proofs of theorems
ProofofTheorem1. For each level m and y, define π (m,y) = pr{Y(a,m) = y} and π (m) =
pr{M(a∗) = m}. There exist U (m,y),U (m) ∼ U(0,1) such that I{Y(a,m) = y} =
I{U (m,y) ≤ π (m,y)} and I{M(a∗) = m} = I{U (m) ≤ π (m)}. The joint distribution
F , then, is a bivariate copula, for which Fréchet–Hoeffding sharp bounds exist. Ap-
plyingthesetopr{Y(a,m) = y,M(a∗) = m} = F {π (m,y),π (m)},wehave
U1(m,y),U2(m) 1 2
Applyingtheseboundstoeachsummandin
yieldstheresult.
ProofofTheorem2. Letπ = pr{R(a) = r,R(a∗) = r∗},π bethevectorizationofthematrix
[π ], and δ be the vectorization of the matrix [π ] , i.e., the vectorization of the matrix
r,r∗ r,r∗ −p,−p
π with row p and column p removed. Equation (1) can now be expressed as γ = xTπ, which
is identified in x, but not π. Conditional on the marginal probabilities, which are identified, the
jointprobabilitieshave(p−1)2 degreesoffreedom,andcanbeexpressedasπ = Bδ+d. Since
xTBδ islinearinδ andeachelementofδ isconstrainedby
the proposed linear programming problem will yield the δ that optimizes xTBδ, and hence
xT(Bδ+d). Thus,γ willbeboundedbyxT(Bδ+d)evaluatedattheminimizingandmaximizing
linearprogrammingsolutionsδ andδ .