Sunday, June 23rd, 2013
On Some Recent Insights in Integral Biomathics
Plamen L. Simeonov
Berlin, Germany
Email: plamen@simeio.org
Abstract: This paper summarizes the results in Integral Biomathics obtained
to this moment and provides an outlook for future research in the field.
Keywords: Biomathematics; Challenges, Potentials, Category Theory,
Memory Evolutive Systems, Relational Biology, Wandering Logic Intelligence
to be published in:
J. Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology.
Special Theme Issue on Integral Biomathics: Can Biology Create a Profoundly New
Mathematics and Computation?
1. What are the challenges in formalizing biology today?
Formalization of any kind presumes the prior presence of something concrete and particular.
Recognizing this in biology is not easy. Many biological phenomena do not have adequate
mathematical representations. This is because living systems are deploying logic and
semiotics beyond our conception of mathematics into the domain of computation, which is on
its part much richer than the standard Turing machine paradigm. In particular, there are four
areas deserving attention with broad impacts in and beyond biology (Root-Bernstein, 2012a):
1. A theory of self-emergent objects that can carry out functions within interactive
variances of the constituents of living systems: developing models of self-emergent
objects (origins of first cells; self-assembly of viruses, etc.) that carry out functions
(selecting/rejecting among possible components; minimizing free energy; etc.) while
utilizing both continuous and discrete information. Set theory is too abstract to handle
such "objects"; they have more structure and other properties than sets and the
elements of sets. Therefore self-emergent objects must be defined in a frame where
their different qualities can be described. Such a theory should be able to incorporate
the work that has been done on understanding hierarchical systems, emergent
properties, complexity theory, etc. Its mathematics should therefore be extraordinarily
integrative. A subsumptive or specification hierarchy is more general than set theory
and could be the first step in this direction.
There are two fundamental issues to be taken in consideration. First, cells are
autonomous/autopoietic – they form themselves. Therefore, we need to use a frame
in which we can describe self-organizing / self-emergent objects mimicking “cellular
life” as evolution of such objects using specifications of the relations between them
that do provide rules i) to limit the entry and exit of individual elements, and ii) allow
elements to undergo transformations (e.g. metabolism) within the object. A key
question to answer here is wether the self (the individuum with a distinct identity) is a
prerequisite for or a consequence of the self-organization? Second, biological objects
(cells) have the variance property1. We need a theory that allows the definition of
objects that are not characterized by specific numbers, proportions and rates of
turnover, excretion and replenishment of the object/cell constituents, but i) by
(empirically determined) variances (number ranges) within which all of these
constituents must exist in order for the living object to function as such (Zadeh, 2000;
Kauffman, 2001), and ii) with the self being potentially associated with these
variances.
This “bio-affine” theory must allow the integration of continuous and “grainy”/discrete
temporalities for the same "object" simultaneously: a circular relation of i) handling
continuous variations of the chemical kinetics, e.g. continuous interactions/flows of
elements, while ii) acting on small sets of definable/discrete elements/individuals
(calculations of modular probabilities) determined by the chemical kinetics. Also, it
should have operators/functions capable of defining state-sensitive objects, i.e. to
model switching processes between stable states when certain values or variances
(within them) are exceeded.
2. A theory of complementary assembling: biological systems build and organize
themselves based on the principle of molecular complementarity to produce robust
aggregates/modules. Such a theory is therefore important, because the formation of
complementary (symmetric or asymmetric/chirality) modules within complex systems
can prune out huge numbers of unfeasible possibilities at each step of the
hierarchical modular assembly.
1 Any given cell must have chromosomes, but their number can vary (as they do in cancers and parthenogenesis)
and still be viable; they can have many ribosomes and mitochondria or but a few and still live; they can accumulate
certain amounts of toxins or lose a certain amount of key ions and still function; etc.
3. A qualia jump2 theory: Mathematics generally treats either scalar quantities or
vector quantities (statically defined), but not the transformation of scalar to vector
(dynamic type transitions). However, some properties of biological systems involve
transformations from pure scalar to pure vector quantities (and vice versa): e.g. a
chemical neurotransmitter signal (scalar diffusion) becomes a directional electrical
signal (a vector).
4. A hidden morphology theory: the linkage between form and function.
The mathematical challenges involved in attempting to model biological form-function
interactions are far from trivial. Natural selection attempts to optimize forms to carry
out particular functions, but since novel functions evolve from existing forms, these
formal attempts may be seriously limited. On the one hand, we do not have
geometrical tools that can easily model processes such as the complex folding of
proteins or chromosomes, or detailed embryological development. Mathematical
forms share little with the actual biological processes that give rise to these
structures. The mathematical abstractions currently used in system biological models
generally do not illuminate the processes that give rise to biological geometries, but
only their outward forms despite the work of René Thom (Thom, 1994). What is
interesting about biological forms, however, is not their geometry per se, but the ways
in which these forms are reifications of the biochemical processes which they carry
out or make possible. For example, it has become evident that the folding of
chromosomes is a prerequisite to bringing together genes that would otherwise be
spatially separated; and also that spatial proximity permits the rapid diffusion and
control of interactive gene products that would otherwise be unable to interact in a
reasonable biological time frame across an unfolded genome (Junier et al., 2010).
Similarly, in human developmental biology we have now excellent data concerning
the sets of genes that must be turned on and when they must be activated or
inactivated in order to produce proper embryological development, yet the discrete
information generated from combinations of individual genes is expressed as a
continuous flow of proteins and hormones that produce gradients which must be
reified as organized groupings of cells that have a specific form. So embryology is
also stymied by the lack of mathematical approaches that can link discrete,
continuous and geometrical information simultaneously. But what kind of
mathematical notions would make it possible to model simultaneously the effects of
geometry (spatial structure) on continuous functions such as diffusion that in turn
regulate on-off gene regulatory switches that act discontinuously or digitally? And
how can a mathematical object obtain and maintain its identity? Also, Lewontin has
stressed the reciprocal relationships between genes, organisms and their
environment, in which all three elements act as both causes and effects (Lewontin,
2002). Therefore, we should be able to explore alternative avenues to traditional
unidirectional genotype-phenotype relationships such as cyclic or helical or chaotic
genotype-phenotype mappings.
2. Are there any solutions in sight?
In fact, such biologically relevant mathematical concepts providing the base for realizing the
scenario in the previous section do currently exist. The above questions reflecting work by
(Root-Bernstein, 2012a) were raised with reference to a 'classical' view on the different
domains of mathematics. This traditional view on mathematics has been modified with the
introduction of more unified and 'relational' approaches, such as category theory (Mac Lane,
1998) and algebraic geometry (Felix et al., 2008) in general, as noted by (Hoffman, 2013). In
addition, richer Bayesian, contextual models, but also quantum models (Gomez-Ramirez &
2 A quale is an individual instance of subjective, conscious experience, "an unfamiliar term for something that could
not be more familiar to each of us: the ways things seem to us” (Dennet, 1988).
Sanz, 2013; Kitto & Kortschak, 2013; Gabora et al.; 2013), and post-Turing computation
(Siegelmann, 2013) and elaborate forms of logic (Goranson & Cardier, 2013; Marchal, 2013)
have changed the understanding about the role of mathematics in biology. The following two
sections recapitulate two complementary approaches which both touch on the implementation
of the Integral Biomathics strategy of (Simeonov et al., 2012b).
2.1 Category Theory (CT), Memory Evolutive Systems and Relational Biology
Category Theory (CT) is a formal domain of mathematics at the frontier between
mathematics, logic and meta-mathematics. It provides conceptual means for thinking about
mathematics in terms of the relations between its domains. CT is: i) a language which tries to
uncover and unify the operations made in different mathematical branches (such as abstract
algebra, topology, geometry, etc.); (ii) a philosophy, which provides a general notion of
mathematical structure (e.g. category of sets, of groups, of graphs, of fields, of rings, etc.);
and iii) a mindset providing new tools (such as adjoint functors, colimits, etc.) that are useful
for defining models of complex systems.
Whereas the question 'Can we model this with differential equations?' is a valid one with a
yes/no answer, the answer to 'Can CT provide tools to handle this?' is often “yes as long as”
we phrase the particular category-theoretic descriptions appropriately. But this affirmative
answer is due to the generality of CT and means also that it is not sufficient as such for
modeling things 'concretely'. One must still use a specifically suited subbranch of
mathematics, although casting the problem directly in the language of category theory is also
often useful. Category Theory offers a 'relational mathematics' emphasizing the relations
between objects rather than the objects themselves. Indeed an object of a category is
characterized, not by its 'ontological structure' but by the set of morphisms arriving at it
(Yoneda Lemma), which corresponds to the different operations in which the object
participates. Therefore there is no need for a new kind of set theory (Question 1), but a whole
variety of morphisms can be used instead of simple maps, thus giving one much more
representational freedom. For instance, we may take a category whose objects are
molecules, and the morphisms model chemical interactions between them. We can look at a
molecule as the set of its atoms and their chemical bonds. However, the morphisms between
molecules do not correspond to maps between these sets but represent emergent properties
at the molecular level depending on quantum level properties with infinitely many elements.
Two category-theoretical approaches are of particular interest for us: Memory Evolutive
Systems, MES (Ehresmann & Vandbremeersh, 2007; Ehresmann, 2012) and Relational
Biology, RB (Louie, 2009, 2013), with the latter forming a continuation of Robert Rosen’s work
on the subject (Rosen, 1958a/b; 1959; 1991; 1999) and on anticipatory systems (Rosen,
2012). Both represent domain-specific incarnations of CT for biology as synergetic syntheses
of a number of mathematical theories (partially ordered sets, lattices, graphs, categories,
adjacency matrices, and interacting entailment-type networks, etc.).
More specifically, the MES theory can handle the different problems with self-emergent
objects in the following way:
1. A "self-emergent object" is modeled as a colimit emerging via a complexification of an
appropriate category. Examples are given in (Ehresmann & Vanbremeersch, 2007).
2. MES are particular state-transition systems. A component of the system (for instance,
a cell) is not represented by a unique object but by the family of its (infinitely many)
successive states. Indeed, in an MES, the original system is not modeled by a unique
category but by an evolutive system, that is, a family of categories indexed by time
with transition partial functors applying between them. Thus, a component C can be
modeled using the family of its successive states. This representation allows one to
differentiate between the complex identity (or "class identity") of C and the individual
identities of its lower level components.
Second, complementary assembling (Question 2) is allowed through the consideration of
"activator links" in memory from a molecule to the procedure which consists in attracting the
complementary molecule.
The qualia jump theory (Question 3) is related to hierarchy and emergence, whereby the
Multiplicity Principle plays an important role since it allows for the emergence of new
properties (represented by complex links). For instance, the electric signal at the cell level is
an emergent property from a pattern of chemical signals acting on the molecular level.
The "hidden form" problem (Question 4) refers to the emergence of a higher-layer object as
the colimit of a pattern of interacting lower-layer objects (which forces its geometric form). The
key question remaining in all cases is how to implement the colimits empirically.
The RB approach presented in The Reflection of Life (Louie, 2013), a domain-specific CT for
biology is formulated in terms of set-valued mappings. Instead of considering a mapping of
the form f :A→B (from set A to set B, sending element a∈A to element f (a)∈B),
Louie suggests the new correspondence F:A – D or3 F:A –[ D (from set A to subsets
of D , sending an element a∈A to set F(a)⊂ D); particularly consequential hereby is
the case when D=H(B,C) (the hom-set H(B,C), a set of mappings from set B to set
C). By using the theory of set-valued mappings it is possible to handle the above questioned
four issues about living systems (1 to 4), of the point/set hierarchy, of continuity/discreteness,
and of cyclic/helical entailment with much naturalness and ease. Ultimately, the theory of set-
valued mappings culminates in the so-called imminence mapping, which greatly facilitates the
further investigation of functional entailment in complex relational networks. In short, both
MES and RB provide truly integrative, both multi-scale, multi-temporality mathematical
approaches to the modeling of biological phenomena. Their common problem remains that
they need to be translated into a more understandable and computable language, that is, an
“operational semantics” to handle the implementation of their concepts is needed.
2.2 The Wandering Logic Intelligence (WLI)
A recent study presented in the 2012 Oxford seminar on the conceptual foundations of
system biology (Bard et al., 2013) has put forward two essential principles of modern biology:
1. Feedback between the participants at several levels – with oscillations being
inherent in the dynamics of this feedback in order to guarantee stability.
This rule defines the “first law of system biology”: Any complex biological event
involves activity at many levels and the properties that emerge from this activity are
not necessarily predictable (Kolodkin et al., 2012).
2. No level of preferred status exists, with necessary and important events taking
place at and between each level so that causality occurs upwards, downwards
and within levels (Noble, 2012; 2013). This rule has been shown to be realized
within the entire physiome (genome, proteome, interactome) (Werner, 2005; Shapiro,
2013). An open question here is how we can address supervenience4 (Kim, 1984;
1987).
3 The ‘forked arrow’ notation ‘–’ or ‘—[‘ Is Louie’s invention.
4 The term “supervenience” was suggested by Kim to denote such phenomena as moral properties that supervene
on natural properties, or mental characteristics that supervene on physical characteristics (e.g. the properties of our
nervous system). The term can be defined as follows: For two sets of properties, A (the supervenient set) and B (the
subvenient set or supervenient base), A supervenes on B just in case there can be no difference in A without a
difference in B. Reversing this principle delivers the converse concept of antisupervenience or determination: B
determines A just in case sameness with respect to B implies sameness with respect to A. Hence supervenience and
determination are two sides of the same coin.
These two principles and two additional ones, related to the emergence of the self and the
complementarity requirements presented in section 1, are epitomized by the Wandering Logic
Intelligence (WLI) theory (Simeonov, 2002a/b/c):
1. Multidimensional Feedback
2. Pulsating Metamorphosis
3. Self-Reference
4. Dualistic Congruence
They were successfully tested in practice for the specification and implementation of mobile
computing and communication architectures (Simeonov, 2002c, Wepiwe & Simeonov, 2005).
These principles can be used also for the investigation of interacting living systems (Louie,
2013) from both the internalist and the externalist viewpoint, i.e., the 1st and 3rd person
perspectives (Rössler, 1987, 1998; Matsuno, 1989, 1996). This can complement the
categorical formalization of MES with the computational semantics of WLI whereby both are
mutually reflective.
Into this context fall two recent insights by (Matsuno, 2013) and (Salthe, 2013). The first is
about the necessity to elaborate and include a new kind of active temporal logic, which
internalizes the description of the metabolic dynamics of a living system recursively into the
dynamics itself. This temporal dynamics5 of the organism (or machine6) maintaining its own
identity (from a 1st person perspective) can be modeled in terms of a constant updating of the
present perfect tense into the present progressive tense. The second constructive aspect of
this computational dynamics and operational semantics type description comes from the
macroscopic level (3rd person perspective) and requires one to trace it both spatially, within
sets of nested hierarchies, and temporally across the entire development cycle.
The synergies between MES and WLI were already studied in (Ehresmann & Simeonov,
2012). Both theories taken together appear to provide a sound base for the modeling of
biological systems.
3. What are the foundations we build on?
Integral Biomathics strongly endorses the following topics for research in biology:
1. A source of current methodological problems in system and molecular biology lies in
a preoccupation with the quantitative methods and a disregard for the qualitative,
structural approach (Schroeder, 2013).
2. The problem of combinatorial complexity7 when dealing with large dynamic multi-
protein complexes in living systems leads to the insight that conventional modeling
approaches (like differential equations) fail to describe the self-assembly process,
mainly due to the combinatorial explosion of the number of intermediate complexes
(Tschernyschkow et al., 2013). A hierarchical levels approach could be a solution.
3. Category theory is a powerful means to express and discover new syntactic
properties different from all others currently considered in biology (Cazalis, 2013).
4. Algebraic geometry shows that form follows function. In order to be properly
understood, this requires one to take into account the interaction between form and
function. The expression “G × M → M” encapsulates this relations between structure
and function8. It is the task of biologists to provide the particular structure of the
5 expressed through the constant exchange of its constituent molecules by new ones from its environment
6 in the post-Gödelian definition of (Marchal, 2013)
7 Tschernyschkow et al. show how to apply a novel rule-based modeling approach in space to the study of the
formation of the inner kinetochore structure that plays a central role in chromosome segregation and cell division.
The pertinent simulation experiments require unconventional mathematical and computational methods for their
interpretation. Structure clustering, information theory, phylogeny, and visualization have been applied so far. The
challenges laid open in the present article document the need for new mathematical and computational approaches
in order to tackle the combinatorial complexity of living systems in space.
8 Often biological form is changing during actions.
parameter group G that is involved in a biological phenomenon. In regard to the
traditional distinction between pure mathematics and applied mathematics, G in the
expression G × M → M, G can be anything (from graphs to categories), and M can be
anything from a module to a category. In view of the tremendous variation that
biology offers, choices must be made in the application of mathematics to particular
biological phenomena. Hereby algebraic geometry or ‘rational homotopy theory’ can
prove to be essential to understanding the structure-function map in biology
(Hoffman, 2012-2013; Felix et al., 2008).
5. Biocomputation and temporality: It turns out that computation as now performed is
unnatural in biology. Computations conceived in first-order logic are generally not
decidable. This fact implies that there is no guarantee that such an algorithm can lead
to an effective procedure to decide upon membership in a legitimate domain of
discourse, or on an allowed set of formulas using Boolean true or false values9.
6. Development and decidability: A crucial question here is whether and how
decidability is implemented in the developmental process of biology. The current
practice of employing simulations in biology without examining the possibility of
undecidability is a bit ill conceived. What makes a developmental process maximally
challenging from the point of view of computation is whether or not decidability10 can
be obtained (Salthe, 2013).
7. Use of probabilities: The limitations of traditional or standard mathematical statistical
models including the standard Bayesian approach, for modeling biological systems
require the revision in terms of the inverse problem to models and parameter values
being obtained by measurements. Here new methods such as a truly Bayesian
approach (Gomez-Ramirez & Sanz, 2013) are suggested as effective tools to deal
with biological probabilities e.g. in neuroscience11 and physics.
8. Realism and fractalization: A resolution of the dichotomy between the one-person
and third-person description of systems requires a subtle account of the interaction
between multiple-time scales to rigorously describe complex internal (first person)
experiences modeled externally (from a third person’s perspective) as hierarchical
nested events (Vrobel, 2013).
9. Objectivism and contextuality: There is a general problem in using the Newtonian
Paradigm in the study of life. Specifically there is the difficulty of defining units of
selection (Salthe, 2008) in biology12, where this concept plays a fundamental role.
This is an unavoidable consequence of the need to take into account the context of
whatever biological process is considered. This applies already on the molecular
level when interaction between parts of the genome are considered, and on a larger
scale when genotype-phenotype interactions are important. A reason for the failure of
elements of the Newtonian Paradigm applied in the study of life are the two concepts
of an object and objectivity. This problem was proposed to be fixed by introducing a
kind of contextual mathematics using three aspects of Quantum Field Theory (QFT):
potentiality in terms of multiple stable lowest energy states, spontaneous symmetry
breaking and Nambu-Goldstone emergence, to explain the creation of new biological
objects and structures (Kitto and Kortschak, 2013). However, a tough problem lurking
here is how to secure the right fundamental predicates for the intended enterprise.
10. Quantum-like potentiality in evolution: A new mathematical framework for
preadaptation that defines the state of a trait as a linear superposition of basic states
– or possible forms – is presented here as mutually orthogonal weighted eigenvectors
in a complex Hilbert space, into which a trait could evolve. The choice of trait
changes is expressed as an adaptive quantum function, which plays the role of the
observable (Gabora, Scott and Kauffman, 2013).
The realization of quantum-like potentiality in evolution (Gabora et al., 2013) in combination
with other seminal ideas like the contextuality concept (Kitto and Kortschak, 2013), the
framework of the cognizer-system model (Nakajima, 2013) or the full Bayesian approach
9 This is the satisfiability problem (SAT) within the frame of non-determinis tic Turing-machine computation, which is
crucial with regard to the likelihood of P vs. NP completeness (Cook, 1971).
10 either from formal logic ,or from bare empirical facts by way of an act of measurement
11 neuroscience has the 'coarse to fine' trope (making a subsumptive hierarchy)
12 This issue is about the nature of identity of a material body encountered in biology.
(Gomez-Ramirez & Sanz, 2013), or the formal categorization of the individual (Catzalis,
2013), or the form-follows-function mapping of algebraic geometry (Hoffman, 2013) and the
third person expression of the internal fractalization of time (Vrobel, 2013), are all consistent
with the line of thought developed in the INBIOSA project (Simeonov et al., 2012a/b). These
approaches are far from being congruent but we believe that they provide a much-needed
new focus that predictably entails a significant “cultural exaptation”.
4. What are the potential application domains?
The above enumeration of areas of application addressed by Integral Biomathics techniques
is incomplete. For example, the WLIMES approach (Ehresmann & Simeonov, 2012) is able to
develop a robust computational framework on top of a qualitative formal model of living
systems based on an evolutionary category theory in the domain of personalized medicine
addressing such fields as:
• virology/vaccinology
• molecular genetics
• oncology
• neuroscience
• immunology
• emergency medicine
Characteristic of these domains is the multi-layered nature of the phenomena. Key features of
these domains are that they are data and knowledge intensive fields, and beset by
incomplete and noisy information.
Infection biology and in particular neurovirology combine a number of key systemic themes in
the above 6 areas: the interactions between organisms and their environments, and those
between two living systems. One of the challenging questions that can help better prevent
spreading of infections and pandemic diseases is understanding how viruses move within
hosts, e.g. from the skin to the nervous system (Zaichick et al., 2013) and thereby attack
multiple weak points in an organism’s defense system.
5. How are these challenges being approached today?
Today, scientists use a multiplicity of mathematical and computational approaches based on
the classical line of Turing machine models. None of the challenges facing the formalization
of living systems outlined in section 1 have been addressed so far (Simeonov et al., 2011).
There are two main fields for theoretical research in biology and medicine:
• quantitative modeling: ODE/PDE systems, probabilistic/statistical/stochastic (e.g.
Monte Carlo, Markovian, Bayesian etc.) models
• qualitative modeling: discrete state-transition systems such as Boolean/logical
networks, Petri nets, process algebras (CCS, CSP, ACP, LOTOS), etc.
A third field is concerned with the visualization of experimental/empirical evidence:
• regulatory charts/maps/graphs, 3D VR models, simulation and animation, etc.
The combination of these areas is known as “hybrid modeling”. Basically we distinguish
between the hypothesis-driven (qualitative) and the data-driven (quantitative) approaches,
both using visualization methods to validate their models, yet with (almost) no links between
them. The funds spent for carrying out data-driven research (Human Genome Project, Human
Brain Project, etc.) exceed by orders of magnitude those for exploring hypothesis-driven
research.
5.1 Qualitative vs. quantitative models
An important current limitation of quantitative methods is the deficit in detailed quantitative
information about the reaction kinetics (kinetic and their associated parameters) underlying
the protein–protein and protein–DNA interactions (Alm & Arkin, 2003).
The missing data are usually replaced by the use of probabilistic and statistical methods. For
instance, (Wierling et al., 2012) propose to predict the disturbances induced by targeted
cancer therapies on the EGF signaling network by introducing a Monte Carlo type strategy
incorporating repeated simulations with parameter vectors sampled from an assumed random
distribution with subsequent statistical significance testing. They demonstrate the applicability
of this approach by generating statistically reproducible predictions of potential drug targets.
Since the application of standard statistical models in biology is limited, refinements of the
heuristics are suggested to fill this gap (Nakajima, 2013; Gomez-Ramirez & Sanz, 2013). On
the other hand, the predictive power of qualitative approaches like Boolean networks and
other discrete techniques is limited to qualitative conclusions only.
The majority of work done up until now has been on modeling complex molecular networks.
A large body of work was done in quantitative modeling using systems of differential
equations (Olmholt, 2013) and in qualitative approaches based on discrete state-transition
systems (e.g. by using Petri nets (Heiner & Gilbert, 2013)). However, progress in these areas
was limited. This is partly because we know little about the reaction constants and partly
because the nature of most of the interactions between the participating proteins has yet to
be elucidated qualitatively or quantitatively. We cannot even be sure, for example, that the
law of mass action holds true given the small number of proteins within a cell so that models
require stochastic or “negotiation” elements.
5.2 Consequences
The data driven approach in biology has not held its promise of predictive diagnostics and
personalized medical treatment (Ahn et al., 2006; Gomez-Ramirez & Wu, 2012). The
extensive knowledge of the genome sequences of human beings and various pathogenic
agents has led to the identification of but a limited number of new drug targets (Drews, 2003).
The employment of new methods for drug discovery based on strategies like high-throughput
screening, combinatorial chemistry, genomics, proteomics and bioinformatics does not
currently bring forth the expected new medications and therapies (Kubinyi, 2003; Glassman &
Sun, 2004). A number of biotechnological projects such as gene therapy, stem-cell research,
antisense technology and cancer vaccination have failed to deliver the expected results
(Glassman & Sun, 2004). The common problem with many of these innovative techniques is
that the risks and unwelcome side effects have been underestimated, as was the case for
gene therapy (Williams & Baum, 2003). Therefore we presently give preference to the
qualitative, hypothesis-driven approach, considering science to be not only concerned with
producing predictive model but also and more prominently to be involved in understanding
Nature, as René Thom argued in defense of his notion of qualitative mathematics (Thom,
1977; 1994).
6. Why can we do better than before?
Current approaches to complex problems rely on modeling but one aspect of the problem
with but one form of mathematics, switching from one to another sort of mathematics to
address the next aspect and then to a third one to describe yet another. All this switching is
an indication of how inadequate our mathematical tools (ODE/PDE systems, stochastic
models, discrete state-transition systems, etc.) of to date are. Biological systems function at
all of these levels simultaneously, so why cannot our mathematics do the same? It is not
biology that is too messy to be modeled, but our mathematics is inadequate because we are
not creative enough (Hong, 2013) to adequately address these biological problems.
This shows we need to go beyond the standard paradigm of computation as formally
implemented in the Turing machine. One candidate to help us get out of the current
stifling situation is to pay more attention to the Turing oracle machine13. This is a
formal scheme to address the issue of making decisions that would consistently
survive on the most concrete and particular level in our empirical world. Note that the
source data of biology come from concrete particulars without exception.
Remember that hierarchy theory (Salthe, 2012) suggests that reductionism can never explain
how novel properties and processes emerge. Biological entities have properties that differ
from chemical and physical ones and require developing appropriate mathematical notions.
What we need is not more detailed physical models of biological systems that could handle
larger and larger amounts of detailed data from increasingly fine-grained studies of the
components of biological systems, but ways of identifying the biological properties that are as
unique to such complex aggregations as temperature is to a set of molecules (Root-
Bernstein, 2012a). This is why we need a new biomathematics – a mathematics based on
such fields as category theory and algebraic geometry which treats continuous functions,
sets, vectors, fields and other formalisms in a single complementary framework that is truly
integrative: A unique evolutionary mathematical and computation platform that deals with the
emergence of organization from non-random selection amongst replicating variations within
complex populations of things. The challenge of Integral Biomathics is to provide the
mathematical and computational methods necessary for the modeling of such emergent
properties and organization.
7. What is missing in current theoretical biology?
Besides the often-referred to self-organization principles (Camazine et al., 2003), biological
systems exhibit the following special characteristics which have been neglected by virtually all
qualitative and quantitative, approaches so far:
• Emergence: Emergent properties differ from resultant properties that can be
predicted from local lower-layer information. They resist premature attempts at being
predicted or deduced by explicit calculation. Thus, the behavior of biological systems
cannot be understood or predicted by simply analyzing the structure of their
constituents. The latter interact in many different ways including multiple negative
feedback and feed-forward controls, which lead to dynamical properties that cannot
be adequately predicted by using linear mathematical models that disregard
cooperation, competition, and non-additive effects. Therefore, in recognition of the
complexity of informational pathways and networks, non-classical mathematical
formalisms are necessary for modeling such systems (Aderem & Smith, 2004; Root-
Bernstein, 2012a). [In our project we are going to model emergence both in an
explicit and in an implicit way, i.e. (a) by developing new formalisms and (b) by using
simulations, without any explicit reference to the emerging properties14.] Emergence
theory regards the natural world as organized in terms of hierarchies that have
evolved over time (Pattee, 1973; Salthe, 1985; Salthe & Matsuno, 1995; Kim 1999,
Morowitz, 2002). Whereas reductionists defend an 'upward causation' by which
molecular states bring about the higher-layer phenomena, the proponents of
emergence advocate a 'downward causation' by which the higher-layer systems
influence lower-layer ones (Kim, 1999). We adopt the “inside-out” causation concept
13 An oracle is a machine which computes a single arbitrary (non-recursive) function from naturals to naturals (Turing,
1939). In other words, this is just another name for non-trivial meta-level heuristics that lies outside an object-level
theory. In Integral Biomathics, we regard "oracles" to truly lie beyond the object-level (scientific and/or mathematical)
theories, such as group theory and QM. In other words, an oracle is anything that is or can lead to a true statement
that cannot be reached within a formalized (syntactic) system of the pertinent theory. Oracles are part of all human
knowledge that cannot be proven within any of the currently known formal systems; i.e. they contain “true”
statements that cannot be proven in a Gödelian sense. All our theories are bound to remain incomplete, but as they
become richer and richer, what once lied outside a given theory will become part of the (again still incomplete) new
theory.
14 For instance the shape of a galaxy can be derived by simulation (most models apply Newton’s law or variants
thereof) over a large number of “particle” stars. The shape of a galaxy then is implicit in Newton’s law.
of Sydney Brenner (Brenner, 2010) in the context it is represented by Denis Noble
(Noble, 2008; 2012). The only way to anticipate emergence is to observe and trace
the pattern formations and their relations within their own context at possibly multiple
layers below, at and above the layer of their initial emergence.
• Robustness: Biological systems tend to be impervious to less than drastic changes in
their environment because they are able to adapt and have flexibly redundant
components and pathways that can act as backups if individual components or paths
fail (Csete & Doyle, 2002; Kitano, 2002; Ehresmann & Vanbremeersh, 2007).
• Hierarchical Modularity: Biological systems are hierarchically organized with
subsystems being physically and functionally isolated in such a way that a failure in
one module does not spread to all other parts of the structure with possibly lethal
consequences (Alm & Arkin, 2003). This modularity, however, does not prevent
different compartments from communicating with each other (Weng et al., 1999).
• Organisational Closure and Openness: Biological systems are self-contained with
internally coupled pathways, but exchange matter, energy and information with their
environment and are therefore not in thermodynamic equilibrium (Yoshiteru, 2009;
Mossio & Moreno, 2010).
• Contextuality: Biological systems are extremely complex and dependent on their local
contexts and their embedding within other systems and ecologies (Aerts & Gabora,
2005; Cardinale & Arkin, 2012; Kitto & Kortschak, 2013).
• Complementarity: There is a chemical link between biological structure and function
(“structure follows function”). First, molecules that bind to each other almost always
alter each other's physiological effects; and conversely, molecules that have
antagonistic or synergistic physiological effects almost always bind to each other.
Second, contemporary biological systems contain an embedded molecular
paleontology based on small, molecularly complementary modules/subunits that are
built into contemporary macromolecular structures such as receptors and
transporters. Third, complementary modules are conserved and repurposed at every
stage of evolution. Finally, modularity based on molecular complementarity produces
a means for storing and replicating information. Linear replicating molecules such as
DNA or RNA are not required to transmit information from one generation of
compounds to the next: compositional replication is as ubiquitous in living systems as
genetic replication and is equally important to their functioning. Chemical systems
composed of complementary modules mediate this compositional replication and
gave rise to linear replication schemes. Molecular complementarity plays a critical
role in the evolution of chemical systems and resolves a significant number of
outstanding problems in the emergence of complex systems. Most physical and
mathematical models of organization within complex systems rely upon
nonrandom/deterministic linkages between components. Molecular complementarity
provides a naturally occurring nonrandom linker. More importantly, the formation of
hierarchically organized stable modules vastly improves the probability of achieving
self-organization. In addition, molecular complementarity provides a mechanism by
which hierarchically organized stable modules can form. Complementarity is
ubiquitous in living systems, because it provides the physicochemical basis for
modular, hierarchical ordering and replication necessary for the evolution of the
chemical systems upon which life is based (Root-Bernstein & Dillon, 1997; Root-
Bernstein, 2012b). Recently, (Kolodkin et al., 2012) argued for replacing the tradition
of Occam's razor in science (reflecting the intention to model the system as simply as
possible) with a ‘law of completeness’.
While already taking into account hierarchical organization and modularity, the reductionist
agendas of molecular and systems biology in the past ignored such essential characteristics
of living systems as emergence, robustness, complementarity and contextuality. This
restriction had a profound impact on biological and biomedical research during the past 50
years.
For instance, the flexible redundancy (cf. robustness) is at the base of the MES' Multiplicity
Principle (MP). It means, so in Edelman's "degeneracy" (Edelman & Gally, 2001) that the
same output can be generated by structurally and functionally different components and
pathways. The latter are hidden (potential) for the researcher a priory due to the switching off
of a particular known component or path (e.g. an enzyme that triggers the synthesis of an
undesired protein). This principle is a new key insight for understanding such phenomena as
cancerogenesis and MODS15. It needs thorugh consideration when developing future
personalized medical therapies. In this way there exists a functional interdependence, not
only between robustness and complementarity but also among the other characteristics of
living systems. This requires a higher layer of functional modeling addressing the above
issues.
In most theoretical biology models the following holds true:
• data-driven and hypothesis-driven models are decoupled,
• all space-scales of interest are non-integrated,
• either upward or downward causation is used alone (generally upward),
• no self-* properties are addressed.
Therefore, current models are incomplete; are sensitive to noisy or missing data; and lack
expressiveness. In addition, the modeling environments have no embedded intelligence. As
a result, the experimenter/researcher is confronted with an exponentially growing complexity
that results from a huge number of variables and parameters to explore. In addition, he/she
faces incomplete and noisy data. The ease of data collection has exacerbated the need of
models rich enough to explain relations present in the data. But model selection must be
perceived as an integral part of data analysis (Johnson & Omland, 2004).
Theoretical biology has been focusing largely on dynamics, stochastic processes and discrete
mathematics. Nevertheless, neither graphical pathway maps, nor “ODEs or formal programs
can indicate whether a description is complete in the sense that it mirrors the full complexity
of reality with … its alternative pathways. Even if it predicts a correct observation, we are not
to know whether the description is correct, we merely know that it is a possible solution. It is
not obvious that there is any way of handling the depths of biological complexity...” (Bard et
al., 2013).
Now the time is ripe to rethink the foundations of biological and medical discovery. Our
proposal is intended to overcome these shortcomings.
8. What do we suggest?
In (Krakauer et al., 2011) the authors plead that it were profitable to explore a wider range of
mathematical ideas, such as those connected with logical formalisms, category theory and a
variety of frameworks supporting concepts related to information-processing (e.g. info-max
assumptions) and forms of distributed decision-making. Hoffman’s last article in this issue
suggests algebraic geometry (Felix et al., 2008) as a promising theory to tackle the problems
of formalizing living systems (Hoffman, 2013). These clarion calls are in line with the Integral
Biomathics program (Simeonov, 2010; Simeonov et al., 2012a/b).
As a first practical step towards the realization of this vision, we propose to devise a more
moderate, but integrative and evolutionary methodology. This includes the development of a
prototype for a unified framework in biomathematics and biocomputation to explore
morphogenesis, development, evolution and brain function across multiple domains and
perspectives.
15 Multiple Organ Dysfunction Syndrome
This unified research and development framework comprises the following elements:
• Qualitative and quantitative modeling
• Deterministic and stochastic approaches
• Discrete and continuous specifications
• Formal and empirical validation and verification
• Visualization tools supporting both the understanding of the target biological system
and the optimization of cognitive exploration processes
Our approach addresses directly three of the 23 DARPA challenges for mathematics16:
i) The Mathematics of the Brain,
ii) The Dynamics of Networks, and
iii) The Fundamental Laws of Biology
Six other challenges on this list are also indirectly addressed in our discussion circle.
Following previous studies carried out in the INBIOSA project17 (Simeonov et al., 2011;
Simeonov et al. 2012a/b,) and the follow-up activities such as this special issue of JPBMB,
we are suggesting an innovative multi-layer approach for qualitative modeling and simulation
of living systems based on the integration of three complementary approaches:
• a formal mathematical methodology based on a dynamic category theory, called
Memory Evolutive Systems, MES (Ehresmann and Vanbremeersch, 2007).
• a formal virtual computation and communication methodology based on temporal
logic, called the Wandering Logic Intelligence, WLI (Simeonov, 2002a/b), and
• a visual modeling and simulation environment GSMP (Siregar et al., 2003).
It represents a formal framework, capable of describing, tracing and predicting the emergence
and development of biological structures, using recursive specification and validation in terms
of their abstract syntax and operational semantics.
Most importantly, we are going to provide complementary 1st and 3rd person system
descriptions18 using a Turing Oracle Machine (TOM) implementation in the WLI19 formalism,
thus bridging the gap between the formal and informal/narrative/visual modeling systems20.
Of course, such a system description addressing a challenging question like understanding
the movements of viruses within the host organism (Zaichik et al., 2013) also implies a
context (Kitto & Kortschak, 2013). The latter needs to be considered from a much broader
perspective21 (Gabora et al., 2013; Gare, 2013), which is of interest for further research.
One necessary prerequisite to making fields like neurovirology work under a Turing oracle
machine design, is to get first hand observational data. Once the data become available, we
can evaluate the performance of a TOM at our disposal. Finally, this research framework is
intended to interface to third party observation, modeling and data analysis techniques such
as used in other quantitative approaches (Wierling et al., 2012).
17 EC FP7 Grant number 269961, www.inbiosa.eu
18 agent-based simulations could be held to be first person
19 To our knowledge, there is no current theory, computational framework, or applied field such as system biology in
which oracles or meta-level decision rules are used to model living systems in their full complexity.
20 Applying mathematics is analogical and metaphorical. Mathematical modeling in the future will have to combine
both digital and analogical computation, as well as some narrative/visual form of concept expression. Some parts of it
will have to be in situ in the medium being investigated, rather than operating in an abstract Platonic world outside
the real world we are living in and investigating.
21 incl. evolution, ecology, society and the researcher engaging in scientific enquiry, theorizing, measuring and
communicating results as part of the context being investigated
A first effort to estimate the match and the benefits of unifying these two approaches was
made in the WLIMES concept (Ehresmann and Simeonov, 2012). Later, in discussions with
other colleagues, we realized that an appropriate integration of structural visualization
techniques for representation, discovery and validation/verification, as well as the
implementation of modern programming paradigms, into our tailored qualitative approach will
be crucial for its success. The major advantage of our approach is that it tries to mimic “the
human capacity to combine concepts in new ways or redefine one concept by re-examining it
in the context of other concepts” (Van Regenmortel, 2004; Hong, 2013).
9. Perspectives
Recently there was some work discussing the chances which biology offers for the creation of
new mathematical theorems (Cohen, 2004; Sturmfels, 2007; Clairambault, 2012). The case is
no different with the here discussed MES and RB. In view of the capabilities presented by CT
and RB, we do not really need a new type of mathematics, but rather appropriate ways to
specify the biological problems using CT along the lines of MES and RB that in turn allow the
artful selection and integration of appropriate mathematical theories in a workable theoretical
framework. Hereby the central issue is the accurate specification of biological problems using
insightful and creative techniques while switching between different fields of mathematics and
biology to ask for key questions, much as Laplace did with physics and chemistry two
centuries ago (Root-Bernstein, 2012a; Hong, 2013). But what if we need a mathematical
theory (such as the one about self-emerging objects discussed above) that questions the
axiomatic foundations of some recognized mathematical theory within the domain of the life
sciences and medicine but can be addressed by CT?
In particular, this was the case with using geometry in physics in Einstein's GRT which
required use of a non-Euclidian geometry. Such foundations were known by that time thanks
to the works of Gauß, Bolyai, Lobatschewsky and Riemann. But what if we do not have such
a base to reflect biological phenomena? Many physical theories were created in simultaneity
with developing the mathematics required for representing them. Both disciplines were
working hand-in-hand for decades, and the bonds became tighter and tighter with each new
theory. Today some scientists have difficulties to classify M-theory (string theory) or gauge
theory as a mathematical or a physical theory. It represents a kind of synthetic product of both
domains. Now, biology is asked to follow the same way. But where would this lead us?
Gödel's theorems delivered the proof for the necessity to downgrade the paradigm of the
axiomatic basis of mathematical completeness (Hilbert's dream). Mathematical biologists
(Rosen, 1991, 1999; Louie 2009, 2013) argue that such phenomena as impredicativity (self-
referencing definition) are unique for biological systems when compared to physical ones.
Fuzziness in biology is another concept not easy to handle with available mathematical tools
applied in physics. According to Gödel, CT/MES/RB and WLI are also incomplete
theories. What does this imply?
Mathematics is not omnipotent. It needs to be developed and applied accurately in other
domains of knowledge (including the humanities and art). In particular, CT is a domain of
mathematics (not a 'new mathematics’), which encompasses graphs, groups, posets, etc. and
thus allows for some unification of mathematics. INTEGRAL BIOMATHICS should be also an
extended mathematical domain, developing and integrating mathematical and computational
notions well adapted to the problems of biology. MES and RB were developed in this spirit,
but many problems remain, so in particular the relations with computations that we try to
model using WLI. These issues are parts of our research schedule.
Concluding all this, the important metaphorical lesson to be learned from Gödel's
Incompleteness Theorems is that "nothing works for everything". Thus in the context of
mathematical biology and Integral Biomathics, all one can ask for are more suitable kinds of
mathematics and computation (than, e.g., Newtonian dynamics and Turing machines22) to
describe biological phenomena.
But whatever it is (the tools of RB, MES and WLI included), there will always lie something
outside its expression powers. There will always be some kind of entity to place in the system
description as a placeholder for the unexpected (Simeonov et al., 2012b). This entity (a
‘homunculus’, a ‘Maxwell daemon’ or a ‘Turing oracle’) could probably be captured to some
extent when given a specific focus when using the complementary 1st, 2nd and 3rd person
system description perspectives (Matsuno, 2003) as borders of knowing.
We consider science to be not only concerned simply with producing predictive models, but
also and more primordially be involved in understanding Nature, as Thom argued in defense
of his notion of qualitative mathematics (Thom, 1977, 1994). Nevertheless this observation
does not mean that we have to stop doing research here. Each time we have accurately
identified a problem and its complementary uncertain part, we will have to find something
else, another mathematical or computational formalism, to cross the next bridge when we
come close to it, as others did long before us. In sum, all we can say is that we are committed
to use CT, MES, RB and WLI as our tools for now. And let's see how far they will take us.
At the end, I would like to comment on a particular characteristic of autopoiesis (Maturana &
Varela, 1980) and self-organization (Kauffman, 1993; Müller & Newman, 2003) in biology, the
morphogenesis (D’Arcy Thompson, 1917). Indeed the classical works of Rashevsky
(Rashevsky, 1940) and Turing (Turing, 1952) on reaction-diffusion systems, as well as the
more recent ones of Nüsslein-Vollhard23 and Gierer & Meinhardt24 made a substantial
progress for understanding this phenomenon. However, there are still some gaps related to
the topological properties of living systems that require special attention within the concept of
a “bounded autonomy of levels (BAL)” (Mesarovic and Sreenath, 2006). We can regard them
as fractions of the elusive “Turing oracle” machine-representation discussed in the previous
section. Particularly there are two aspects that need to be considered in a realistic model
about the emergence and development of life reflected in morphogenesis:
First, an organism constantly realizes/computes morphological symmetries throughout its
developmental cycle. The external environment/ecosystem tends to interfere with these form-
inducing functions, which a healthy and young system repairs again and again to restore its
structure and functioning. Simultaneously, internal aging processes evoke degeneration of
organs and tissues at its own pace (related to an intrinsic metabolic rate). Both internal and
external factors constantly cause symmetries to be broken. In this regard, morphogenesis
reflects the capability of a living system to unfold and maintain symmetries, while opposing
incompatible changes (that are also the outcome of symmetry breakings) and actively fighting
deterioration at the price of using-up energy. Topology is capable of expressing the
characteristics of symmetries to be embodied, although it is incapable of delineating the route
from the degenerated symmetries back to the symmetry-breaking points. On the other hand,
a diffeomorphism25 is capable of deciphering whatever dynamics is proceeding on a smooth
manifold, while being incapable of securing the occurrence of an abrupt symmetry-breaking
event. Yet, both topology and differential geometry are incapable of dealing with the task of
perpetuating an inexhaustible degeneracy of symmetries to be broken.
22 Note: Using a Turing Machine (TM) as a metaphorical model for biology is inappropriate, but using Turing’s notion
of a Universal Machine (TUM) to define a mathematical biology, which is not based on the TM design, but on
Church’s thesis is a reasonable approach (Marchal, 1992).
25 an isomorphism in the category of smooth manifolds, which is an invertible function that maps one differentiable
manifold one-to-one-and-onto another, such that both the function and its inverse are smooth (Wikipedia)
Therefore, what could be further developed to handle symmetry breaking of degenerative
processes from topological perspective within MES (Ehresmann and Vanbremeersch, 2007)
is the inclusion of concepts rooted possibly in the “laws of form” calculus (Spencer-Brown,
1972) and incorporating perhaps concepts from differential geometry (Kühnel, 2005), group
and symmetry theories (Carter, 1997; McWeeny, 2012), knot and braid theories (Moran,
2000; Kauffman, 2006), Temperley-Lieb algebra (Abramsky, 2008), as well as quantum
topology and computation (Kauffman & Baadhio, 1993; Pachos, 2012), even supersymmetry
(LaBelle, 2005) and beyond, all within a unifying dynamic category-theoretical-computational
framework such as the one discussed in this paper.
Second, what is required for delivering a realistic model of developing life forms is the
construction of a material body as a computational agent inside those hypothetical
“protogerms” that is able to maintain its own identity while constantly suffering a breaking of
the symmetries latent in itself. This material body “keeping its self-identity upon variability”26
can be regarded as the primitive (bio)computational element or engine: the vir27. The living
cell itself, or its ingredient macromolecules (including DNA/RNA complexes) are, in fact, the
resulting computational assemblies – the “clusters” and “clouds” built from the operation of
such multiple primitive machines (viri). On the other hand, premature aging, infections (such
as those caused by viruses, fungi and bacteria) and degenerative/metabolic disorders can be
seen as biological entities with (distributed) computations performed by exo-viri28 provoking
structural and functional organic changes in the opposite direction towards deterioration,
deformation, dysfunction and death. Both analogous biocomputational mechanisms, the ones
of (eso-)viri and of exo-viri, concur inside the organism and in the ecosystem as a whole.
Nevertheless, senescence entails a natural, inevitable end of life (Salthe, 2013); see,
however, also (Kloeden, Rössler and Rössler, 1990).
Finally, the key issue remaining to be discovered and formalized in morphogenesis is how
decision making in these opposite biocomputational processes and senescence is
implemented, in contrast to the scheme suggested e.g. by Gierer & Meinhardt which
(according to some interpreters) imposes an arbitrary boundary condition of hypothetical
origin. It is one thing to consider the role of topology in morphogenesis, but quite another to
see what aspect of the system is responsible for making morphogenetic decisions. This issue
could be resolved using topology and geometry backed e.g. by category theory and algebraic
geometry, and some sort of biocomputational logic such as those discussed in (Simeonov,
2002a/b) and (Goranson & Cardier, 2013) explaining the dynamics of the underlying
processes.
Of course, all of this goes without saying that understanding the dynamics of biology does
require something invariant in its own descriptive enterprise, just as the dynamics of physics
does. What is relevant exclusively for biology is the occurrence of a function, which keeps
form invariant throughout the exchange of the component materials (Matsuno, 2013).
Acknowledgements: I would like to thank Koichiro Matsuno, Stanley N. Salthe, Otto E.
Rössler, Arran Gare, Andree C. Ehresmann, Jaime Gomez-Ramirez, Pridi Siregar, Aloisus H.
Louie, Bruno Marchal, Ted Goranson, Louis H. Kauffman and Robert S. Root-Bernstein for
their valuable help with reviewing and commenting on this paper. It has passed multiple peer
reviews and reformulations (from individual 1st, through shared 2nd into consolidated 3rd
person descriptions) to hopefully offer a semi-formal proposal implementing the requirements
of a progress report in the field.
26 The object addressable in 3rd person description is actually being upheld in 1st person description (Koichiro
Matsuno, June 12th 2013, personal correspondence).
27 man, hero, man of courage (Lat.); this element does not exclude the possible concomitance and operation of a
“Turing oracle” machine within itself.
28 A pathogen such as a virus infecting an organism can incorporate such an exo-vir body.