On the combined gravity gradient components modeling for applied geophysics
Alexey Veryaskin1 and Wayne McRae
Gravitec Instruments Ltd.
Gravity gradiometry research and development has intensified in recent years to the extent that
technologies providing a resolution of about 1 Eötvös per 1 second average shall likely soon be
available for multiple critical applications such as natural resources exploration, oil reservoir
monitoring and defense establishment. Much of the content of this paper was composed a
decade ago, and only minor modifications were required for the conclusions to be just as
applicable today. In this paper we demonstrate how gravity gradient data can be modeled, and
show some examples of how gravity gradient data can be combined in order to extract valuable
information. In particular, this study demonstrates the importance of two gravity gradient
components, Txz and Tyz which, when processed together, can provide more information on
subsurface density contrasts than that derived solely from the vertical gravity gradient (Tzz).
Keywords: gravity gradient modeling, gravity gradiometry
1. Introduction
Gravity gradients can be treated as fields of differential accelerations between two infinitesimally
close spatial points. They can be analytically described using a second rank tensor known as the
tensor of gravity gradients
ij ¶ x ¶ x¶ x
Where the i and j subscripts denote one of the orthogonal Cartesian coordinates (x, y, z), F is the
scalar gravitational potential, g is a component of the gravitational field vector g = (g , g , g ),
and ¶ /¶ x is the partial derivative with respect to one of the Cartesian coordinates (i.e. ¶ /¶ x ¶ /¶ y,
or ¶ /¶ z). Out of the tensor’s nine components, only five among them are totally independent due
to their geometrical symmetry (T = T , where i „ j) and the validity of the Laplace equation
outside gravitational field sources (Pedersen and Rasmussen, 1990).
For many gravity gradiometry applications, it is the Tzz component (i.e. the second vertical
derivative of the gravitational potential) of the gravity gradient tensor that is the primary target as
the most informative source of information for data interpretation even when other components
1 Correspondence address: School of Physics, University of Western Australia, 35 Stirling
Highway, Nedlands, Perth WA6009, Australia; e-mail: vav@cyllene.uwa.edu.au
are measured (Forsberg, 1984; Marson and Klingele, 1993; Bodard et al., 1993). Despite the fact
that the FTG technology is readily available (Murphy, 2004), there are a number of gravity
gradiometer developments that are aimed at the measurement of only one or a few gravity
gradient components followed by the post-processing stage of recalculating the Tzz component
from the measured ones (While et al., 2006; DiFrancesco, 2007)
In this paper, we shall consider two off-diagonal gravity gradient tensor components, namely the
Txz and Tyz components, as an alternative to the Tzz source of information. The primary
constraint on the direct use of Txz and Tyz data as a geophysical tool is that the information they
contain is complicated and difficult to interpret (Bodard et al., 1993). Nevertheless, by
measuring just the two Txz and Tyz gravity gradient components, it is possible to get more
information about anomalous subsurface density contrasts than that contained in the vertical
gravity gradient (Tzz).
The easiest way to show this is through combined component modeling which makes it possible
to retrieve a level of detail equivalent or better than that contained in Tzz gradient images
(Veryaskin and Fraser, 1996). It is assumed that a gravity gradiometer capable of directly
measuring the Txz and Tyz gravity gradients is also capable of producing the real time data sets
that are discussed in this study. Recently, a novel design of an absolute string gravity
gradiometer has been presented which is aimed primarily at measuring simultaneously the Txz
and Tyz components from a static or mobile platform, and at the possible data processing
algorithms described below (Veryaskin, 2000; Veryaskin, 2003).
The aim of this paper is to demonstrate the utility of combined gravity gradient modeling by
producing modeled gradient images of equivalent clarity to those found in other studies (Bodard
et al., 1993). To achieve this we have chosen comparable density structures to those used in
other studies (buried blocks, a salt dome) and two different modeling approaches.
2. Combined component modeling
There are a number of ways in which the gradient components Txz and Tyz can be combined for
modeling. However, for the scope of this paper only two particularly relevant techniques are
presented.
The first approach is to use the two gradient components to obtain the third vertical derivative of
the gravitational potential (Veryaskin and Fraser, 1996). In this study we have modeled two
structures: buried blocks (representing a sharp edge density contrast) and a salt dome
(representing an object having a regular cylindrical geometry) with no “edge of model” effects.
These two structures were chosen by Bodard et al., (1993), and provide a convenient baseline to
compare our calculations.
The second approach is simply to use Txz and Tyz gravity gradients as x and y components of a
single vector, and hence deriving its absolute value (Veryaskin and Fraser, 1996; Matthews,
2002). This might be valuable for first order interpretation only and so is dealt with in a separate
section using only one example: the salt dome model.
2.1. The third vertical derivative of the gravitational potential
The third vertical derivative of the gravitational potential can be derived from the Laplace
equation outside any material body
T + T + T = 0 (2)
From Eq.2 one can easily obtain
xx + yy = - zz = - T (3)
¶z ¶z ¶z zzz
Then, by changing the order of the derivatives, it yields
xz + yz = - T (4)
By definition, Eq.4 is invariant with respect to angular rotations in the horizontal plane. That
means the Tzzz has the same value in any Cartesian coordinate system with different orientations
of the horizontal x and y axes.
Assuming that the Txz and Tyz components can be measured at spatial points
Ri = {x, y}, i = 1, 2, 3…N
Eq.4 can be represented in the following discrete form
T (i) = - xz xz - yz yz (5)
There are two possible modeling scenarios that we shall consider in this paper. One is two
dimensional grid modeling, representing the amount of information contained in the Tzzz. For
this type of modeling, we make the following assumptions:
Firstly, that the quantities Txz and Tyz are measured in absolute units in the horizontal xy-plane,
and that data is plotted at a constant spatial sampling interval D covering a square area of
(N+1) · (N+1) points, where N is an integer. In practice this would be difficult to achieve, but
data recorded in the field can be interpolated to a spatially regular grid. Secondly, a single
reading station {i, j} has the coordinates x = D i, y = D j with i and j running from 0 to N.
Finally, as Txz(i, j) and Tyz(i, j) gravity gradients are known or calculated at every point in the
grid, by using Eq.5, we can generate a 2-D, N· N array of data, which contains the same amount
of information as the Tzzz field:
GridFieldZZZ[i, j] = T (i, j)- T (i+1, j)+T (i, j)- T (i, j+1) (6)
xz xz yz yz
In worked examples we found a gradual drop in image clarity as the distance between sampling
points is increased. A further contribution to image distortion would be the inability of the survey
platform to hold a true course. In that case, we can use the data collected along an arbitrary path
with a constant sampling rate D t in the time domain. The quantity that would contain the
equivalent amount of information as the Tzzz field, is either Eq.5 or the following one
ProfileFieldZZZ[i] = xz xz + yz yz (7)
where t – t = D t = const, and {Vx, Vy} are the platform velocity horizontal components.
The major advantage of using the third vertical derivative of the gravitational potential Tzzz is
that it does not contain any non-inertial contributions. When in motion, a vertical gravity
gradiometer does measure the following effective Tzz component
Teff = Tgrav + W 2 + W 2
where W and W are the platform angular rate horizontal components. As their spatial derivatives
by definition are equal to zero, the Tzzz field is free of any motion effects. However, the same
applies to Eq.7 only if the sampling interval D t is infinitesimally small. Also, since Eq.6 and Eq.7
contain only differential combinations of Txz and Tyz, any instrument systematic errors and zero
point drift disappear as well.
It is possible to avoid the platform velocity terms in Eq.7 since it can be brought to the same
form as Eq.6 (which we designate below as the ProfileFieldZZZ). Assuming the sensitivity axes
X and Y of the gravity gradiometer, which measures Txz and Tyz, are both set at the same angle
(45 degree) to the instantaneous horizontal projection of the velocity vector of the moving
platform (see Fig.5), one can replace Eq.7 with the following one
xz xz yz yz
Consequently, in the case of the profile modeling (single path modeling) Eq.8 is the one we will
use in this paper for the combined Txz and Tyz gravity gradient components.
2.2. Single vector modeling
A gravity gradiometer, which can measure simultaneously the Txz and Tyz gravity gradient
components in their absolute units, can provide a real time output signal as follows
T = T2 +T2 (9)
The analytical signal always has its single-valued magnitude whether the platform, which carries
the gradiometer, changes its orientation in the horizontal plane or not. This means that it is not
necessary to know the exact orientation of the local sensitivity X and Y axes of the gradiometer
with respect to any co-ordinates determined, for instance, by a GPS positioning system. The
same situation applies only to the vertical gravity gradient Tzz among all the other gravity
gradient tensor components. Of course, the use of Eq.9 as a real time output would require a near
zero inertial environment (a stable table) as Txz and Tyz are subjects to angular rate and angular
acceleration contributions (Veryaskin, 2000).
3.1. Square grid modeling: buried blocks
A simple 3D buried blocks model was used in Bodard et al. (1993). For ease of comparison the
same model is used in this study. The main departure from their method of presenting the model
is the calculation of the Txz and Tyz gradients used in this paper. In Bodard et al. (1993) study,
each block was made up of a large number of rectangular prisms whose gravitational field is well
known in the literature in terms of gravitational acceleration (Nagy, 1966). The total
gravitational signature was calculated as the summation of gravitational acceleration of each
individual prism over the volume. In this study we simplified the model by choosing a single
rectangular block to represent the entire density contrast and by using exact analytical
expressions derived for the Txz and Tyz gravity gradients above the under laying structure (see
Appendix A to this paper).
Apart from this variation, the design of the survey area and the geometry of the model remain the
same as Bodard et al. (1993). Four square 10 km · 10 km blocks having a density contrast of
1 g/cm3 were set apart diagonally at a distance equal to their diagonal size, and the shallowest
block was placed in the left upper corner of the 110 km · 110 km survey plane. The top of each
next block was set to the same elevation as the bottom of the previous upper block. As in the
original model, the vertical thickness of each block was chosen to be 3 times its top depth, and
the shallowest block was chosen to be 100 m thick with a top elevation of 0 m (ground level).
The whole structure was then modeled using Eq.6 in a Mathematica script run on a PowerMac
computer. A number of density plots were generated assuming different instrument noise
specifications and different survey altitudes. No other filtering, image enhancement or
integration technique were used on the raw data sets.
Fig.1 shows an image of the buried blocks model in terms of the calculated Tzzz field, i.e. the
third vertical derivative of the gravitational potential. This is done in order to get an impression
of what information is contained in this particular data that can not be measured directly. Again,
we used the exact analytical expression derived from the Txz and Tyz gradients, obtained in
Appendix A to this paper, by analytically calculating their spatial derivatives with respect to the
coordinates x and y, and then by using Eq.4.
In Fig. 2 the same model is presented in terms of the combined Txz and Tyz gravity gradients
(GridFieldZZZ described by Eq.6). The model calculates Txz(i, j) and Tyz(i, j) as if measured
simultaneously by a noiseless gravity gradiometer at 150 m altitude above the top surface of the
shallowest block. The spatial resolution is 1 km, and 110 · 110 data points cover the survey
plane.
As Fig.1 and Fig.2 are almost identical, this proves that the information contained in the
combined field of the Txz and Tyz gravity gradients is equivalent to that of the third vertical
derivative of the gravitational potential. None of the other gravity gradient tensor components
would provide the same information as Txz and Tyz ones.
The density plot of the exact field of the third vertical
derivative (Tzzz) of the gravitational potential for a set
of buried square blocks. Each block has a density
contrast of 1 g/cm3 and measured 10 km · 10 km
across in total survey area of 110 km · 110 km. As in
Bodard et al. (1993) paper, the blocks were placed
consecutively deeper in the earth (starting at the
surface) at diagonals to each block. The vertical
thickness of the shallowest block was 100 m whilst the
vertical thickness of subsequent blocks was chosen to
be 3 times its top depth. The Tzzz field then was
evaluated at each kilometer.
-100 E +100 E The same model as in Fig. 1, only presented in terms
of the combined Txz and Tyz gravity gradients
(GridFieldZZZ(i, j) described by Eq.6. It is assumed
that Txz(i, j) and Tyz(i, j) are measured
simultaneously by a noiseless gravity gradiometer at
150 m altitude above the top surface of the shallowest
block. The spatial resolution is 1 km, and 110 · 110
reading points cover the survey plane. As Fig.1 and
Fig.2 are almost identical, this proves the information
contained in the combined field of the Txz and Tyz
gravity gradients is equivalent to that of the third
vertical derivative of the gravitational potential.
Here and further in the text the following standard gravity gradient unit is used:
1 E = 1 Eötvös = 10-9 s-2.
Figure 3. Figure 4.
In Fig.3 and Fig.4 noise is added to the data presented in Fig.2, as if the gradiometer measuring
Txz and Tyz gravity gradients was a real device having an operational noise spectral density of
N (E/√Hz) in both channels. It is chosen to be 5 E/√Hz in the case of Fig.3 and 50 E/√Hz in the
case of Fig.4. As we have said above, the spatial resolution is equal to 1 km. This distance can be
covered in about 20 s by flying the gradiometer at about 50 m/s, which approximates an average
survey flight speed. That means 20 s average time can be applied to the raw data collected by
measuring Txz and Tyz gravity gradient components. This translates into the signal variance,
added to Fig.3, to be about 1 E, and the same in Fig.4 to be about 9 E. Interestingly, a Txz and
Tyz measuring gravity gradiometer with a moderate noise floor of about 50 E/√Hz is capable of
detecting the hidden structures corresponding to the buried blocks from an altitude of 150 m.
There are no gravity gradiometers yet capable of achieving 1 E resolution by measuring Txz and
Tyz gravity gradients while on board an aircraft, an airship or a helicopter. However, a
resolution of less than 9 E is achievable onboard a low speed (low turbulence) mobile carrier
(DiFrancesco, 2007).
3.2. Profile modeling: buried blocks
In this section we shall use the Eq.8 instead of Eq.6, which was used in the previous section for
the grid modeling. It is assumed that a gravity gradiometer having its local sensitivities axes
(X and Y ) constantly kept at 45-degree angle to the instantaneous horizontal projection of the
velocity vector of the carrier platform. Measurements of Txz and Tyz gravity gradient
components are taken at a constant sampling interval D t in the time domain along a single path as
depicted in Fig.5.
In a worked example, however, we shall use the buried blocks model and the data collected
through a single profile as shown in Fig.6. The profile crosses the second shallowest buried
block along its central horizontal line, i.e. – at 65 km from the origin of the survey plane. The
ProfileFieldZZZ(i) data then was calculated using Eq.8. The result is shown in Fig.7.
Figure 5. Figure 6.
-100 E +100 E
Figure 7. The ProfileFieldZZZ data is assumed to be collected at a shortest possible sampling
period in the time domain at 50 m/sec survey speed along the straight line shown in Fig.6.
The survey line crosses the second shallowest buried block of the model under consideration.
Again, 20 s average then is applied to the data, which corresponds to 1 km spatial resolution.
As depicted in Fig.7, despite the moderate sensitivity of the gradiometer that is assumed to be
measuring the data (50 E/√Hz spectral noise density is considered in each channel), there is a
distinct signal with sharp changes just over the boundaries of the buried block target.
It is important to point out again that the shorter the sampling interval, the less the influence of
platform motion on the combined Txz and Tyz data described by Eq.8. As the information
contained in the ProfileFieldZZZ is equivalent to that of the exact static Tzzz field free of any
motion effects, the same should apply to Eq.8.
3.3. Square grid and profile modeling: salt dome
Salt domes represent geological structures of special interest for explorers, as they can create
structural positions and seals, which capture and contain hydrocarbons, which migrate from oil-
bearing rock (Nettleton, 1976). They also act as a good structure for modeling as they are often
circular in shape when viewed from above.
Bodard et al., (1993) used a salt dome model to map gravity gradient tensor components. In their
study a square 10 km · 10 km area was covered by 126 · 126 points where different gravity
gradients were evaluated and the results were then presented in the form of density plots. The
salt dome was placed in the centre of the area with its top situated at 1 km below the ground
level. As in their previous model, the salt dome was built up from a large number of 0.5 km
cubes. Gravity gradients were then evaluated by summing all gravitational signatures produced
by the cubes. However, an “edge of model” effect was found as a consequence that cubes could
not accurately represent the regular round plan of the model. As a result of that there might be
excess values of gravity gradients from sharp boundaries, such as the edges of cubes.
In order to avoid this we used a modified salt dome model comprised of cylindrical disks (see
Fig.8) having different thicknesses. Once again, exact analytical expressions for the Txz and Tyz
gravity gradients in the case of an arbitrary cylindrical gravitational field source were used to
represent a single disk (see Appendix B to this paper). The total gravitational signature in Eq.5
was evaluated by a simple summation over all disks. The modified model was chosen to have its
top situated at 1.5 km below the ground at the centre of a 10 km · 10 km square area and the
bottom of the lowest disk was situated at 8.5 km below the top of the model. An arbitrary vertical
cross section profile of the salt dome model can be generated by using a simple function
incorporating its largest diameter and the depth of its top and bottom. A table of disk thicknesses
was built up using a condition that each upper disk has its radius set 25 m smaller than that of the
next deeper disk, and all these radii fit the profile chosen. A total of 100 disks were found to
represent the modified model, which was assigned to have a uniform density contrast of –
0.2 g/cm and the largest diameter of 5 km (Nettleton, 1976).
This approach also allows for individual density contrast values to be assigned to each disk
enabling finer details. The result of this modeling is presented in Fig.8, which is comparable with
any vertical gravity gradient (Tzz) images that can be generated under the same conditions
(Bodard et al., 1993).
3.4. Single vector modeling: salt dome
The salt dome model discussed above can also be used in order to generate a density plot using
the analytical signal described by Eq.9. The centre of the salt dome was placed again in the
centre (x = 5 km, y = 5 km) of a 10 km · 10 km square area. The analytical signal was then
evaluated at every 100 m from an altitude of 2000 m. The signal’s behavior across the centre of
the anomalous area along the x-axis is also presented in Fig.10.
Figure 8. A noiseless density plot (GridFieldZZZ described by Eq.6) and the composition
of the salt dome model described above. The data was evaluated at every 100 m of the
survey 10 km · 10 km area, and the survey plane altitude is 150 m.
Figure 9.
The same model as in Fig.8 only presented in
terms of the profile signal described by Eq.8.
The survey line crosses the centre of the salt
dome.
Figure 10. A noiseless density plot of the same model as in Fig.8 only presented as the
analytical signal described by Eq.9. A cross-sectional behavior of the signal is also shown
on the right-side picture above. The survey plane altitude is 2000 m.
It can be seen that the gravitational signature has a deep minimum just at the centre of the model.
One can prove that both the density plot image and the vertical cross section behavior are typical
for the gravitational signal described by Eq.9, provided that the gravitational source is a single
symmetrical 3-D body, or a cluster of similar structures, which are detected from a high altitude.
When the horizontal dimensions of an arbitrary body (or of a cluster of such bodies) becomes of
the same order of magnitude as the altitude of the survey plane, then the gravitational signature
of the shape is distorted by the nonlinearity of the analytical signal. Non-symmetrical shapes will
have more disrupted images but their gravitational signatures will still have minima that can be
used in first order interpretation.
4. Discussions
This paper clearly demonstrates the amount of information contained in the two Txz and Tyz
gravity gradient components. On their own, neither of these two gradient fields looks very
informative, when compared with the field of the vertical gravity gradient Tzz, as shown by
Bodard et al. (1993). However it should be evident that the combined component modeling with
these two gradients can show at least an equivalent or even better level of information as the
single Tzz field does.
It also should be pointed out that a recalculation of any derivatives of the gravitational potential
into the fields of their higher-order derivatives, or into some other derivatives of the same order
cannot add any new information. Moreover, like any passive filter, this procedure decreases the
total amount of information but redistributes it in a way that might be helpful for interpretation
(While et al., 2006).
Nevertheless, the potential benefit of using Tzzz data derived from low order derivatives has
already been demonstrated (Sagitov et al., 1983). In their study a set of first order Bouguer
gravity anomalies over a deepwater subsalt prospect in the Gulf of Mexico were used to calculate
the field of the third vertical derivative of the gravitational potential. The Tzzz field turned out to
be complicated: instead of one maximum there appeared to be several. These maxima did
however coincide with the location of oil deposits, whilst three wells drilled near the maximum
of the Bouguer anomalies were found empty.
In this study however, we do not recalculate the Tzzz field from any low rank derivatives. We do
combine the individually measured Txz and Tyz gradients in a way that radically redistributes the
information contained in each of the individual components, and that information is effectively
equal to that of contained in the Tzzz field. The main problem of combined component modeling
is that noise increases when the individually measured gravity gradient components are
combined.
The other modeling procedure described in this paper (single vector modeling) is less dependent
on the individual gradient components being measured with sufficient accuracy. The main reason
for this is that at high altitude an instrument is simply being used as a “likely target” detector and
is not required to map fine details. The other natural advantage of high altitude flying is the low
air turbulence, which allows smoother and faster survey flights.
So, one of the possible ways of using combined components data sets would therefore be a
combination of the high-altitude “single vector” minima search, for large scale gravity
reconnaissance, followed up by a more accurate low altitude FieldZZZ survey over an area of
interest.
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Dr Ed Biegert for his comments on the subject of this paper made long
time ago during Gravitec’s first presentation at a conference of the SEG (Denver, 1996). We also
would like to thank Dr Neil Fraser for his contribution at the time the paper was composed as a
preprint. Our special acknowledgement to Mr Howard Golden for his comments and
improvements he has made in the latest edition of the paper.