On the Law of Directionality of Genome Evolution
Liaofu Luo
Laboratory of Theoretical Biophysics, Faculty of Science and Technology,
Inner Mongolia University, Hohhot 010021, China
*Email address: lolfcm@mail.imu.edu.cn
The problem of the directionality of genome evolution is studied from the information-theoretic
view. We propose that the function-coding information quantity of a genome always grows in the
course of evolution through sequence duplication, expansion of code, and gene transfer between
genomes. The function-coding information quantity of a genome consists of two parts, p-coding
information quantity which encodes functional protein and n-coding information quantity which
encodes other functional elements except amino acid sequence. The relation of the proposed law
to the thermodynamic laws is indicated. The evolutionary trends of DNA sequences revealed by
bioinformatics are investigated which afford further evidences on the evolutionary law. It is argued
that the directionality of genome evolution comes from species competition adaptive to
environment. An expression on the evolutionary rate of genome is proposed that the rate is a
function of Darwin temperature (describing species competition) and fitness slope (describing
adaptive landscape). Finally, the problem of directly experimental test on the evolutionary
directionality is discussed briefly.
1 A law of genomic information
The traditional natural sciences mostly focused on matter and energy. Of course, the two are
basic categories in the nature. However, parallel to yet different from matter and energy,
information constitutes the third fundamental category in natural sciences. One characteristic of a
life system is that it contains a large amount of information. Life consists of matter and energy, but
it is not just matter and energy. The life of an individual comes from the DNA of its parents. DNA,
which weighs only 10-12 gram for human, is insignificant in terms of matter because, like many
other things on earth, it is composed of nitrogen, oxygen, sulfur, etc. In addition, DNA, as a source
of energy, is also unimportant, since it is just composed of the similar level of chemical energy as
other macromolecules that can be produced by experiment. Schrodinger (1944) was the first who
recognized the importance of information and indicated that the characteristic feature of life which
differentiates from an inanimate piece of matter is the large amount of information contained in its
chromosomes. He said, “We believe a gene – or perhaps the whole chromosome fibre – to be an
aperiodic solid. With the molecular picture of gene it is no longer inconceivable that the miniature
code should precisely correspond with a highly complicated and specified plan of development
and should somehow contain the means to put it into operation.” Seventy years have passed. Now,
as we try to formulate the basic law of life system we should put our discussion based again on the
concept of information. Any building or structure needs a blueprint to be built, this blueprint is the
information. A life is a complicated structure. It is like a drama unfolding in a time span. The
information that represents this dynamic structure is the soul of a life. DNA is a book of
microscopic size that has all basic information about the development, growth and death of a life.
This is also true when the point is examined in terms of the origination of life. Because life only
comes into being when the primitive molecular sequence has evolved for a long time and has
enough information accumulated in it. As we all admire the exquisiteness of the structure and
function of advanced lives on earth, we know that they have all evolved from primitive lives. Each
tiny bit of evolution must be realized through storing information in DNA and changing the DNA
sequence. Therefore, whether we examine the issue from the emergence of individual life or from
that of a species, life starts from information. Lao Tzu said in his Book of Tao and Teh, “It was
from the Nameless that Heaven and Earth sprang, the named is but the mother that rears the ten
thousand creatures, each after its kind.” If the first sentence can be interpreted as: The Universe
starts from nothingness, then the second one means that life starts from information.
Then, what is the basic law of genomic information? The extension of the diversity of species
and their evolution towards higher function more adaptive to environment shows that the life
evolution obeys a law with definite direction. Darwin expressed the law as “survival of the fittest”.
It means that the ‘designed’ properties of living things better adapted to survive will leave more
offspring and automatically increase in frequency from one generation to the next, while the
poorly adapted species will decrease in frequency. Here, the basic point of Darwin’s theory is the
directionality of the evolution. Accompanying the development of molecular biology and with
ever increasing understanding on genomes we are able to express the law on life evolution
direction more quantitatively and precisely. About the direction of genomic evolution many
studies were carried out on the change of genome size (Gregory, 2005; Bennett et al, 2005;
Gregory et al, 2007). The size of genomes for sibling species can change more than several tenfold,
for example, 340-fold for flatworms, 70-fold for nematodes, 170-fold for arthropods (insecta),
350-fold for fish, 130-fold for amphibians,196-fold for algae (chlorophyta), 500-fold for
pterridophytes and 1000-fold for angiosperms, etc. Moreover, the evolutionary complexity of a
species is irrespective of its genome size. For example, the C-values of lungfishes are higher than
human about 8 to 20 times. Some salamanders can also have large genomes with C-values 15
times or more than human. Next, about the genome size evolution it was speculated that plants
might have a “one-way ticket to genomic obesity” through amplification of retrotransposons and
polyploidy. The similar assumptions were also made that the animal genome sizes might change in
the direction of increase. However, there has been considerable evidence that both increases and
decreases may occur in plant and animal lineages. In the meantime, no fossil evidence on the
genome size variability in the single direction was reported. These have made the issue on the
directionality of genome size more complex and interesting. However, from our point of view the
genome size of a species is not a proper measure of evolutionary directionality since it is
irrespective of genetic information necessary for encoding the biological function. Instead, when
our investigation is based on the function-coding information we will be able to obtain an
unambiguous picture on the evolutionary law of genomes.
We propose that the Genome Evolution Direction obeys the law of Function-Coding
Information Quantity Growing (CIQG).
Start from the definition of information quantity. For an n- long sequence (called sequence
A) written by symbols A , A ,…,.and A where A taking s possible values (i=1,…,n) , if the
1 2. n i i
sequence A encodes certain function then we define the function-coding information quantity of
the sequence I =log ∏s .
There are three points about the definition of function-coding information quantity which
should be clarified first. The first is related to the estimate of information quantity contributed by
epigenetic inheritance, the second is how to estimate information gain in the process of inheritance
information expression, and the third is to distinguish the function-coding part from the total
information quantity of DNA sequence.
For DNA sequence of a genome the symbol A takes four values A,G,C or T. However, for
eukaryotes the chromatin remoulding and histone modifications is another type of variables which
has the potential to influence fundamental biological processes and may be epigenetically
inherited through somatic divisions (ENCODE, 2007). The nucleosome positioning, the
occupancy of nucleosomes along the chromosome, as a key factor for gene regulation has been
found in recent years. More than thirty histone modifications have been found for human and
other vertebrates (Kouzarides, 2007). They form the source of heredity information in addition to
DNA sequence of four kinds of bases A,G,C and T. Moreover, for prokaryotes and eukaryotes the
DNA methylation can inhibit gene expression and be epigenetically inherited through perpetuation
by a maintenance methylase and therefore the methylated bases give additional symbols
applicable in genetic language (Lewin, 2008). Generally speaking, the epigenetic inheritance
describes the ability of different states, which may have different phenotypic consequences, to be
inherited without any change in the sequence of DNA. But in the long history of adaptive
evolution the interaction between epigenetic inheritance factor and DNA sequence may lead to the
connection between two factors, making the former dependent of the latter. The point is supported
by some recent observations. For example, the nucleosome positioning both in human and yeast
genome can be predicted from DNA sequence by using bioinformatics method (Ioshikhes et al,
2006; Gupta et al, 2008; Chen et al, 2010).
If the independent role of epigenetic inheritance in the information transmission can be
neglected then the source of the genetic information can only be in DNA sequence. The next
problem we are concerned is the information gain in DNA expression. DNA sequence is the
main sequence of inheritance information. In its expression many protein sequences (called
para-sequences) are formed under its instruction and these proteins are in close interaction with
DNA sequence. For an n-long DNA sequence the primary information quantity is 2n. Suppose
the total length of protein sequences is m. Then the total information quantity of DNA-protein
interacting system is 2n+ mlog 20. It means in the expression of genetic information the
information quantity of a genome is largely increased. This is a universal principle that the
information quantity increases in the expression and transmission due to formation of
para-sequences and interaction with them. So, for a living cell the information quantity acquired in
its life circle is much larger than the information quantity of primary inheritance information.
However, in the proposed CIQG law the information gain from para-sequences is not taken into
account and what we talk about is only the inheritance information of DNA main sequence.
What is the function-coding information quantity of DNA sequence? A function-coding DNA
sequence consists of two basic types：p-coding sequence which encodes functional protein and
n-coding sequence which encodes all other functional sequence segments. Evidently, the
function-coding DNA sequence is a part of DNA main sequence. For a four-symbol DNA
sequence the p-coding information quantity equals twice of the length of protein-coding sequence
(or CDS in common genomics terminology)，and the n-coding information quantity includes the
contribution from promoters and other transcriptional regulatory elements upstream of the
transcriptional start site (TSS) and the contribution from non-protein-coding RNAs (ncRNAs) in
genes and intergenic sequences in primary transcripts. So, the function-coding information
quantity of a genome
I = 2(N + N ) (N = CDS length , N = n-coding sequence length ) (1)
if the epigenetic inheritance effect is neglected. For most genomes I is smaller than twice of
genome size due to existence of non-functional part (for example, pseudogenes) in DNA
sequence.
With the meaning of the function-coding information quantity I we express the law of
Function-Coding Information Quantity Growing (CIQG) as follows:
The function-coding information quantity I (including protein-coding information quantity
and other function-coding information quantity) of a genome sequence always grows in the course
of evolution ( C ≥0)through sequence duplication, expansion of code, horizontal gene
transfer and other expanding strategies.
Entropy increase is a universal law of nature. Due to the randomness of molecular motion the
entropy of any isolated physical system always increases. However, the law stated above is not
identical with the physical law of entropy growing. The law of CIQG refers to the evolution of
function-coding information quantity of genome. The mechanism responsible for CIQG is
functional selection. Those species that cannot increase their coding information quantity in
genomic evolution should be deleted through species competition. As a biological law of evolution,
there may exist exception; for example, some genome evolves in strange and peculiar environment.
However, the exception should be rare. On the other hand, the time scale dt in C ≥0 is
determined by the minimal time interval required for natural selection acting on heredity process.
As using the clock with accuracy of several generations for given species the law C ≥0 can
then manifest itself.
The above proposal on the CIQG law is definitely different from the second law of
thermodynamics of entropy growing, but it is consistent with Kauffman’s hoped-for fourth law of
thermodynamics for self-constructing systems of autonomous agents (Kauffman, 2000).
Following Kauffman the autonomous agent means an agent or system working in one’s own
interest adaptive to environment. The genome discussed in this article can be looked as a concrete
example of ‘autonomous agent’. When our discussions are devoted for the system of genomes we
are able to gain deeper insights on the basic evolutionary law on autonomous agents.
In his book “Investigation” Kauffman wrote：“Biospheres, as a secular trend, that is, over the
long term, become as diverse as possible, literally expanding the diversity of what can happen
next. In other words, biospheres expand their own dimensionality as rapidly, on average, as they
can.” and called it ‘the fourth law of thermodynamics for self-constructing systems of autonomous
agents’. He formalized the push into novelty as the mathematical concept of an adjacent possible.
“Biospheres may enter their adjacent possible as rapidly as they can sustain.”
Through extensive and elaborate investigations we found many examples that show the
genomes becoming as diverse as possible and expanding their own dimensionality continuously in
the long term of evolution. Moreover, we suggested that the function-coding information quantity
can be served as the quantity for measuring the diversity or dimensionality of the genome.
Supporting facts in the demonstration of CIQG law have been listed in another paper,
Arxiv:0808.3323 (Luo, 2008), and the cited literatures therein. In next two sections we will
discuss the driving forces of the directionality of genome evolution both from a genome sequence
itself and from the competition among genomes. The evolutionary trends of DNA sequences
revealed by bioinformatics will be studied in section 2. A theoretical formula on the genomic
evolutionary rate will be proposed and the relation of evolutionary directionality with species
competition will be discussed further in section 3.
2 Evolutionary trends of DNA sequences revealed by bioinformatics
2.1 Gene sequence evolution obeys Maximum Information Principle. By using Haken’s
Maximum Information Principle (MIP) formalism (Haken, 1988) we demonstrated that for the
protein-coding sequence of gene the Shannon information quantity (information entropy)
( p(i)is probability of base i in a given gene sequence) is maximized under the constraints of
fixed Markov entropyH
F = ∑ p( ji)log p( j i) , (3)
fixed Markov entropy with lag and/or fixed G+C content p(C)+ p(G). We found that the
deduced maximized statistical distributions of p(i)for most protein-coding sequences are in
good agreement with experimental data (Luo, 1995). In the above deduction the maximization of
information entropy describes the random mutation of bases in the gene sequence evolution; while
the constraints of fixed Markov entropy or fixed G+C content describes the role of natural
selection on particular base distribution and base pair correlation. Therefore, the driving force of
sequence evolution is the combination of two factors, the random mutation and the natural
selection. The success of MIP analysis shows the maximization of Shannon information quantity
under constraints gives the evolutionary direction of gene sequences. This is micro-evolution. The
evolution of genome is macro-evolution which results from a large amount of micro-evolution of
genes (Ridley, 2004). The above discussion also gives an explanation of why the function-coding
information quantity I defined above is so important for describing the genome evolution since
the information quantity (namely, the logarithm of the involved state number) is a basic
characteristic of the information system .
2.2 Functional sequence segment recognition by increment of diversity Diversity of a
sequence ensemble X is defined by（Laxton，1978）
D(X)= Nlog N −∑n log n = N(−∑ p log p ) (4)
2 i 2 i i 2 i
where n the frequency of base i in the ensemble and p = i = i its probability. Note
that the diversity is exactly the Shannon information multiplied by N. For an ensemble of
sequences of given function the base distribution of {n} has a particular form which is determined
by functional evolution. The diversity D(X) provides a bioinformatics quantity for functional
segment recognition. For sequence comparison between ensembles X ({n}, N) and Y ({m}, M) we
can introduce the generalized Jensen-Shannon Divergence (Lin, 1991)
GJS=N∑ p log i + M∑q log i
=N∑ p log p + M∑q logq − (N + M)∑s logs (5)
i i i i i i
Np + Mq n m
s = i i , p = i , q = i
i N + M i N i M
GJS is also called Increment of Diversity
which means the increment of diversities as two sources X and Y merged. If Y is a single sequence
fragment whose function is to be recognized, and ID(X, Y) is small enough then Y is predicted as a
sequence of same function with ensemble X. Using ID method we have successfully recognized
splicing sites, promoters and transcription starting sites, etc.(Lu et al, 2010) The success of
functional segment recognition by Increment of Diversity means the bases in functional sequences
have attained a stable distribution around the maximum entropy due to the functional selection in
evolution (Jin et al, 2008). The success also shows the information quantity or diversity is a good
quantity for functional sequence recognition.
2.3 Information quantity gain in sequence recombination is correlated with recombination
rate We study the increase of information quantity in sequence expansion. Consider the change
of information quantity when two sequence segments are combined to one. The information
quantity (diversity) of sequence segment a (long N ) or b (long N ) is
（I a）= −N ∑ p log p = N log N −∑m log m
a aj 2 aj a 2 a aj 2 aj
（I b）= −N ∑ p log p = N log N −∑m log m (6 )
b bj 2 bj b 2 b bj 2 bj
respectively. The information quantity (diversity) of combined sequence is
a b 2 a b aj bj 2 aj bj
It is easily to prove （I a +b）≥ I(a)+I(b). Define the gain of information quantity in the
combination
I(a)+ I(b)
For human genome taking the window width 5Mb (N = N = 5M) we found the averaged
R(a;b) is correlated to the experimental recombination rate (Liu et al, to be published). Since
the recombination rate is a measure of local evolutionary rate of a species the above result means
the genomic local evolutionary rate is related to the information gain in DNA sequence expansion.
2.4 Deviation of k-mer frequency from random sequence increases with evolution For a
long-N DNA sequence the average of k-mer frequency is measured by α ，α= , and the
deviation byσ 2 ，σ2 =∑ i ( f - the frequency of the i-th k-mer). For a
random sequence of same length, σ 2(k,N)= α(k,N) due to Poisson distribution. Define the
ratio of the deviation (σ 2(k,N)) for a real DNA sequence to that for a random sequence
(α(k,N)) as the non-randomness parameter Q(k,N)
Q(k,N)gives a sum rule of the k-mer frequency deviations which represents the nucleotide
correlation strength or non-randomness level of DNA. It describes how the k-mer frequency
distribution of a DNA sequence is deviated from the stochastic value due to functional selection.
On the other hand, from the statistical analysis of genome data we found Q(k,N)increases with
N for most DNA sequences when N large. Since the sequence duplication is an important
mechanism for genome evolution the above result shows the non-randomness increases due to
sequence duplication apart from the functional selection. Therefore, both factors, the
functionalization of DNA sequence (base mutation under selective constraint) and sequence
expansion, are the driving force for genome evolution and both factors contribute to the increase
of Q(k,N).
The dependence of the sum rule Q(k,N) on species has been calculated for k=6 and N=N
where N is the length of genome, i.e. the total length of all chromosomes. The Q(6,N ) for 11
genomes are listed in Table 1 (Luo et al, 2010). We find it increases roughly with evolutionary
complexity which means the directionality of genome evolution does exist.
In fact, by using k-mer frequency statistics one can reconstruct evolutionary tree of species.
The evolutionary tree gives more detailed evolutionary relations among species. The deduced
evolutionary tree from k-mer frequency statistics is basically consistent with life tree (Qi et al,
2004). However, in recent studies it was found apart from common evolutionary divergence the
ecological convergence of the genomes is superimposed to the tree (Kirzhner et al, 2007). Both
evolutionary divergence and ecological convergence are consistent with the above analysis based
on the sum rule of k-mer frequency deviation.
Table 1 The relation between Q(6,N ) and species
Species N Q(6,N )
M. genitalium 580076 244
A. fulgidus 2178400 212
E. coli 4639677 371
S. cerevisiae 12070900 1642
A. thaliana 118960610 23479
C. elegans 100269917 40371
D. melanogaster 72736145 7854
G. gallus 285755532 72776
D. rerio 859083401 133051
M. musculus 2617133082 389371
H. sapiens. 2893618752 494841
2.5 Homogeneity of RNA folding energy in genome means coordinately functionalization of
RNA local structure Luo and Jia ( 2007a, 2007b) calculated local mRNA folding energy
in twenty-eight genomes. Through the local folding of mRNA sequence they discovered an
interesting law: the intraspecific homogeneity and interspecific inhomogeneity of mRNA folding
energy. Then, the studies were generalized to more genomes and to other functional regions
of RNA sequences. The same results were obtained (data see below, next section). How to
understand the intraspecific homogeneity of RNA folding in a genome? Although the large
interspecific difference may occur due to the rapid accumulation of mutations the stochastic
interaction among genes can make the horizontal spread of the change of RNA folding energy
from one gene to other members. As is well known, the concerted evolution (coincidental
evolution) of multigene families has been proved by a large body of data from restriction enzyme
analysis and DNA sequencing techniques (Li, 1997). The intraspecific homogenization of mRNA
folding energy is like the concerted evolution but may have alternative origin. We know that at
each stage of the transfer of heredity information from primitive DNA sequence to functional
protein expression the related elements of the genome are frequently interacted and re-organized.
From sequence to structure to function, this is the basic logic of genome as a life machine. The
homogenization of RNA folding energy among genes in a genome may reflect the close
interaction between genomic sub-systems necessary for information transfer from sequence
structure to function, reflect the functional need of the total genome.
The coordinately functionalization of RNA local structure is a key factor to fit the function of
genome. To give a quantitative description of the functionalization of RNA local structure we
introduce a fitness parameters of the structure: the non-stochasticity of RNA local folding. For
gene q in a genome the non-stochasticity parameter is defined by
where E (q) is the i-th value of local folding energy of gene q in a window of given width (say,
50 bp) and A(q) is the local folding energy of the corresponding randomized sequence
(preserving the same base composition as the native sequence) of gene q. Set the mean and the
deviation of D(q) denoted by μ and σ respectively. Define CV = to describe the
scattering of D(q) of a genome. Simultaneously, we calculate the k-moment of
D(q),C = (D(q)−μ)k . Skewness is defined by C /σ3 and Kurtosis defined by
4 −3. The small skewness and kurtosis means the distribution near Gaussian type. We study
the relation between D(q) and q. The linear regression gives the slop very near to zero,
≈0, and the scattering of D(q)is small for each genome. The parameters CV and
the slops of linear regression for 11 genomes are listed in Table 2. Skewness and Kurtosis are also
listed (Chen, to be published). These results of statistical analyses show that the deviation of the
local RNA folding energy from the corresponding stochastic value, D(q) , is indeed
homogenized in a genome. Since RNA folding is an important step for the genetic information
transmission and expression the homogeneity of RNA folding energy and of its deviation gives
demonstration of the coordinately functionalization of RNA local structure to fit the functional
need of the total genome.
Table 2 D(q)-related parameters for typical genomes
Organism Slope CV Skewness Kurtosis
H． sapiens -0.00385 0.376 -0.143 -0.412
R． norvegicus -0.00806 0.258 -0.757 2.403
D． rerio -0.00191 0.346 0.583 1.853
D． melanogaster -0.00306 0.358 0.491 1.546
C． elegans -0.00194 0.271 -0.168 0.983
A． thaliana 2.27E-5 0.391 0.548 0.587
S．cerevisiae 1.19 E-4 0.532 2.176 8.534
B． subtilis -5.22E-4 0.199 0.137 -0.344
E． coli -1.45E-4 0.178 0.120 0.587
A．fulgidus -0.00133 0.209 0.344 1.321
M．pneumoniae -0.00263 0.168 0.159 0.372
2.6 Evidence of function differentiation among species : the large interspecific
difference of RNA folding energy The first round bioinformatics studies on the RNA
function differentiation were carried out by Luo and Jia in 2005 to 2006 (Luo et al, 2007a,
2007b). They discovered the intraspecific homogeneity and interspecific inhomogeneity of
mRNA folding by calculating local mRNA folding energy in twenty-eight genomes, 8 archaea,
14 Eubacteria and 6 eukaryota. For each species about 120 genes (coding regions) were
chosen stochastically and each mRNA sequence was folded in a local window pattern, namely, in
short regions of 50 bases and shifted by 10 bases. The averaged local folding energy of the j-th
native mRNA sequence in the i-th genome is denoted by y . Define the mean error sum of squares
MESS and the mean class sum of squares MCSS, the former describing the square deviation of
mRNA folding energy in a genome and the latter describing the square deviation of this energy
among genomes. The analysis of variance (ANOVA) is given by the following formulas:
Here SSe is the error sum of squares, CLS is the class sum of squares, t is the number of organisms
in a given class, y is the mean of y over the n sequences in the i-th organism for a given
class (i=1,2,…,t ; j=1,2,.., n ). If y depend on another set of co-variables x and these two
sets of variables obey a regression equation in the form of y ≈ a+bx for each class then
one should generalize ANOVA to the analysis of covariance (ANCOVA). Through ANOVA and
ANCOVA analysis these authors calculated MESS and MCSS of folding free energy of native
mRNA and deduced the F value
By comparing the calculated F value with F-distribution the significance level (P-value) was
deduced. They discovered F>>1, i.e., the extremely significant difference between MCSS and
MESS.
In the above studies only coding RNA sequences and mainly prokaryotic genomes were
considered. To explore if the intraspecific homogeneity and interspecific inhomogeneity of mRNA
folding is universal Chen et al generalized the statistical analyses to more eukaryotic genomes and
for more functional regions in addition to coding sequences (Chen, to be published). Consider 32
organisms including 7 mammalian (class 1), 7 other vertebrates (class 2), 6 invertebrates (class 3),
8 plants (class 4) and 4 fungi (class5). For each genome 100 genes were stochastically chosen and
four types of genomic regions, namely 5′ UTR, intron, CDSs and 3′ UTR, are studied. The
statistical property of mRNA folding free energies was studied by use of two methods, the
one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) and the analysis of covariance (ANCOVA). In ANOVA
the co-variables x are not introduced and the mean error sum of squares MESS and the mean
class sum of squares MCSS are calculated directly from y . While in ANCOVA only the simple
model is adopted where the co-variable is supposed to be x = (G +C)% for 4 different
functional regions respectively. The results of ANOVA analysis on RNA folding energy for 5
classes of organisms are listed in Table 3, which gives F = 10~50 at the significance level
P<0.0001. Furthermore, if 32 organisms are put into a single class then the like calculation gives
F =37.16, F =32.79, F =35.56, F =15.61 with p<0.0001.
5′UTR CDSs Intron 3′UTR
The similar results were also obtained in ANCOVA analysis on RNA folding energy (data not
shown here). All above analyses indicate that the selection for RNA folding is specific among all
genomes, irrespective of the kingdoms of species and the functional regions of genome. These
results show the extremely significant difference between MCSS and MESS for folding energy of
native RNA sequence is a universal law. Further, by use of the same method, Luo et al (2007a,
2007b)) and Chen et al (to be published) proved that the extremely significant difference between
MCSS and MESS also exists for folding energy deviation of native RNA relative to randomized
sequence.
What is the mechanism responsible for the universal law that the RNA folding energy (or its
deviation from randomized sequence) in different genomes is always higher than that in a genome ?
We speculate that it is a result of functional differentiation among species since more similar
forms will compete more strong, which tends to push species apart during evolution （“divergence
of churacter” as stated by Darwin）. So, the above calculations show that the Darwin’s principle of
evolutionary divergence can be demonstrated quantitatively by genome sequence analysis. In the
mean time, the ecological convergence of the evolutionary tree proposed by recent studies
(Kirzhner et al, 2007) can also be obtained in above RNA folding energy analysis among genomes.
In fact, although the large F values have been deduced in ANOVA and ANCOVA statistical
analysis for prokaryotes and large branches of eukaryotes, the multiple comparison test shows the
difference of folding energy deviation is not so significant for several particular pairs of genomes.
So, both evolutionary divergence and ecological convergence are consistent with and can be
deeply understood through RNA folding energy analysis. Our results show that the specific
selection among genomes does exist from the point of RNA structure and function, and the
functional selection among genomes is due to species competition adaptive to environment
(including ecological environment) that serves as one of the firmest grounds for the understanding
of the genomic evolutionary direction.
Table 3 ANOVA analysis of RNA folding energy in 32 eukaryotes
F (df ,df )$
5′-UTR INTRON CDS 3′-UTR
Class1 16.08 (6,693)* 56.32 (6,693)* 17.83 (6,693)* 8.24 (6,693)*
Class2 22.15 (6,693)* 45.78 (6,693)* 8.63 (6,693)* 26.11 (6,693)*
Class3 29.61 (5,594)* 65.24 (5,594)* 46.31 (5,594)* 20.88 (5,594)*
Class4 39.66 (7,792)* 37.48 (7,792)* 40.98 (7,792)* 19.21 (7,792)*
Class5 13.38 (3,396)* - 48.72 (3,396)* 27.13 (3,396)*
$ df represents the degree of freedom. df=t−1, df=∑n −t. * means p<0.0001. Since most of genes in
the fungi genome are intronless, comparisons related to intron regions were only carried out for class 1 to 4.
To conclude: 1) Firstly, both Shannon information quantity and diversity are good quantity
for describing gene evolution. Both the maximization of Shannon information with respect to
stochastic mutation and the increase of diversity with respect to sequence expansion imply the
directionality of evolution. 2) Secondly, the functional selection results in the deviation of DNA
segments from random sequences. The stronger the functional selection is, the larger the deviation
from random will be. So, the functional constraints should be imposed to the maximization of
information quantity. The random mutation, the sequence duplication and the functional selection
are three independent driving forces but they jointly play a role in the genome evolution. This is
the very reason why in our definition of the information quantity of genome (namely, CIQ)
the‘function-coding’has been emphatically indicated. 3) Thirdly, the homogeneity of RNA
folding energy in a genome and the significant difference of RNA folding energy among genomes
imply the existence of the coordinately functionalization of RNA local structure (functional
specificity) and the functional selection upon species competition adaptive to environment, that
provides an important approach to the understanding of evolutionary direction of genome. To
summarize, the genome evolutionary direction is generally decided by two factors, the inherent
evolutionary trends of DNA sequence in a genome on one side, and the forces from outer, namely
from species competition adaptive to environment on the other side. Here the inherent
evolutionary trends include the evolutionary stochasticity of DNA sequence, the recognition of
different functional segments by particular base distribution, the sequence recombination rate
correlated with the gain of information quantity，the increase of non-randomness of k-mer
frequency distribution to adapt to the functional need, and the homogeneity of RNA folding
energy in a genome, etc. The microevolution is the basis of macroevolution. The consistency
between microevolution and macroevolution is one of the firmest buttresses of modern
evolutionary theory. What we learn about microevolution in this section is relevant to studying
macroevolution, to solving the problem of genomic evolutionary direction.
3 Further discussions on genome evolutionary rate and species
competition adaptive to environment
3.1 Evolutionary rate of genome The species competition and functional selection is one of
the most important mechanisms for function-coding information quantity growing of genome. The
experimental evidences on CIQG law were discussed in Arxiv:0808.3323 (Luo, 2008). Several
points related to the evolutionary rate, species competition, environmental change and
experimental test of CIQG law will be discussed in the last sections. To describe the competition
strength among genomes in a given ecological and inorganic natural environment one introduces
the concept of Darwin temperature T . T =0 means no competition at all. A small T means the
relaxing competition and a high T means the intense competition. The genome evolutionary rate
is dependent of Darwin temperature. In mathematical terminology is a growing
function of T . On the other hand, the evolutionary rate depends on the adaptation of the species.
Suppose a set of fitness functions {w (q)} defined on sequence space q. Here {w } includes
the characteristics by which taxonomists distinguish related species, it also includes some invisible
adaptations such as disease resistance. If the fitness changes suddenly in adaptive landscape, or
in other words, if the slope of fitness { } is steep enough, then the evolutionary rate will be
high; otherwise, the small slope corresponds to low evolutionary rate. We assume is a
function of the slope of fitness { } and T ,
Note that due to the multi-dimensionality of fitness {w (q)} and the existence of correlation
between them the adaptation of a species is not a single-factor quantity that can be defined
properly. Haldane wondered why evolution so often seems nonadaptive or even maladaptive.
For example, he remarked on the apparent nonadaptiveness of several basic characteristics of
some species; he noticed that many lineages evolved large size or large horn just prior to
extinction, etc. He went to some trouble to explain how this could be so (Haldane, 1990).
However, from our point of view, the key problem is the multi-dimensionality of fitness function
which should be noticed carefully in finding a reasonable explanation for this puzzle. With the
same reason the slope of fitness is a quantity of high dimension and may have
complicate relation with the fitness slopes on the adaptive landscape.
To simplify the problem consider only one component is dominant in fitness functions and
other components can be neglected. In this case one may assume the most probable trajectory on
adaptive landscape is that with the steepest slope due to natural selection. Set
By appropriate definition of Darwin temperature we speculate a simple form of (time t in
generation）
C = kT S (16)
It means for species in a given ecosystem, the evolutionary rate of genome is proportional to the
ruggedness (steepness) of adaptive landscape and the proportional coefficient is a measure for the
Darwin temperature (the competition intensity) of the ecosystem. S in Eq (16) is
species-dependent. For example, as a new species bifurcated from the evolutionary tree the new
and old species have different adaptation slopes, S (old)≠ S (new). Generally, the new
species has steeper adaptation slope and evolves faster than the old one. This is consistent with the
fossil records that the evolution always shows a sudden rate in new species formation.
Accompanying the function innovation and improvement the new species can have a higher
function-coding information quantity and attain a higher evolutionary complexity.
For a species at the local maximum of fitness on adaptive landscape where all trajectories
have zero slope, it leads to =0. From Eq (16) the system simply moves to the nearest
adaptive peak and remain there. However, the practical situation may be somewhat complicated.
In above formulation the fluctuation force has been completely neglected. If the fluctuation force
is added at RHS of Eq (14) and (16) such strict deterministic behavior does not occur and the
random drift can move the genome under the control of a higher adaptive peak. In this way a
succession of peaks can be reached, each one higher than the previous one. Another factor to
drive the system not captured at local maximum is the environmental change since the adaptive
landscape changes with environment. In any case, the evolution at pause is consistent with the
punctuated equilibrium observed in the fossil records of species evolution (Ridley, 2004).
3.2 Species competition and parasitism The intensity of species competition in a
ecosystem is described by Darwin temperature. The evolutionary directionality exists only in
case of T >0. In the limiting case of no competition, T =0, the evolutionary rate approaches to
zero and the directionality has no meaning. The CIQG law holds for all free-living genomes. Is it
valid for parasites and symbionts? For parasite system the Darwin temperature needs re-definition.
Consider a prokaryote genome varying from free-living to host-dependent lifestyle. The
environment inside the host cell contains many of the nutrients and defense systems that a
bacterial cell needed, since genes that are needed in a free-living bacterium to provide the
resources are not needed in an intracellular bacterium. In this case the gene loss may be
advantageous since a cell with less DNA can reproduce faster. The loss of function in parasitism
results in the decrease of coding information quantity of the genome. This is a phenomenon of
so-called retrogression, which should not be included in the scope of CIQG law. As for the
evolution of bacteria parasitized in a stable host environment whether the CIQG law holds or not
is a new problem to be studied. For example, in case of parasitic bacteria resisting drugs the
evolutionary rate of the bacterial genome may be high and may not follow the law assumed above.
Different from free-living bacteria the parasite uses some genetic apparatus (for example, the
translational apparatus) of host for its own purpose. So, the parasite’s genome is not an
independent autonomous agent and its evolutionary law may adopt a form different from CIQG
law.
3.3 Sudden change of environment and evolution of survival The survival of the fittest
means the golden judge for the species competition is the adaptation to the environment. As
environments change, the competition between similar individuals will make for the evolution of
new adaptations in each that reduce the intensity of competition. So, the law of evolutionary
direction is closely related to environmental change. For a genome in stable environment I grows
with time For a genome in slow-varying environment I grows adiabatically adapting to the
change of environment. Here slow-varying means the marked environmental change can be found
only in several generations of the species. However, for a genome in suddenly-changing
environment, if the speed of growing I cannot adapt to the sudden change of environment then
the species would be close to extinction. Generally speaking, the sudden change of environment
causes deaths of most individuals. Perhaps, only few quasi-species survive in the disaster. The
survival may be explained by the quasi-species having evolved a structure of preadaptation which
can evolve new function to adapt to the suddenly changing environment. The preadaptation is a
common phenomenon observed in the evolution of species. The occurrence of the structure of
preadaptation is an evidence of the genome as an autonomous agent always entering its adjacent
possible as rapidly as it can sustain.
Is the CIQG law consistent with DNA damage? Consider bacteria live in an environment
where the strong electromagnetic field is suddenly applied. Then the bacterial DNA could be
damaged. DNA damage means the loss of heredity information. Although the decrease of genome
information quantity does occur in this case it is merely due to external forces and is irrelevant to
any evolutionary law. What is important is in the subsequent repair process, although a part of
functional elements in old species may have been deleted but they have been replaced by a more
efficient functional network. The process of evolving new function does obey the law of CIQG.
Thus the increase of coding information quantity can be valid even in the circumstance of DNA
damage.
3.4 On experimental test of CIQG law To test the CIQG law by direct experiments we
suggest to study the evolution of a simple system – the free-living bacteria under external forces,
for example, under ion implantation. Recently the bacterial genomic evolution was studied by
Barrick et al (2009) through 40,000 generations from a laboratory population of E coli. The
long-term experiment was conducted in 20 years. They observed the mutations accumulated at a
near-constant rate over the first 20,000 generations and the rate of genomic evolution accelerated
markedly only when a mutator lineage became established by about generation 26,500. It seems
that the time needed for the occurrence of a mutator in free-living bacteria is still too long. So, we
consider external forces applied to the prokaryotic genome system. Since the biological effects of
low energy ion beam implantation on rice were discovered by Chinese scientist in 1986, the ion
implantation as a new mutation source has been widely applied to the breeding of crops and
microorganisms (Song et al, 2006). The basic researches on ion-beam-induced biological effects
were also conducted in recent years. From the experiments on low energy (about 10 kev) ion beam
implantation on E coli we observed the accelerated evolutionary rate of genome. Although most
bacteria died under the irradiation of 10 kev ion beam the mutator phenotypes of E coli seem to
appear in the survivals several days after ion implantation. In the mean time, if put the sample
under periodic irradiations of ion beam (ion implantation repeated several times in a month), we
found the genomic evolution still in one-way directionality, not showing any periodicity in spite of
the environment having changed periodically. The preliminary result reveals that the experiments
by using external field (electro-magnetic field, ion beam irradiation, etc) applied to organisms
could provide an efficient tool to observe the genetic change of genome and test the CIQG law
directly.
Acknowledgement
The author is indebted to Drs Wei Chen, Yang Gao, Jun Lu, Guoqing Liu and Zhiqin Song for
their helpful discussions. The main numerical results given in Table 2 and 3 were calculated under
Chen’s help and the numerical results in Table 1 were originally obtained by Gao in a published
article, arXiv: 1004.3843.
The manuscript was prepared for submission to the 15th Evolutionary Biology
Meeting , Marseilles, France, September 27-30, 2011.