1v2960.1170:viXra
On the defence notion
Anne Bonfante
and Jean-Yves Marion
1 Loria-INPL
E´quipe Carte
anne.bonfante@libertysurf.fr,Jean-Yves.Marion@loria.fr
2 E´cole Nationale Sup´erieure
Mines de Nancy
1 Computer virology and art of war
“Trojan horses”, “logic bombs”, “armoured viruses” and “cryptovirology” are
termsrecallingwargears.Infact,conceptsofattackanddefencedrivetheworld
of computer virology, which looks like a war universe in an information society.
This war has several shapes, from invasions of a network by worms, to military
and industrial espionage...
For convenience, and because the term “virus” has a bigger impact from an
epistemological point of view,
(theword“virus”wasadoptedaftertheoreticalworksofCohen[1]andAdle-
man[2])wewillreferto“virus”orallthedifferentkindsofcomputerinfections.
The reader may consult Filiol’s books [3,16] for further information about the
definitions and classifications of malware.
We could think at first sight that questions about computer security, and
particularly about fights against computer viruses, are just a matter of highly
trained security computer officers, and that a victory just depends on scientific
and technical knowledge. But sometimes algorithmic and programming are not
enoughtocatchthewholepicture.Indeed,thestudyofmalwarestrategiesshows
that they are close to the battle of the Horacii against the Curiacii...
A different point of view could then bring to computer virology a new
prospect. This study is a part of a general investigation, which tries to under-
stand viral strategies in order to anticipate attacks and improve defences, and
to define the philosophical and political issues. Reading famous strategists and
philosopherscouldgivepreciousinformationaboutconscious-orunconsciousvi-
ralpractices,explicit-andimplicitbehaviourofthemalware’swriters,whatever
kind of attacks they launch. For this, a case study is a good way to make the
connection between the technical or scientific profiles of a virus and the kind of
strategy used (the meaning of the word ”strategy” is here conveyed by politi-
cal and war philosophies). The case of the Whale virus can be extended to the
Bradley concept, its epistemological model, which is meaningful.
The question of War, as well as the best way to do it and the political-
and human issues related to it, is very old in the history of philosophy, as we
⋆ This work has been supported byproject ARAVirus.
canalreadyfindit inthe Peloponnesian war [4],writtenbyThucydide,a Greek
generalandhistorianin430BC,orPlato’sRepublic [5](420-340BC).Philosophy
of war has always been an active theme of philosophy and was the main issue
for some authors like Machiavelli (1469-1527), who wrote the Art of war [6] in
1519.
Are the writers of malware Machiavelli’s readers? This question sounds like
a joke,but is legitimate,as we shallsee.Indeed, the more dangerousviruses are
the ones which seem to apply principles and to use strategies of the art of war,
like Machiavelli’s, or from other war theorists like Clausewitz [7].
2 Bradley defences
TheWhaleviruschallengedScotlandYardforabouttwoweeksduringthe1990’s
[8]. This virus is a typical case study, because it has its own defensive weapons.
From the Whale virus, a virus shape named Bradley was proposed by Filiol [9].
This shape, which could also be considered as an epistemological model, will
guide us in our study on virus defences. Indeed, it uses very complex notions
coming from mathematics and computer science in order to defend and attack.
Bradley protection systems are first used to prevent the detection of the
viruses by an antivirus software, and then to bypass the defences of the host
system, which is under attack. We will study the two most interesting types of
defence: the armoured code aspect and the virus’s one because they are typical
and relevant. It is worth to notice that the furtive aspect was a Whale feature.
An armouredcode consists in protecting a code from an analysis,which can
be static by disassembling, or dynamic, by monitoring executions.
Protectingacodeagainststaticanalysisisascientificchallenge.Thepaperof
Barak&al[10]onobfuscationisagoodillustrationofthesedifficulties.Withthe
benefitofhindsight,alltheprotectionmethodsusedleanonthesameapproach.
Thecodeprotectionisperformedbyanobfuscator.Infact,thelatterisakindof
compiler, which transforms a source programme s into a scrambled programme
in such a way that:
1. The scrambled programme
computes the same thing as the source pro-
gramme s. (in other words, there are semantically equivalent).
2. The runtime ofthe scrambledprogrammes′ is close to the one ofs. (that is
up to a polynomial).
3. The programme
is unreadable as well for a human analyst as for a de-
obfuscation programme.
The third point corresponds to the obfuscation clause, which turns out to be
difficult to formalize. Obfuscation consists in rewriting the code in order to
make it less understandable.Cryptographyplays a crucialrole in this task.The
interested reader may consult the recent paper of Beaucamps and Filiol [12]
about the practical obfuscation methods. Moreover, a virus may mutate when
it duplicates with polymorphism or metamorphism techniques.
An obfuscator protects a programme in a way that we could call passive,
unlike furtivity techniques. It aims to camouflage a code in order to slow the
analysis of its adversaries down. Advantage for the attacker with this method:
the guarantee of immunity for a while, because the time spent to camouflage is
evershorterthanthe onespentbythe adversarytodetectit.Thus,the attacker
protects itself against antivirus software, which, on the one hand search for a
signature of a known malware. On the other hand, it protects itself against
the work of analysts, which are trying to understand the meaning of its code.
This method used by virus looks like both a camouflage and a shield, which are
designed to resist an attack as long as possible. It appears then to be a method
of passive defence.
ABradley virus alsocombines anactive defence method: ”furtivity”.It con-
sistsindeceivingahostsystem,bymodifying,forexample,systeminterruptions.
Inthe caseofWhale,techniquesoffurtivity allowto detectadebugger.Thede-
fence becomes active, because a virus can trigger an action off, if it is aware
that some agent is trying to analyse it. Furtivity then allows the prevention of
behaviouralanalysis techniques used by antivirus. Moreover,the resistance of a
virus to such an analysis allows the collection of information about the defence
methods of the host system. Consequently, we may suppose that this fact is
a piece of its attack plan and the reasons why the virus was launched... We
must then look at the reasonsfor which a virus like Bradley integrates so many
defence techniques.
3 Why does a virus defend itself?
The partofthe viruscodewhichpurposeisto infiltrateasystemandto deceive
theantiviruscanbeconsideredasbothanoffensiveweapon(itentersafortress)
and a defensive weapon (camouflage). A particularity of Whale, as well as the
Bradley concept, is that its code contains advanced defensive functionalities,
which go beyond the traditional ones used to enter a system. If a virus was a
mere offensive weapon, why allowing such defence mechanisms then?
If we send troops to attack a place, and whatever the issues are, it seems
normal to arm them and to give them some means to protect themselves. Such
defensive means are necessary in order to protect troops and avoid casualties.
However, in the context of a conflict in the information society, what does the
attacker try to protect?
Iftheonlygoalistogetsomeinformationback,thelossofavirusisapartof
the operation.Why are viruses protected then? We think that the host systems
should address those questions in order to prepare its defence.
This brings us to a first hypothesis. The attacker is a Machiavelli’s reader
without knowing it. Indeed, one of the fundamental principles of the art of war
is that we must have both offensive and defensive weaponries. A good defence
is meaningless if it is not armed: the only guarantee of autonomy and indepen-
dence is the ability to be in a defensive position as well as in an offensive one
if necessary. Computer security questions should then necessarily consider the
possibilitytoprepareanduseoffensivemethods.However,statelegislations,like
theFrenchone,donotallowattacksandforcesecurityofficerstosetonlydefen-
sive methods with no possibility of counter-attack.The efficiency of the defence
isalsorelatedtothe questioningaboutthisbanonpossessingandtrainingwith
its own (offensive) weapons. Machiavelli’s readers know how important it is to
keep control over one’s own weapons because it is a sine qua non condition for
security and independence.
Thesecondhypothesis isthatavirusprovidesadefence becauseithas some
hostile intentions.If there areas sophisticatedhigh-leveldefence mechanisms as
theonesmentionedabove,itmeansthattheviruswasmadeforaveryimportant
purpose. We could use this criterion in order to set a typology of viral attacks:
the more elaborated the defence is, the more important the objective is.
Lastly, the third hypothesis is that we should call security policy views into
question. If a virus based on the Bradley concept integrates such elaborated
sequences of defence, it is because it probably expects a serious counter-attack.
The defences arethus strongerthan whatthey claim or thanthey are knownto
be (but it is maybe a trick:fooling the adversarywhile looking more vulnerable
than you are in reality.)
Otherhypothesesareconceivable,andsomeshowthat’viralwar’takessome-
times paradoxical or new shapes we should study in order to anticipate the
future.
4 New time scales?
Information technology war implies to have to reconsider the scales of the con-
flicts, particularly the time scale, but also the one of the space. The time nec-
essary to decipher and analyse a virus (remember the two weeks which were
necessary to analyse Whale!) is a “long” time. It means that it corresponds to
a human time-scale. On the other hand, if we consider that a viral attack sym-
bolically represents a hostile operation, the length of the attack is very short
(between a second and a minute). There are at least two levels of analysis to
bring out in order to understand the defence question:
– The human scale. The conception of dangerous viruses is a long process
becausetheyintegratealotofmathematicsandabigknowledgeincomputer
science. It is hard to capture a virus and difficult to analyse it. This is the
case of Whale.
– The computer scale. A virus is inside a system, and must fight against an
anti-virus.The fightlasts a few seconds,orminutes, programmeversuspro-
gramme.
We couldthink atfirstsightthataviralattackisacompletely new kindofwar,
since it takes place in an entirely different way compared to traditional war.
Can we use the term of war again, since there is nothing in common between a
few-second strike and a real battle in the field?
A virus writer finds time to design a virus efficiently and cannot ignore that
it will require a lot of time to decipher and analyse the virus, if it is captured.
Therefore,this time wasanticipatedandshouldbe consideredasa genuinepart
of the attack.It canbe used to create a diversionor to have more time (indeed,
duringthephaseofanalysis,theattackercandosomethingelse).Thenthistype
of virus corresponds more to a traditional war, and consequently sets conflicts
back in a long time-scale and not in an instantaneous one. Isn’t it the aim of
the attacker? So don’t we have to consider that a viral attack is just a weapon
as another one, or just a part, of a global conflict? Such a viral attack is a way
to set things back in a better-known field, which is more traditional, in a way
more human: the field of men, logistics and “normal” time.
This shift of scale between viral attacks and traditional fights allows us to
ask further questions. For example, look at the ratio between the 14 days of
analysis,whichisthe time necessaryto understandWhale,and1minute,which
willbe consideredlikeatime-referenceatthecomputerlevel.Theratiobetween
these scales is around a million. The change of scale directly implies that when
a viral attack is launched, it cannot be controlled at the human level anymore,
because it is too fast. Admittedly, the use of a gun implies that its process is
autonomous and does not depend on a human (when a gun is fired, the bullet
is unavoidable...except in ”Matrix”!). But in the case of a computer war, we
should not consider a single virus, but a set of viruses against defences. Each
of these agents communicates with the others, reacts to its environment and
takes decisions, independently from any human interventions. Moreover, if the
computer scale is very short, the conflict area could be the whole net [13]! This
changeof the scalesmaybe implies that we shouldchange ourclassicalconcepts
of war analysis, as we traditionally find them in books of great authors like
Clausewitz [7].
5 A central question: the losses
Cyberwarimplies to reconsider a crucialnotion of every armedconflict: the one
of the casualties.Indeed, why does someone programan armouredvirus? What
is the attacker’sobjective? What may he lose, andwhich losses does he wantto
avoid?
In the setting of traditional war with different armed forces, the question of
thecasualtiesisoneofthemostimportanttomakestrategicandtacticalchoices.
This question is coupled with an obvious moral issue. This issue is represented
bytheassessmentoftheinherentratioinanyoperation:the(human-,technical-
or practical) cost of an action must be related to the interest or to the benefit
of this action. So, this assumes the responsibility of the military leaders and of
the governments, particularly a moral responsibility, since casualties should be
avoided.Takinga riskshouldthen be justified with respectto the currentissue,
especially when human lives are concerned. The moral responsibility is more
difficulttotake,butitjustexistsinthecaseofrealwars,becausewecanalways
know the number of deaths, without always really understanding the benefit of
an operation.Cyberwar changes traditional war categories,since the moraland
the casualty question as well as the question of the just cause, do not come up
anymore.
Inversely, the heroic figure or the heroic action supposes that the loss of a
life is there for a greatcollective benefit. The greaterthe sacrificeof the hero is,
the more he takes risks; the more conscious he is that he will not survive to his
action, the more heroic he is. We can ask if hackers identify to the issues of the
hero, as we already mentioned, by overcoming all difficulties and responding to
all challenges. Indeed, the point for a hacker is here to accomplish a technical
exploitgivinghimthefeelingofbeingahero,evenifhisactionsarereprehensible.
Recent movies show that clearly: it is the heroic figure of Neo in Matrix.
Itseemstousthatweshouldunderstandthespecificityofmodernwarswith
respect to how they consider casualties. In the case of a virus, the loss of the
latter is somehow immaterial, maybe anticipated, or even programmed by its
designer. It means, first, that we do not consider losses as real ones (like events
to avoid),oratleastthatitis apartofthe strategy,especiallyaswe canalways
replace a virus: losses are duplicable because a virus can be duplicated.
Anothercharacteristicofcomputer-waristhatitdoesnotleanoneconomical
and industrial resources, which are decisive factors in the case of a “real” war,
even if they are not the only ones. In the case of a viral war, the attacker’s
strength is not directly related to economical- or industrial resources, but to a
scientific and technical knowledge, which then becomes a possible cause of war,
or at least reasons for a competition.
When an attacker ”loses” a virus, the latter can be analysed. From then on,
we may reproduce quite easily its design. However, there are some interests in
avoiding the loss of a viral weapon in order to protect knowledge, in terms of
cryptographyforexample.Theattacker,asawarleaderorastrategist,measures
the interest of an action and determines the risk he runs. One of the clearest
specificities of a modern or post-modern conflict is that the technical questions
aim more and more at replacing the question of force. Violent confrontation is
shifted to technical considerations.
6 Counter-attack and issues
The viral defence system often allows the attacker to stay anonymous, which
prevents possible counter-attacks. But this fact changes the concept of war be-
cause the enemy is not identified. What is peculiar to war is to have an enemy,
aknownopponent.Oncetheenemyremainsanonymous,confrontationdoesnot
correspondtotherepresentationofwar,butmoretoguerrillawarfare:theenemy
is not conventional and cannot be spotted.
Furthermore, if the attacker tries to hide his strategy as long as possible, it
means that the host system itself can be protected. Indeed, a virus is able to
deludeadefenceinsuchawaythatitcanbeinpositiontoobservetoolsusedfor
defence: a virus is able to be behind the line, and so is able to list all defensive
tools. Therefore, this means that the virus code has a mechanism the function
of which is to detect the tools usedby the defence in order to analyse intruders,
viruses and so on.
We could conclude for the time being that the strategy used by the virus in
this case is a prospective one. Detecting the defence tools has a meaning only if
anotherattackisplannedinthenearfuture.Consequently,weshouldanalysethe
aims of the virus froma temporalpoint of view.A viralattackcan be an initial
assault before another one, so we should not simply consider what represents a
given attack at a given time.
Lastly, the issues of computer virology are directly related to other domains
wherecomputernetworksareusedastoolstoexchangeinformation.Itisawayto
say that the field of viral war is also economic and financial, and that it implies
political positions, in particular questions about individual rights. Economic
issues are not always perceptible behind some behaviour,which may have some
moral justifications: for example, it is the case of Sony rootkit [15]. The reason
of the integration of computer virology was to protect author rights, and to
protect the data contained in the disk. The reality was that this technology
allowed to spy the user’s data (it is of great interest from a commercial point
of view...). The ambiguity is in the fact that Sony was perfectly able to justify
this functionality, which is usually used by malware, in order to protect author
rights. This worry is legitimate, but nothing proves that the real purpose was
this one... So,computer virologyis the place of different kinds of wars,but the
hostility logic often remains the same.
7 Evolutions and perspectives
Viral defence, as a large part of computer security, depends on the results of
theoretical computer science. For the record, there are Cohen’s results on viral
detection undecidability: it is not possible to construct perfect anti-virus soft-
ware. Other results depend on conjectures of the algorithmic complexity theory
(like if P=PSPACE, then practically all cryptographic codes will be broken).
It is interesting to see once more that we face a scale problem. Indeed, conjec-
tures related to the algorithmic complexity theory imply that a given problem
is computable but the runtime is beyond belief and is greater than the age of
the universe! Science acts as a guarantor for defence soundness. If a defence
depends on the algorithmic complexity theory, so it must take into account the
timescalesthatwehavementionedpreviously.Aviraldefencemaybeconceived
to resist an analysis at a human scale, and from then on can be considered as
immune with respect to the computer time scale (where the time scale is about
a minute). On the other hand, during a computer attack, and at a computer
time scale,this heavydefence slowsthe virusexecutiondown.So,the issueis to
choosethe rightweaponryaccordingto the targetsthatareaimed.This subject
was widely discussed in many strategy books, as Machiavelli did in his Art of
war.
As we saw it above, viralwar integrates the necessity of a prospective strat-
egy: on the one hand, because it could use the information the virus found,
pursuing the elaboration of its attack’s tactics according to the environment it
is located in. In this sense, a virus is a modern weapon since it is adaptable:
there are interactions between a virus and its environment. There is an episte-
mological and scientific dimension as soon as we think about a viral attack as
a deployment of a large number of autonomous and cooperative agents. This
direction recalls analogies with biological immune systems [14]. Another possi-
bility is to consider the agents of a network with divergent interests like in the
algorithmic game theory. The game theory, which tries to predict behaviours of
apopulationinagivenenvironment,couldthenbeusedtoanalysepoliticaland
sociologicalbehavioursofagentsrunningviralattacks,andalsooftheuserswho
are concerned by those attacks.
Tocomebacktothequestionoftheinteractionofavirusinitsenvironment,
we can say it is inseparable from a forecast. That is that a virus adapts to its
environment in order to pursue an attack, or to send information back with the
view tomakeanotherattack.Thistemporalforecast,evenif itisimplicit, is the
sign that a viral arm cannot be understood, or analysed, without thinking of
the one who possesses it. The attacker’s intention (or the intention of the ones
who orderthis action)isrevealedby the question,whichseemsharmlessatfirst
glance:whatisthepurposeofaweapon?If,tobespecific,itcanbeusedtomake
another attack, or just to pursue the current one: this attack is a step. It also
meansthatitisnecessaryfortheoneswhoarefightingagainstviralattacks,not
only to view an attack here and now, but always to think about the intentions
that could be implied. To give another conclusion to this discussion, we should
analyse a viral attack by what it implicitly discloses:the virus’s method for the
attack indicates what its writer knows, or what he thinks he knows about the
target he aims. Anybody thinking he is a potential target should integrate into
its security policy what he wants to show to the others, in such a way that he
directs the kind of attack he can be the target of. The issue at stake here is to
applythegoodoldstrategy:afalselure,afalsetarget,oranoticeableweakness,
which transforms stratagems into an art of playing with representations and to
trickenemies.Wemustalwayscomebacktothis Machiavelli’sprinciple:“Never
believe that the enemy doesn’t know what he does”, always assume that you
haveto dealwitha smart-,surelycraftyenemy,whoseintentions arenotalways
visible. So, the security of a target should not only stem from the strength of
a defence: the attackers will always succeed to penetrate by a way or another.
We should also know how to use trickery,how to play with psychologicaleffects
andmakeouropponentbelievethatdefencesaredifferentfromwhattheyreally
are...
Acknowledgement
We would like to thank first lieutenant de Marqueissac for her valuable help in
improving the correctness of our English.