2v9108000/hp-tnauq:viXra
OPERATIONAL QUANTUM LOGIC: AN OVERVIEW1
BOB COECKE2
Department of Mathematics,
Free University of Brussels,
Pleinlaan 2, B-1050 Brussels, Belgium.
e-mail: bocoecke@vub.ac.be
DAVID MOORE3
Department of Theoretical Physics,
University of Geneva,
24 quai Ernest-Ansermet, CH-1211 Geneva 4, Switzerland.
e-mail: d.moore@phys.canterbury.ac.nz
ALEXANDER WILCE
Department of Mathematics and Computer Science,
Juniata College,
Huntingdon, PA 16652, USA.
e-mail: wilce@juniata.edu
The term quantum logic has different connotations for different people, having
been considered as everything from a metaphysical attack on classical reasoning
to an exercise in abstract algebra. Our aim here is to give a uniform presentation
of what we call operational quantum logic, highlighting both its concrete physi-
cal origins and its purely mathematical structure. To orient readers new to this
subject, we shall recount some of the historical development of quantum logic,
attempting to show how the physical and mathematical sides of the subject have
influenced and enriched one another.
1ThispaperisaslightlymodifiedversionoftheintroductorychaptertothevolumeB.Coecke,
D.J. Moore and A. Wilce (Eds.), Current Research in Operational Quantum Logic: Algebras,
Categories, Languages, Fundamental Theories of Physics series, Kluwer Academic Publishers,
2000. Consequently, there is a particular focus in this paper on the (survey) articles of that
volume,whicharededicated toD.J.Foulisinhonorofhisseminalcontributions toourfield.
2Theauthor isPostdoctoral ResearcheratFlanders’FundforScientificReseach.
3Currentaddress: DepartmentofPhysicsandAstronomy,UniversityofCanterbury,POBox
4800Christchurch,NewZealand.
2 COECKE, MOORE AND WILCE
1. Introduction
The subject ofoperationalquantumlogic—lying somewhereatthe crossroadsof
mathematics, physics and philosophy — has a long and complicated history, and
has generated a large, scattered and unruly literature. It is not an easy thing to
explain, in a few words, what it is supposed to be about! Our best attempt is to
say that operational quantum logic involves
(a) the fact that the structure of the 2-valuedobservablesin orthodoxquantum
mechanics may usefully be regarded as a non-classical propositional logic,
(b) the attempt to give independent motivation for this structure, as part of a
general programme to understand quantum mechanics, and
(c) the branchofpure mathematics that has grownout of (a) and(b), and now
concerns itself with a variety of “orthomodular” structures generalizing the
logic of 2-valued quantum observables.
Whatever else it may be, quantum logic is a living, growing part of contem-
porary mathematics and theoretical physics — one that has continued to hold
the interest of a body of mathematicians, physicists and philosophers of science.
This sustained interest reflects in part the fact that the basic ideas and language
of quantum logic inform most discussions of the vexing foundational problems
of quantum mechanics (indeed, to a degree that is often not recognized even by
the discussants). It reflects also the fact that quantum logic has spawned an au-
tonomous and fascinating branch of pure mathematics concerned with a variety
of structures — orthomodular lattices and posets, orthoalgebras, partial Boolean
algebras, etc. — generalizing P(H). Finally, the recent advent of quantum com-
putation and quantum information theory offers a field of practical applications
for quantum logic which has yet to be fully explored.
Historically, quantum logic derives from von Neumann’s (more than casual)
observationthat the 2-valuedobservables,representedin his formulationof quan-
tummechanicsbyprojectionoperators,constituteasortof“logic”ofexperimental
propositions. This idea wasfurther pursuedby BirkhoffandvonNeumann. After
two decades ofneglect, interestinquantum logicwas revived,due in largepartto
Mackey’s analysis of the probabilistic calculus of standard quantum theory cou-
pled with his theory of induced representations. The further development of the
subject has occurred at several levels and in a number of directions. Mackey’s
work was extended significantly by Piron, whose representation theorem and ax-
iomatic framework provided much impetus for further development. At the same
time, dissatisfaction with Mackey’s axiomatic framework led to a search for more
primitive,andmoreconcretelyoperational,foundations. Notable hereis the work
of Foulis and Randall, and also that of Ludwig and his colleagues at Marburg.
Work in foundational physics has also stimulated, and been stimulated by, purely
mathematicalresearch,notablyinthedevelopmentofanabstracttheoryofortho-
modular lattices and, in recent years, more general structures such as orthoalge-
bras and effect algebras. More recently still, the subject has seen the application
OPERATIONAL QUANTUM LOGIC: AN OVERVIEW 3
of powerful category-theoretic techniques. Given the somewhat overwhelming va-
riety of these developments, in this introductory essay, we are going to attempt
an outline of quantum logic that will help readers who are not already experts in
the subject to understand the various papers that are produced — and also, to
see them as belonging to a common subject. We start by discussing the seminal
workofBirkhoffandvonNeumannanditsdevelopmentbyMackey. Wethenturn
to a brief exposition of Piron’s representation theorem and his axiomatic frame-
work, referring the reader to [Coecke and Moore 2000] and [Valckenborgh 2000]
for expositions in a more contemporary, categorical idiom. Next, we discuss the
work of Foulis and Randall, in particular their introduction of the notion of an
orthoalgebra, and their observation that tensor products of orthomodular posets
generallyexistonlyasorthoalgebras. TheFoulis-Randallformalismisdiscussedin
detail in[Wilce 2000]. We followwith a generalexpositionofthe pure mathemat-
icaltheory of orthomodularstructures. For more details onorthomodularlattices
we refer to [Bruns and Harding 2000], for observables on orthomodular posets to
[Ptak 2000] and for group representations on (interval) effect algebras to [Foulis
2000]. Finally, we mention the notion of categoricalenrichment and the theory of
quantales, surveyed respectively in [Borceux and Stubbe 2000] and [Paseka and
Rosicky´ 2000], before introducing computational and linguistic aspects, treated
respectively in [Resende 2000] and [Gudder 2000].
2. Von Neumann’s quantum mechanics
While precise mathematical treatments of quantum mechanics existed before Jo-
hann von Neumann’s monumental treatise [1932], it may reasonably be argued
that this work fixed once and for all the theoretical framework of standard quan-
tumtheory,inwhicheachquantummechanicalsystemisassociatedwithaHilbert
spaceH,eachunitvectorψ ∈Hdeterminesastateofthesystem,andeachobserv-
able physical quantity associated with the system is represented by a self-adjoint
operatorAonH. Thespectraltheoremtellsusthatsuchanoperatorisassociated
with a spectral measure
assigning to each real Borel set B a projection operator P (B) on H. For any
unit vector ψ ∈H, the quantity
then defines a probability measure on the line, which von Neumann regards as
giving the probability that the observable (represented by) A has a value in the
set B when the system’s state is (represented by) ψ. If the identity function has
finite variancein µ , thenψ is in the domainof A, andthe expectationvalue of
A relative to ψ is given by
Exp(A,ψ)=R
(s).
4 COECKE, MOORE AND WILCE
One easily checks that this works out to Exp(A,ψ)=hAψ,ψi.
2.1. THE LOGIC OF PROJECTIONS
If the Mathematische Grundlagen der Quantenmechanik signalled the passage
into maturity of quantum mechanics, it also signalled the birth of quantum logic.
Evidently,itis the projection-valuedmeasureP , morethanthe operatorA, that
most directly carries the statistical interpretation of quantum mechanics outlined
above. Now, as von Neumann notes, each projection P ∈ P(H) itself defines an
observable — one with values 0 and 1. If P = P (B) is the spectral projection
associatedwithanobservableAandaBorelsetB,wemayconstruethisobservable
as “testing” whether or not A takes a value in B. Von Neumann regards P as
representing a physical property of the system (or rather, of the system’s states).
He remarks that
“the relation between the properties of a physical system on the one
hand,andtheprojectionsontheother,makespossibleasortoflogical
calculus with these. However, in contrast to the concepts of ordinary
logic, this system is extended by the concept of ‘simultaneous decid-
ability’whichischaracteristicforquantummechanics.” [vonNeumann
1932,p.253]
Indeed,ifP andQarecommutingprojections,thentheirmeetP∧QandjoinP∨Q
in the lattice P(H) may be interpreted classically as representing the conjunction
and disjunction of the properties encoded by P and Q; further, the projection
P′ =1−P servesasasortofnegationforP. IfP andQdonotcommute,however,
thentheyarenot“simultaneouslydecidable”,andthemeaningofP∧QandP∨Q
is less clear. Nevertheless, P(H) retains many features of a Boolean algebra, and
may be regarded as an algebraic model for a non-classical propositional logic. In
particular,P(H) is orthocomplementedandso enjoys analoguesofthe de Morgan
laws; more sharply, the sub-ortholattice generated by any commuting family of
projections is a Boolean algebra.
2.2. THE LOGIC OF QUANTUM MECHANICS
It is noteworthy that von Neumann speaks of the simultaneous “decidability”
(i.e., testability) of properties, but does not distinguish between decidable and
undecidable properties per se. Classically, of course, any subset of the state-
space counts as a categorical property of the system, and nothing in principle
preventsusfromtakingthesameviewinquantummechanics. However,onlythose
subsets of the state space corresponding to closed linear subspaces of the Hilbert
space areassociatedwith observables,andso“decidable”by measurement. Ifone
adopts a ratherseverepositivism, accordingto which no un-decidable proposition
ismeaningfulatall,oneisledtotheseeminglystrangedoctrinethat,foraquantum
OPERATIONAL QUANTUM LOGIC: AN OVERVIEW 5
mechanicalsystem,the setofmeaningfulpropertiesforms,notaBooleanalgebra,
but rather the lattice P(H) of projections of a Hilbert space.
ThisideawasfurtherdevelopedbyvonNeumanninajointpaperwithGarrett
Birkhoff entitled The Logic of Quantum Mechanics [Birkhoff and von Neumann
1936]. Birkhoff and von Neumann observe that P(H) retains a number of the
familiar features of the algebra of classical propositional logic — in particular, it
is orthocomplemented and hence satisfies de Morgan’s laws. It is not, however,
Boolean—thatis, the distributive lawfails. BirkhoffandvonNeumanngosofar
as to suggest that
“whereas logicians have usually assumed that properties L71-L73 of
negation were the ones least able to withstand a critical analysis, the
studyofmechanicspointtothedistributiveidentities L6astheweakest
link in the algebra of logic.” [Birkhoff and von Neumann 1936, p.839]
Asweshallseeinsection7,thisremarkisratherdeeperthanonemayimagine,be-
ing interpretablein terms ofthe fundamental difference betweenHeyting algebras
and orthomodular lattices considered as generalizations of Boolean algebra.
This suggestion that the projection lattice may be viewed as a propositional
logic has been understood in a number of rather different ways. Some have seen
it as calling into question the correctness of classical logic. Others have seen it as
entailingalessdrasticmodificationofclassicalprobabilitytheory. Aswehaveseen,
vonNeumannhimself[1932§3.5]israthercautious,remarkingthattheequivalence
between subspaces and projections induces a sort of logical calculus. Similarly,
Birkhoff and von Neumann [1936 §0] conclude that by heuristic arguments one
can reasonably expect to find a calculus of propositions for quantum mechanical
systems which is formally indistinguishable from the calculus of subspaces and
resembles the usual logical calculus.
More radical is the view of Finkelstein [1968, 1972] that logic is in a certain
sense empirical, a view championed by such philosophical luminaries as Putnam
[1968, 1976]. Finkelstein highlighted the abstractions we make in passing from
mechanics to geometry to logic, and suggested that the dynamical processes of
fracture and flow already observed at the first two levels should also arise at the
third. Putnam, on the other hand, argued that the metaphysical pathologies
of superposition and complementarity are nothing more than artifacts of logical
contradictions generated by an indiscriminate use of the distributive law.
Thisviewofthematter,whichremainspopularinsomequarters,4 dependson
areadingoftheprojectionP asencodingaphysicalpropertyofthequantalsystem,
and on the assumption that only physical properties are ultimately to count as
4Forinstance,BambergandSternberg[1990,pp.833-835]write: “Infact,[quantum mechan-
ics] represents the most profound revolution in the history of science, because it modifies the
elementary rules of logic. ... [T]he distributive law does not hold in quantum logic. As we
mentionedabove,thevalidityofquantummechanicshasbeenexperimentallydemonstratedover
and over again during the past sixty years. So experiment has shown that one must abandon
oneofthemostcherishedprinciplesoflogicwhendealingwithquantum observables.”
6 COECKE, MOORE AND WILCE
meaningful (or at any rate, as fundamental). There is, however, a different way
of construing P, namely, that it encodes a statement about the possible result of
some “measurement”. Thus, if A is the self-adjoint operatorcorresponding to the
observable A and P =P (B) is the spectral projectionof A corresponding to the
BorelsetB,wemightconstrueP asencodingthepropositionthatameasurement
ofAwouldyieldavalueinE ifmade. Thisconstrual,usuallydubbedoperational,
guided Mackey in his reconstruction of von Neumann’s quantum mechanics, to
which we now turn.
3. Mackey’s programme
In an influential paper [1957], subsequently expanded into the monograph [1963],
GeorgeMackeyargued(a)thatonecouldreconstructmostifnotalloftheappara-
tusofvonNeumann’squantummechanicsfromthepremisethattheexperimental
propositions form an ortholattice isomorphic to P(H), and (b) that this premise
itself could be independently motivated by verygeneralconsiderationsabout how
probabilistic models of physical systems ought to look.
3.1. QUANTUM MECHANICS AS A PROBABILITY CALCULUS
Mackey construed quantum mechanics as simply being a non-classicalprobability
calculus, in which the Boolean algebra of events of classical probability theory is
replaced by the lattice P(H). More exactly, Mackey stressed that both the states
and the observables of a quantum mechanical system can be defined purely in
terms ofP(H). First, anystatisticalstate W determinesa probabilitymeasureon
P(H), namely the mapping
A deep theorem by Gleason [Gleason 1957; Dvureˇcenskij 1993] shows that, con-
versely, every σ-additive probability measure on P(H) has this form. Second, an
observable with values in the measurable space (S,F) may be represented by a
projection-valued measure
where,foreachmeasurablesetB ∈F,theprojectionM(B)istakentoencodethe
“experimental proposition” that a measurement of the observable yields a value
in the set B. Evidently,we may pull probability measureson P(H) back alongM
to obtain a classical probability measure on F. We interpret M∗(ω) = ω◦M as
giving the statistical distribution of values of M (in S) when the system is in the
state represented by ω. In other words,
represents the probability that the observable representedby M will yield a value
in the set B, when measured, when the state of the system is represented by W.
OPERATIONAL QUANTUM LOGIC: AN OVERVIEW 7
This connects with von Neumann’s operator-theoretic representation of ob-
servables in a natural manner, as follows: if f : S → R is any bounded classical
real-valuedrandom variable defined on S, we may define the self-adjoint operator
in the usual way.5 Then, for any probability measure µ on P(H), we have
where W is the density operator corresponding to µ. This view of quantum me-
chanicsisstrikinglypowerful. Gleason’stheorem,togetherwiththe spectraltheo-
rem,theclassicalresultsofStone,Wigner,WeylandvonNeumann,andMackey’s
own work on induced unitary representations, allow one essentially to derive the
entire apparatus of non-relativistic quantum mechanics (including its unitary dy-
namics, the CCRs, etc.), from the premise that the logic of experimental proposi-
tions is represented by the projection lattice P(H). For an outline of this recon-
struction, see [Mackey 1963] or [Beltrametti and Cassinelli 1981]; for a detailed
account, see [Varadarajan1968].
3.2. MACKEY’S AXIOMS
Its success notwithstanding, Mackey’s account of quantum mechanics as a prob-
ability calculus still rests on one undeniably ad hoc element: the Hilbert space
H itself. Indeed, once one entertains the idea that the testable propositions as-
sociated with a physical system need not form a Boolean algebra, the door is
openedtoahugerangeofotherpossibilities. Itthenbecomesamatterofurgency
to understand why nature (or we) should choose to model physical systems in
terms of projection lattices of Hilbert spaces, rather than anything more general.
Mackeyoutlinedanambitiousprogrammetodojustthis,bydeducingtheHilbert
spacemodelfromasetofmoreprimitiveand,ideally,moretransparentlyplausible
axioms for a calculus of events.
The framework Mackey adopts is an abstract structure (O,S,p), where O
is understood to represent the set of real-valued “observables” and S the set of
“states” of a physical system. These are connected by a mapping
where∆isthesetofBorelprobabilitymeasuresontheline. Theintendedinterpre-
tationisthatp ( · |s)givesthestatisticaldistributionofvaluesofameasurement
of the observable A∈O, when the system is in the state s∈S. We may take the
pair(A,B),whereA∈O andB isarealBorelset,torepresentthe“experimental
proposition” that a measurement of A yields (would yield, has yielded) a value
5Iff isnon-negative, then A f isgivenbythesupremumoftheoperators Ag =Pi giM(Bi)
whereg=Pi giχBi isasimplerandomvariablewith0≤g≤f.
8 COECKE, MOORE AND WILCE
in B. Mackey considers two such propositions equivalent iff they have the same
probability in every state — in other words, (A ,B ) and (A ,B ) are equivalent
iff the associatedmappings P :=p (B | · ) are the same. The set L of such
Ai,Bi Ai i
mappings P , which he calls questions, is Mackey’s quantum logic.
Now, ordered pointwise on S, the set L is an orthocomplemented poset with
unit1givenbyP A,RforanyobservableA,whoseorthocomplementationisgivenby
P A ′ ,B =1−P A,B =P A,R\B . LetussaythatthequestionsP,Q∈Larecompatible
iffP =P andQ=P forsomecommonobservableAandsomepairofBorel
setsB andC. ThenwemayconsiderP andQtobe“simultaneouslymeasurable”.
Further, let us say that the questions P,Q ∈ L are orthogonal (or “disjoint”, in
Mackey’s language) iff P ≤ Q′. In this case, we write P ⊥ Q. Mackey at this
point imposes his
AxiomV: IfP isanycountablefamilyofpairwiseorthogonalelementsofP,then
there exists an element P ∈L with P +P +···=P.
This axiomguaranteesthatLis a σ-orthomodularposet—thatis,L satisfiesthe
two conditions
(a) Any countable family of pairwise orthogonal elements P ∈ L have a join
(least upper bound) W i P i in L, and
(b) If P ≤Q, then (Q∧P′)∨P =Q.
OnanysuchposetL,onecandefineprobabilitymeasuresonLtobemappings
µ:L→[0,1]suchthatµ(1)=1and,foranycountablepairwiseorthogonalfamily
of elements P i ∈ L we have µ(W i P i ) = P i µ(P i ). We can also define, given any
two σ-OMPs L and M, an M-valued measure on L to be a mapping α : L → M
such that α(1 ) = 1 and, for any countable pairwise orthogonal family P ∈ L
we have α(W i P i ) = W i α(P i ). For a general discussion of such maps in terms of
observables see [Pta´k 2000]. Returning now to the OMP L of questions, Mackey
observes that
(a) Each state s ∈ S defines a probability measure s :L →[0,1] by evaluation:
(b) Each observable A ∈ O defines an L-valued measure P : B(R) → L via
P (B)=P on the real Borel sets (which, constituting a σ-Boolean alge-
bra, certainly constitute a σ-OMP).
Conversely, suppose L is any σ-OMP L, and that S is any order-determining
set of probability measures on L — i.e., µ(p) ≤ µ(q) for all µ ∈ S implies that
p ≤ q. Let O be the set of all L-valued Borel measures on the line, and define
p : O×S → ∆(R) by p (B|µ) = µ(α(B)). Then the structure (O,S,p) satisfies
Mackey’s axioms, and, furthermore, the OMP of questions constructed from it is
canonically isomorphic to L.
OPERATIONAL QUANTUM LOGIC: AN OVERVIEW 9
As remarked by [Foulis 1962; Gudder 1965], Mackey’s axioms then define the
theoryofthefollowingclassofstructures: pairs(L,∆)whereLisaσ-OMPand∆
isanorder-determiningfamilyofprobabilitymeasuresonL. Suchpairs(routinely
referred to as quantum logics in the mathematical literature in the 1960s and
1970s)havebeen studied intensively by many authors. For detaileddiscussions of
orthomodularposetsinthequantumlogicalcontextsee[BeltramettiandCassinelli
1981; Gudder 1985; Pt´ak 2000; Pt´ak and Pulmannov´a 1991]. Of course such
quantum logics are still a far cry from the standard quantum logic P(H). Among
other things, the orthomodular poset P(H) is a complete lattice: arbitrary joins
exist, not just countable orthogonal joins. Still, one might hope that a deeper
analysis — perhaps involving additional axioms — might lead to a meaningful
characterization,and,ideally, a motivation for the standardquantum logics. This
was Mackey’s expressed goal:
“Ideally, one would like to have a list of physically plausible assump-
tions from which one could deduce [the Hilbert space model]. Short
of this, one would like a list from which one could deduce a set of
possibilities ..., all but one of which could be shown to be inconsistent
with suitably planned experiments. At the moment, such lists are not
available...” [Mackey 1963, p.72]
This topic lies at the heart of Piron’s original axiomatization, to be discussed in
the next section. On the other hand, as we shall discuss in sections 5 and 6, the
autonomous study of such structures leads naturally to further generalizations,
notably, to orthoalgebrasand effect algebras.
Beforeturningtoarapidsurveyofsomeofthemajordevelopmentswhichhave
occurred since Mackey’s foundational work, let us make a few comments. First,
andforemost,themajorfeaturewhichseparatesMackey’sformalismfromcurrent
tendenciesinoperationalquantumlogicistheformer’srelianceonprobabilityasa
primitive concept. While important advances in this context have been made, for
example in [Pulmannov´a 1986a,b; Gudder and Pulmannov´a 1987; Pulmannov´a
and Gudder 1987], most contemporary work relegates probability to a derived
notion.6 This is not to say that statistical states are unimportant in operational
quantum logic. However, they have passed from the status of a rather vaguely
construedprimitiveconcepttothatofawelldefinedstructuraltool. Heremention
may be made of the characterization of the state spaces of standard quantum
logics, culminating in Navara’s proof of the independence of the automorphism
group, center, and state space of a quantum logic [Navara 1992].
A notable exception to this trend is the theory of decision effects introduced
6Forexample,whilein[Piron1964§7]generalizedprobabilityisdiscussedasausefulphysical
heuristic, in [Jauch and Piron 1969 §5] states are defined as maximal sets of actual properties
of the system. Similarly, while the formalism introduced in [Randall and Foulis 1970; Foulis
andRandall1972;RandallandFoulis1973]isexplicitlyconcernedwithoperationalstatistics,in
[Foulis,PironandRandall1983;RandallandFoulis1983;Foulis,GreechieandRu¨ttimann1992,
1993] emphasis isplaced on the conception of states interms of supports inthe outcome space
associatedtothesystem.
10 COECKE, MOORE AND WILCE
by Gu¨nther Ludwig during the revision of his classic text [1954, 1955]. This work
is basedon the classificationof macroscopicnotions into preparativeand effective
partswhichbothparticipateinmeasurementinteractionsmediatedbyactioncar-
riers. WeshallnotenterintothedetailsofLudwig’saxiomaticscheme,successively
refined in [Ludwig 1964, 1967, 1968; D¨ahn 1968; Mielnik 1968, 1969; Stolz 1969,
1971; D¨ahn 1972; Ludwig 1972] and codified in the monumental treatise [Ludwig
1985, 1987], but will content ourselves with some general remarks. The primitive
notion in this theory is that of a probability relation defined on the Cartesian
product of the set of ensembles and the set of effects, these two sets being taken
as embedded in a suitable pair of Banach spaces. In some sense, then, the work
of Ludwig and his collaborators runs parallel to the field of operational quantum
logic as we have introduced it, focussing more on the functional analytic struc-
ture of the problem than its ordered algebraic aspects. As such it perhaps bears
more formal relation to the algebraic quantum theory of Segal [1947] and Haag
andKastler[1964]thantheoperationaltheoriesofPironandFoulis–Randalltobe
discussed next. Nevertheless, an important physical feature of Ludwig’s work is
that it attempts to deal with the notion of non-ideal measurements by exploiting
subprojective operators. Note that suchoperatorsappearnaturally in discussions
ofgeneralizedlocalisability[JauchandPiron1967;Amrein1969]. Forgeneralsur-
veys of the different approaches to operational quantum mechanics see [Gudder
1977,1979,1981;LudwigandNeumann1981],foradetailedanalysisofthemodel
relationshipbetweentheapproachesofPironandLudwigsee[CattaneoandLaud-
isa 1994; Cattaneo and Nistic`o 1993], and for an overview of the application of
POV-measures to questions in the foundations of quantum mechanics see [Busch,
Lahti and Mittelstaedt 1991; Schroeck 1996].
4. The work of Piron
Significant progress at both ends of the problem of completing and extending
Mackey’sprogrammewasmade byConstantinPiron[1964]andfurtherdeveloped
in what has become known as the Geneva School approach to quantum physics.
Pironcharacterizedabstractlythosecompleteorthomodularlatticesrepresentable
as the lattices of closed subspaces of generalized Hilbert spaces. He also supplied
a deep analysis of the basic physical ideas of quantum mechanics that helped to
motivatetheassumptionsneededinhisrepresentationtheoremasreasonable,gen-
eralaxioms. Inthissectionwedescribeaformalizedversionoftheseaxiomsinthe
spirit of [Piron 1976],before making some remarks on more recent developments.
OPERATIONAL QUANTUM LOGIC: AN OVERVIEW 11
4.1. THE REPRESENTATION THEOREM
The projection lattice P(H) has a much more regular structure than the general
OMP provided by Mackey’s axioms. In particular, P(H)
(a) is a complete lattice — that is, the meet and join of any subset of L exist,
(b) is atomistic — that is, every element of P(H) is the join of the atoms (here,
the one-dimensional projections) beneath it,
(c) satisfies the atomic covering law: if P ∈ P(H) is an atom and Q ∈ P(H) is
arbitrary,thenP∨QcoversQ,i.e.,isanatominthelattice{M ∈L|Q≤M},
(d) isirreducible—thatis,itcannotbefactoredasanon-trivialdirectproduct.
Equivalently, no element of P(H), other than 0 and 1, commutes with all
other elements.7
In his thesis [Piron 1964], Piron proved a partial converse, namely that all such
lattices(ofsufficientlength)Lmayberealisedasthesetofbiorthogonalsubspaces
of a generalized Hilbert space. Explicitly, by considering the (essentially) unique
meetandatompreservingembeddingofLinaprojectivegeometry,andexploiting
thestandardvectorspacerealizationofprojectivegeometriesofdimensionatleast
three, he showedthat the image of the originallattice couldbe characterisedby a
definite hermitian form.8
Now, for an arbitrary inner product space V, the complete atomistic ortho-
lattice L(V) of biorthogonal subspaces need not be orthomodular. When it is, V
is termed a generalized Hilbert space. This terminology is motivated by another
strikingresult,namelythatifV isaninnerproductspaceoveroneofthestandard
division rings (i.e., R,C or H), then L(V) is orthomodular iff V is complete. This
was firstprovedby Piron,using a hypothesis onmeasure extensionswhich turned
out to be independent of ZF set theory; under prompting by Stone, a geometric
7Of course, not every quantum mechanical system is irreducible, but in general decomposes
into a family of purely quantum systems indexed by superselection rules. For example, [Piron
1964] shows that each orthomodular lattice satisfying axioms (a)–(c) is the direct union of a
familyofirreduciblelattices,itscorrespondingprojectivegeometrybeingthedirectunionofthe
correspondinggeometries. Abstractly,systemswithdiscretesuperselectionrulesmaybetreated
bytakingprojection-valuedmeasureswithvalues inanappropriatevonNeumannalgebraA. If
the induced orthomodular lattice L(A) does not contain a summand of type I2 then Gleason’s
theorem continues to apply: every σ-additive probability measureon L(A) extends uniquely to
a normal state on A[Christensen 1982; Yeadon 1983]. For further discussion see, for example,
[BunceandHamhalter1994; BunceandWright1994;Hamhalter 1993,1995].
8Thisdevelopmenthasbecomemuchmorephysicallytransparentandmathematicallyelegant
since the seminal work of Faure and Fro¨licher [1993, 1994, 1995], where the construction of
linear representations for projective geometries and their morphisms is carried through in a
categorically natural manner. For example, an orthogonality relation determines a morphism
from the projective geometry to its dual and so a quasilinear map from the underlying vector
spacetoitsdual. Inthiswaytheinnerproductofquantummechanicsfindsarigorousandneat
foundation.
12 COECKE, MOORE AND WILCE
proof was later obtained by Amemiya and Araki [1965].9 Finally, let us remark
that the Geneva School formalism that was inspired by this theorem has been
extensively applied to several problems of a more or less concrete nature, for ex-
ample,symmetries [EmchandPiron1962,1963],superselectionrules[Piron1965,
1969],observables[Piron1971;GiovanniniandPiron1979;Giovannini1981a,b,c],
the a priori probability [Piron 1972], and irreversible processes [Gisin and Piron
1981; Gisin 1981, 1982a,b,1983a,b].
4.2. PIRON’S AXIOMS
Mackey’s axioms produce only a σ-complete orthomodular poset L — a far cry
fromthecomplete,atomisticOMLfiguringinPiron’sTheorem. Pironwasableto
motivate the necessary extra structure in the context of an axiomatic framework
similar to Mackey’s, but differing from it in taking as basic not the concept of
probability,butaconceptofphysicalpropertybasedonthecertaintyofobtaining
anexperimentaloutcome. HerePironconsciouslyexploitstheworkofDirac[1930
§1.2],who givesan operationaldiscussionof lightpolarisationin terms of the cer-
tainty or otherwise ofpassagethrough anappropriatecrystal,and the conception
of Einstein, Podolsky and Rosen [1935] that elements of reality are sufficient con-
ditions that one be able to predicta physicalquantity with certainty and without
disturbing the system.
Piron begins with a primitive set Q of questions — understood to represent
definite experimental projects having just two possible outcomes, which we des-
ignate as yes and no. For ease of presentation let us consider given a set P of
preparation procedures.10 For P ∈P and α∈Q we write P (cid:15)α to indicate that
the preparationP is suchthattheanswerto the questionαcanbe predictedwith
certainty to be yes. We can then associate, to every question α, the proposition
Let L:={ [α] | α∈Q } be the set of all such propositions, considered as a poset
under set inclusion. Note that [α] ⊆ [β] iff every preparation making α certain
also makes β certain. Piron proceeds to adduce several axioms the force of which
is to make L a complete, atomistic OML satisfying the covering law.
L is a complete lattice The first, andprobably the most novel,of these axioms
9Notethatnecessaryandsufficientconditionsfortheunderlyingdivisionringtobestandard
haverecentlybeenfound—oneofthesimpleststatementsintheinfinitedimensionalcasebeing
thatthevector spaceadmitaninfiniteorthonormalsequence [Sol`er1995;Holland1995;Prestel
1995];foranexampleofanonstandardgeneralizedHilbertspacesee[Keller1980],foradetailed
discussionofthegeometryofgeneralizedHilbertspacessee[Gross1979,1990],andforasurvey
ofothercompleteness resultssee[Dvureˇcenskij1992].
10Notethatthisisnotstrictlynecessary,butisjustanexpedienttoavoidlocutionssuchas‘if
the system is, or has been prepared, insuch a waythat ...’. Similarly,the usual identification
of propositions with equivalence classes of questions is made for ease of exposition and should
notbetakentooseriouslyasadefinition.
OPERATIONAL QUANTUM LOGIC: AN OVERVIEW 13
involves the notion of a product question. Given a non-empty set A of ques-
tions, their product is the question α = ΠA defined as follows: to pose α, one
selects,inanywayonewill,aquestionβ ∈Aand,posingthis question,attributes
to α the answer obtained. Piron’s first axiom requires that Q be closed under
the formation of arbitrary product questions. A moment’s reflection reveals that
[ΠA] = T [β]. Hence, L is closed under arbitrary intersections and thus a
complete lattice.11
OrthocomplementationIfαisanyquestion,wemaydefine aninversequestion
α∼ byinterchangingtherolesofyesandno. PironrequiresthatQbeclosedunder
the formationofinverses. The intendedinterpretationrequiresus tosuppose that
[α]∩[α∼]=∅. InordertosecureanorthocomplementationonL,Pironintroduces
another axiom, namely, that for any question α, there exists some compatible
Orthomodularity On the face of it, this does not rule out the possibility that
there may exist severalinequivalent compatible complements for a given α. How-
ever, this is remedied by a third axiom, Piron’s
Axiom P: If b<c and b′ and c′ are compatible complements for b and c, respec-
tively, then the sub-lattice of L generated by b,b′,c,c′ is distributive.
Itfollowsthatcompatiblecomplementsareunique,therebydefininganorthocom-
plementation. Moreover,AxiomPdictatesthatLbeorthomodular: ifb<c,then
(c∧b′)∨b=c by the distributivity of {b,c,b′,c′}.
Atomicity and the Covering Law Piron enforces the atomicity of the lattice
with an ad-hoc axiom (A1) requiring that L be atomic — i.e., every element
dominates at least one atom. The coveringlaw is also imposed directly (as axiom
A2), but with some substantial motivation, as follows. Let us denote by Σ the
set of atoms of L. Now, in any orthocomplemented poset L, the Sasaki mapping
φ:L×L→L is given by φ(a,b)=b∧(b′∨a). If b is fixed, we write φ :L→L
for the mapping φ (a) = φ(a,b) = b∧(b′ ∨a). Note that L is orthomodular iff
φ (a) = a for all a ≤ b, in which case φ (a)∨b′ = a∨b′. Using these remarks,
it is not hard to prove that an OML L satisfies the atomic covering law iff, for
all a ∈ L, we have a ∈ Σ &b 6⊥ a ⇒ φ (a) ∈ Σ . We then have an alternative
formulationofthecoveringlaw,namely,thatSasakiprojectionsmapatomseither
to atoms, or to 0.
Piron defines the state of the system to be the set of all propositions p = [α]
11Theproductoperationwasfirstintroducedin[JauchandPiron1969]. Earlier,themeethad
beenintroducedviaeithersemanticconjunction[Piron1964]orlimitfilters[Jauch1968].
12The fact that an axiom must be postulated guaranteeing the existence of an orthocomple-
mentation is due to the fact that the inverses of equivalent questions need not themselves be
equivalent. For example, 0·I = 0 however (0·I)∼ = 0∼·I∼ = I·0 = 0 and 0∼ = I. For a
discussionofsomeconfusionsonthispointsee[FoulisandRandall1984].
14 COECKE, MOORE AND WILCE
that are certain (at a given time, in a given situation). We naturally require that
the state be closed under intersection and enlargement, i.e., that it be a complete
filter in the lattice L. Such a filter is principal, and is generated by an atom.
Hence, states may be representedby atoms.13 Finally, calla,b in L compatible iff
{a,b,a′,b′} is distributive, iff φ (a)=a∧b. Piron calls the question
(a) ideal iff every proposition compatible with [α] that is certain before a mea-
surement of α is also certain again afterwards when the result of that mea-
surement is yes.
(b) first-kind iff the answer to α immediately after securing the answer yes is
certain to be again yes.
In the presence of axiom A2 (i.e., the covering law), one can then prove that, for
β an ideal first-kind measurement of b ∈ L, if a is the state before measurement,
then the state after securing yes upon measurement of α is φ (a).
Manypeoplehavefoundthe physicalreasoningthatmotivates Piron’saxioms
compelling. However,thisframeworkturnsouttohavesomesharplimitations. In
particular, a system consisting of two “separated” systems, in the sense of Aerts
[1981,1982],eachofwhichindividually obeysPiron’saxioms,willasawhole con-
formtotheseaxiomsifandonlyifoneofthesystemsisclassical. Toprovethiskey
result, Aerts exploited the notion of an orthogonality relation, where two states
are orthogonal if there exists a question which is certain for the first and impos-
sible for the second. The use of this relation has become central in more recent
axiomatizationsoftheGenevaSchoolapproach,suchas[Piron1990;Moore1999].
For a detailed analysis see [Valckenborgh 2000]. Note that in these works atten-
tion is focussed on complete atomistic ortholattices as models for the most direct
axiomatizations based on the physicalduality between the state and property de-
scriptions of a physical system. Somewhat paradoxically, then, Piron’s approach
keeps one axiom rejected in the OMP approach — namely completeness — and
rejects anotherwhich the latter keeps — namely (some formof) orthomodularity.
As we shall see in the next section, this cleavage is symptomatic of the fact that
oneshoulddistinguishconceptuallythe propertylatticeofasystemfromits logic,
even when they turn out to be isomorphic.
5. The work of Foulis and Randall
Contemporary with these developments was the work of Dave Foulis and the late
Charlie Randall on empirical logic, a happy synthesis of ideas coming from their
respective doctoraldissertations, on abstractlattice theory [Foulis 1958]and con-
crete operational statistics [Randall 1966]. Not only does this formalism provide
13Conversely,ifp6=0,thenp=[α]whereαisaquestionthatiscertainforatleastoneprepa-
ration. Hence, there exists at least one state (i.e., any state compatible with that preparation)
that contains p. Hence, there mustbe sufficiently manystates sothat for every p∈L,there is
astate/atom a≤p. Butthiseasilyimpliesthateveryatom isastate. Thus,states correspond
exactlytoatoms ofL.
OPERATIONAL QUANTUM LOGIC: AN OVERVIEW 15
a powerful general heuristic, but as we shall see it has also laid the ground for
severalof the purely mathematical developments to be discussed in the following.
5.1. TEST SPACES
Both Mackey and Piron begin with a primitive structure in which experimental
propositionsofthe form“observableAtakesvalue insetB”areunrelatedfordis-
tinctobservables. Ineffect,eachobservableAisassociatedwithaBooleanalgebra
B of possible events (isomorphic to the Borel field in Mackey’s scheme, and to
{0,1}inPiron’s),theseBooleanalgebrasbeinginitiallydisjointfromoneanother.
Identifications are then made between the Boolean algebras corresponding to dif-
ferent observables. In Mackey’s scheme, the primitive propositions (A ,B ) and
(A ,B ) are identified iff they are equiprobable in every state; in Piron’s, iff they
arecertaininexactlythe samesituations. Bothapproachesto the constructionof
quantumlogicshavebeenthe objectofsomecriticism. Inparticular,asanumber
of authors point out, both become problematic when one considers compound or
iterated measurements.14
In a long series of papers (e.g., [Foulis and Randall 1972, 1974, 1978, 1981a;
Randall and Foulis 1970, 1973, 1978, 1983a]), Foulis and Randall developed an
extensive theory – which they termed empirical logic — in which such identifica-
tionsaregivenapriori,withnopriorreferencetoanyconceptofstateorproperty.
Their formalism is based on the primitive notion of an operation or test — that
is, a definite set of mutually exclusive alternative possible outcomes. The Foulis-
Randalltheoryfocussesontestspaces,i.e.,collectionsAofoverlappingtests. The
identification of outcomes between distinct tests is understood to be given, i.e.,
Foulis and Randall lay down no doctrine as to how such identifications must be
made. Letting X =SA standfor the outcome spaceofA, a statisticalstate onA
is defined to be a mapping ω :X →[0,1] such that P ω(x)=1 for every test
E ∈ A, and a realistic state is represented [Foulis, Piron and Randall 1983] by a
certainkindofsubsetofX calledasupport, representingthe totality ofoutcomes
possible in that state. Note that, quite apartfrom its own merits, this notion can
be used to give a perspicuous mathematical treatment of Piron’s axiomatics; see
[Randall and Foulis 1983b] and [Wilce 1997].
Anumberofalgebraic,analyticandorder-theoreticobjectscanbeattachedto
a test space A, each serving in a slightly different way as a sort of “logic”. Under
simple normative conditions on the combinatorial structure of A, these turn out
to coincide with more familiar structures. In particular, if A is “algebraic”,15
one can construct from the events of A a rather well-behaved ordered partial
14Asimpleexampleisofferedin[CookeandHilgevoord1981]. Thepointisafamiliarone—
even in orthodox Hilbert space quantum mechanics, one must keep track of phase relations in
discussingiteratedexperiments,andthesearelostwhenoneidentifiesexperimentalpropositions
accordingtoeithertheMackeyorthePironscheme.
15A test space is algebraic if any two elements sharing a common complement share exactly
thesamecomplements,whereAandBarecomplementsiftheyaredisjointandA∪Bisatest.
16 COECKE, MOORE AND WILCE
algebraicstructureΠ(A),calledanorthoalgebra. Thesecanbedefinedabstractly:
anorthoalgebraisapair(L,⊕)whereLisasetand⊕isacommutative,associative
partial binary operation on L satisfying the three additional conditions:
(a) There exists a neutral element 0∈L such that, for every p∈L, p⊕0=p,
(b) There exists a unit element 1 ∈ L such that, for every p ∈ L, there is a
unique q ∈L with p⊕q =1,
(c) If p⊕p exists, then p=0.
Orthoalgebras then generalize orthomodular posets, which can be defined as or-
thoalgebras in which, given that p ⊕ q, q ⊕ r and r ⊕ p all exist, the element
p⊕q⊕r also exists. This axiom, called orthocoherence, is in fact a finitistic ver-
sion of Mackey’s axiom V. Conversely, dropping condition (c) we obtain what is
calledaneffectalgebra,calledgeneralizedorthoalgebrasby[GiuntiniandGreuling
1989] and D-posets by [Kˆopka 1992].
5.2. ORTHOALGEBRAS
Orthoalgebras and effect algebras are sufficiently regular objects to have an in-
teresting mathematical theory (one that is only beginning to be explored). In
particular, nearly all of the conceptual apparatus of OMP-based quantum logic,
such as centers [Greechie, Foulis and Pulmannov´a 1995] and Sasaki projections
[Bennett and Foulis 1998;Wilce 2000],can be rather easily extended to this more
general context. On the other hand, because of their simplicity, test spaces are
often much easier to manipulate than their associated “logics”. They also have
the heuristic advantage that the operational interpretation is, so to say, right on
the surface, with the logics serving only as useful invariants. In particular, while
it is completely straightforward to combine test spaces sequentially, the various
“logics” rarely respect such combinations. Finally, if A is algebraic,there exists a
canonical order-preserving mapping L →L from the logic of A into the property
lattice associated with any entity (A,Σ) over A. In both classical and quantum
mechanical examples, this mapping is in fact an isomorphism, so that L inherits
from L the structure of a complete lattice, and L inherits from L an orthocom-
plementation and orthomodularity. This isomorphism is, however, the exception
ratherthantherule. Asstressedby[Foulis,PironandRandall1983],thetendency
to identify L and L – even when they are isomorphic — has caused a great deal
of unnecessary confusion in discussions of the foundations and interpretation of
quantum mechanics.
Besides its awkwardness in dealing with sequential measurements, another
difficulty that arises with the Mackey scheme of quantum logic, again recognized
first by Foulis and Randall [1979], is that it is not stable under the formation of
any reasonable sort of tensor product. Given quantum logics (L,∆) and (L′,∆′),
each understood to represent some “physical” system, one wants to construct a
OPERATIONAL QUANTUM LOGIC: AN OVERVIEW 17
model (M,Γ) of the coupled system in which L and L′ may display correlations,
but do not directly interact. Minimal requirements would be that
(a) there exists a map L×L′ →M carrying p,q to some representative propo-
sition p⊗q ∈M, and
(b) for every pair of states µ∈∆,ν ∈∆′, we be able to form a state µ⊗ν ∈Γ
However, Foulis and Randall produce a simple example showing that this is in
general impossible: a small, finite OML L with a full set of states such that no
such “tensor product” exists for two copies of L.
The culprit turns out to be Mackey’s Axiom V — or, more precisely, or-
thocoherence. Indeed, one can show, under the very mild assumption that the
orthoalgebrasinvolvedeachcarryaunitalfamilyofstates,thattensorproductsof
orthoalgebrascanbeformedinsuchawaythatdesiderata(a)and(b)aresatisfied
[Foulis and Randall 1981b; Randall and Foulis 1981]. However, as the example
just discussed illustrates, orthocoherence is not stable under this tensor product.
Combining these results with the above mentioned negative results of Aerts for
property lattices, what emerges is that the isomorphism between logic and prop-
erty lattice, characteristic of both quantum and classical systems, breaks down
when one forms tensor products unless the systems in question are classical. This
is notto saythat the results wereentirely negative. Later researchinto the struc-
ture of tensor products [Kla¨y, Randall and Foulis 1987; Golfin 1987; Wilce 1990,
1992;BennettandFoulis1993;DvureˇcenskijandPulmannov´a1994;Dvureˇcenskij
1995] revealed that Foulis–Randall tensor products of quantum-mechanical enti-
ties, while no longer strictly quantum, still retain a rich geometric structure.
These results gave substantial impetus to the study of orthoalgebras, test
spaces and other structures more general than those considered by Mackey and
Piron (some of which will be discussed below). The theory of test spaces, in
particular, has developed in several directions in the past decade. A number
of authors (e.g., [Dvureˇcenskij and Pulmannov´a 1994b; Pulmannov´a and Wilce
1995;Gudder 1997])havediscussedgeneralizedtestspaces in whichoutcomes are
permitted to occur with some multiplicity or intensity, and have used these to
provide an operational semantics for effect algebras that parallels the test-space
semantics for orthoalgebras. Measure theory on orthoalgebrashas been discussed
by[Habil1993]. Nishimura[1993,1995]hasgeneralizedtheideaofatestspaceby
replacing discrete outcome sets by complete Boolean algebras and locales. [Wilce
2000]gives an up-to-date survey of the Foulis-Randall theory; for a personalview
ofthehistoricaldevelopmentofthisstrandofoperationalquantumlogicsee[Foulis
1998, 1999].
6. Orthomodular structures
Thus far, we have focussed on quantum logic as a foundational or interpretive
18 COECKE, MOORE AND WILCE
programmeinphysics. Butthe subjecthasother,quite independentrootsinpure
mathematics. Von Neumann himself had stressed the importance of order theo-
retic methods in studying infinite-dimensional analogues of projective geometry.
Loomis [1955] and Maeda [1955] independently recognized that a fair bit of the
dimension theory of von Neumann algebras could be carried over into a purely
lattice-theoretic setting, namely, that of an orthomodular lattice equipped with a
suitable equivalence relation. This stimulated a number of mathematicians to be-
gininvestigatingorthomodularlatticesinabstracto. Itsoonbecameapparentthat
suchlatticesoccurwithsomenaturalityinawiderangeofmathematicalcontexts.
If (S,∗) is any involutive semigroup, call an element e∈S satisfying p =p2 =p∗
a projection. If S contains a (two-sided) zero element, the right annihilator of
x∈S is the right ideal {a∈S|ax=0}. Foulis [1958,1960,1962]defined a Baer
*-semigroup to be an involutive semigroup S with zero having the property that
the right-annihilator of any element x ∈ S is the right ideal generated by a (nec-
essarily, unique) projection x′. He showed that the set L(S) of closed projections
p=p′′inS alwaysformsanorthomodularlattice. Conversely,everyorthomodular
lattice can be represented as L(S) for some Baer *-semigroup. Indeed, while this
representation is not unique, there is a canonical choice for S, namely the semi-
group S(L) of residuated self-mappings of L, i.e., mappings φ : L → L for which
there exists a mapping ψ : L → L satisfying ψ(x) ≤ y′ ⇔ x ≤ φ(y)′. Among
these mappings are the Sasaki projections φ , discussed in section 4, which turn
out to be exactly the closed projections in S(L).
Overthefollowingdecades,asubstantialpuretheoryoforthomodularlattices
was developedby Foulis and others. The state of this theory as ofthe early1980s
is representedby the book of Kalmbach[1983]. [Bruns and Harding 2000]discuss
more recent developments, of which there have been many. Particularly striking
is the recent discovery of Harding [1996, 1998] that one can organize the set of
direct-product decompositions of essentially any algebraic object into an ortho-
modular poset. On the other hand, the on-going work on Mackey’s programme
alsoproducedavarietyofstructuresmoregeneralthanorthomodularlatticesand
posets — orthoalgebras, the still more general effect algebras, and, in a different
direction, the partialBooleanalgebrasof Kochenand Specker [1967]. All of these
are primarily partial algebraic, and only secondarily order theoretic, objects. All
have attracted, especially during the past few years, significant mathematical in-
terest.16 Thetheoryofeffectalgebras,muchofwhichisduetothepioneeringwork
of Foulis and the late M. K. Bennett [Bennett and Foulis, 1995, 1997; Foulis and
Bennett 1994], continues to develop rapidly. Of particular interest here is their
recent reformulation of a large part of the theory of effect algebras (and thus, of
quantumlogic)asabranchofthe theoryoforderedabeliangroups,alsodiscussed
in [Foulis, Bennett and Greechie 1996; Foulis, Greechie and Bennett 1998; Wilce
1995, 1998]. This is the subject of [Foulis 2000].
Finally, orthomodular lattices have also been studied in detail in the purely
16One notable result is that of Kochen and Conway [Kochen 1996], that very small sets of
projectionsinP(H)generateapartialBooleanalgebrathatisdenseinthefullprojectionlattice.
OPERATIONAL QUANTUM LOGIC: AN OVERVIEW 19
logical context, and in particular the possibility of defining reasonable implica-
tion connectives. One of the basic results in this direction is that of Kalm-
bach [1974] who, exploiting the characterisation of free orthomodular lattices on
two generators [Bruns and Kalmbach 1973], was able to show that there are ex-
actly five lattice polynomials a→b satisfying the primitive implicative condition
a ≤ b ⇔ (a → b) = 1. Note that here orthomodularity is essential, a simple
consideration of the non-orthomodular “benzene ring” showing that such connec-
tives do not exist in the non-orthomodular case [Moore 1993]. For an analysis of
the weaker exportation condition a ≤ b ⇒ (a → b) = 1 conjoined with modus
ponenssee[Herman,MarsdenandPiziak1975],andforadetailedinvestigationof
the deduction theorem see Malinowski [1990, 1992]. On the other hand, defining
a Kripkean accessibility relation induced from non-orthogonality, an idea having
its origins in Foulis and Randall’s work on lexicographicorthogonality[1971], has
allowed the introduction of modal quantum logic [Dalla Chiara 1977, 1983;Gold-
blatt 1974, 1975]. Of course there has been much other work on implications in
quantum logic; for general overviews see, for example, [Dalla Chiara 1986; van
Fraassen 1981; Hardegree and Frazer 1981].
7. Dynamical, categorical and computational aspects
We close by considering the categorical reformulation of the basic notions of or-
der structures and its application to operational quantum theory, a subject with
strong links to various recent developments in enriched category theory and com-
putational semantics. The basic tool of this theory is that of pairs f ⊣ g, where
f : L → M and g : M → L are isotone maps between posets, satisfying the
adjunction condition f(a) ≤ b ⇔ a ≤ g(b). For a pedestrian development of the
theory of adjunctions with a particular focus on its operational applications we
refer to [Coecke and Moore 2000]. It is amusing to note that this notion may
be used to shed some light on Birkhoff and von Neumann’s remark cited above
that while philosophers have tended to focus on the nature of negation in non-
classicallogics,the study of quantummechanics highlights the distributive law as
the weak link in operational quantum logic. To see this, let us note that Heyting
algebras,consideredasmodelsforintuitionistic logic,maybe definedasthoselat-
tices admitting an implication connection → satisfying the adjunction condition
(x∧a)≤b⇔x≤(a→b) [Birkhoff 1940 §161;Birkhoff 1942 §27]. Since the con-
dition f ⊣g implies that f preservesexisting joins andg preservesexisting meets,
any Heyting algebra is distributive. On the other hand, much of the structure
theory of orthomodular lattices rests on the so-called Sasaki adjunction φ ⊣ φa,
[Nakamura 1957; Sasaki 1955]. In a certain sense, then, we may consider Heyt-
ing algebras as a class of distributive lattices where those elements possessing a
complement may be simply characterised,and orthomodular lattices as a class of
ortholattices where the set of complements of any given element may be simply
20 COECKE, MOORE AND WILCE
computed. For discussions of Heyting algebras and the more general semicomple-
mented lattices, see [Curry 1963; Frink 1962;K¨ohler 1981; Nemitz 1965].
One of the earliest, and most important, applications of residuations in or-
thomodular lattices was Foulis’ pioneering work on Baer ∗-semigroups, described
above. This research has not only led to a deeper understanding of the notion of
residuation[BlythandJanowitz1972;Derd´erian1967],butwasalsocrucialinthe
developmentofdynamicalaspectsofoperationalquantumlogic. Oneofthefirstof
these developments was the work of Pool [1968a,b], who sought a phenomenolog-
ical interpretation of Baer ∗-semigroups via the notion of conditional probability
supplied by the conventional quantum theory of measurement. A more distinctly
operationalapproachto evolutions ingeneralwasprovidedby Daniel [1982,1989]
and extended by Faure, Moore and Piron [1995], the latter leading to a general
study of the categories of state spaces and property lattices [Moore 1995, 1997].
Here an externally imposed evolution is modeled by pulling back definite exper-
imental projects defined at the final time to their images defined at the initial
time. By physical arguments, this map must preserve the product operation and
so the lattice meet. Hence, under suitable stability conditions, its join preserv-
ing left adjoint then describes the propagation of the state of the system. These
observations have been generalized by Amira, Coecke and Stubbe [1998], who ex-
plicate the structure of operational tests derived from the notions of free choice
and composition. Note that the latter of these notions in particular plays a fun-
damental role in the heuristics of Foulis and Randall mentioned above. Finally,
the abstractstructureofoperationalresolutionshasbeenanalysedby Coeckeand
Stubbe [1999a,b, 2000], allowing, for example, an analysis of the physical notions
ofcompoundness[Coecke2000]andthedualitybetweencausalityandpropagation
[Coecke, Moore and Stubbe 2000].
Mathematically, the structure induced from operational resolutions is that of
a quantaloid, namely a category whose Hom-sets are join complete lattices such
thatcompositiondistributesonbothsidesoverjoins.17 Onethus obtainsasimple
example of an enrichedcategory,in which Hom-sets are objects in some base cat-
egory and composition is realised by natural transformations satisfying coherence
criteria. Thishasbecomeacentralnotionincategorytheory,andistreatedinthe
standard text [Borceux 1994]; for a specialised treatment see [Kelly 1982] and for
a pedagogical development see [Borceux and Stubbe 2000]. Restricting attention
to categories with a single object, we then recover quantales, introduced by Mul-
vey [1986] as a non-commutative generalization of locales.18 Here mention may
be made of the recent extension of the localic notions of simplicity and spatiality
to the context of quantales [Kruml 2000; Paseka 1997; Paseka and Kruml 2000;
17Thename quantaloid wasintroduced byRosenthal [1991], although much ofthe basiccon-
ceptualdevelopmenthadalreadybeenmadebyJoyalandTierney[1984]andPitts[1988]intheir
studiesofGrothendiecktopoi.
18Note that historical precedents for these notions can be traced back to the work of Ward
and Dilworth [Ward 1937, 1938; Ward and Dilworth 1939a,b], who used such multiplications
to study ideals in rings, a technique which has recently been applied to non-commutative C∗-
algebras[Borceux,Rosicky´andVanDenBossche1989; Rosicky´1989].
OPERATIONAL QUANTUM LOGIC: AN OVERVIEW 21
Rosicky´ 1995],asubject treatedin somedetailin[PasekaandRosicky´2000]. Itis
interestingtoobservethatsimilarstructureshavealsobeenexploitedincomputer
science. An important example is the so-called observational logic of Abramsky
and Vickers [Abramsky 1991; Abramsky and Vickers 1993; Vickers 1989]. Here it
isobservedthatthepossibilitythatobservationinducesachangeofstateformally
leads to a passage from frames to quantales. This line of thought has been ex-
tendedbyResende[1999,2000],whodescribesgeneralsystemsonthebasisoftheir
observablebehaviour independently ofany supposedstate space. For anoverview
see the [Resende 2000]. It should be noted, however, that these considerations
are rather different from the contemporary notion of quantum computation (see
for example [Gudder 2000]’s general theory of quantum languages, i.e., languages
accepted by quantum automata).