]hp-mehc.scisyhp[
1v7428000/scisyhp:viXra
Optimal Control of Molecular Motion Expressed
Through Quantum Fluid Dynamics
Bijoy K Dey , Herschel Rabitz
Department of Chemistry, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey
Attila Askar
Department of Mathematics, Koc University, Istanbul, Turkey
Present address : Department of Chemistry, Chemical Physics Theory Group,
University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada
A quantum fluid dynamic(QFD) control formulation is presented for optimally
manipulating atomic and molecular systems. In QFD the control quantum system is ex-
pressed in terms of the probability density ρ and the quantum current j. This choice of
variables is motivated by the generally expected slowly varying spatial-temporal depen-
dence of the fluid dynamical variables. The QFD approach is illustrated for manipulation
of the ground electronic state dynamics of HCl induced by an external electric field.
I. INTRODUCTION
Manipulating the outcome of quantum dynamics phenomena by a properly tailored
external control is a topic of increasing activity [1-15]. Problems where the external con-
trol is electromagnetic have received the most attention, although other applications arise
as well. Various implementations of quantum control have been experimentally realized
[16-25]. A variety of control strategies have been suggested, and optimal control the-
ory(OCT) provides the most general framework for acheiving field designs. Such designs
will generally require further refinement in the laboratory through learning techniques to
overcome design uncertainities [17-20]. A basic difficulty in attaining the control designs
is the computational effort called for in solving the time-dependent Schroedinger equa-
tion, often repeatedly in an iterative fashion. This paper introduces the quantum fluid
dynamic(QFD) control formulation to simplify this task. Calculations have shown [28,
29] that QFD is capable of being much more efficient than conventional methods(e.g.,
FFT propagation), and this savings should carry over to the control design task. This
paper will show how OCT can be combined with QFD.
The theoretical basis for dynamic control [2-13] is to create non-stationary states of
one’s choice, by optimally designing the control field. Typically, the problem is posed as
seeking an optimal field to drive a quantum wave packet to a desired target at a chosen
time t=T. In the traditional approach [3-10] to quantum optimal control an objective
designfunctionalJ¯isdefined, whichdependsonthesystemwavefunction, awavefunction
like Lagrange multiplier, and the external field. Minimization of the objective functional
leads to the identification of external field(s) capable of delivering a specific outcome.
This process requires solving for the complex oscillatory wave function and the similarly
behaved Lagrange multiplier, and due care is needed for their proper representation in a
suitable basis for capturing their behaviour. Often the rapidly varying spatio-temporal
behaviour of these functions necesitates the use of many unknowns in the basis.
This paper explores an alternative formulation for OCT to design the electric field.
The formulation is based on the fluid dynamic view point of quantum mechanics [26-
29], which by-passes the typically oscillatory nature of the wave function to exploit the
generally smoothbehaviour of the real density and the quantum current variables. Recent
illustrations have demonstrated the smooth spatial and temporal nature of the variables
and the ability to discretize them on a relatively small number of grid points [28, 29].
As background in section 2 we give a brief summary of the QFD formulation of quantum
mechanics. Section 3presents OCTwithin theframework ofQFDfordesigning anelectric
field to meet a specific objective. Section 4 applies the OCT-QFD formulation for the
manipulation of HCl. Section 5 concludes the paper.
II. QUANTUM FLUID DYNAMICS
The treatment below considers a single particle of reduced mass m, but
the QFD formulation has an immediate extension to many particles. The time-dependent
Schro¨dinger equation is given by
where V typically confines the particle in a locale and V is the control taken here as
−µ(x)·E(t) with E(t) being the electric field and µ(x) the dipole moment. Substituting
where A and S are real functions, into Eq.(1) and separating
the real and imaginary parts one easily obtains two equations. The imaginary part yields
the continuity equation
and the real part the following equation for the phase S
where V = V +V +V with V =
eff ext q q 2m ρ1/2 2m
∇S.
Equation (3) has the form of the classical Hamilton-Jacobi equation with an extra
’quantum potential’ term V . This equation can be transformed into one for the evolution
of the velocity vector v by taking the gradient to give
Defining the quantum current as
one readily obtains the equation of motion for jby substitution of ∂ρ and ∂ vfromEqs.(2)
and (4) as
Eqs.(2) and (3) or (2) and (5) describe the motion of a quantum particle within the QFD
formulation of quantum mechanics. The motion of a quantum particle is governed by
the current vector j and the density ρ in Eqs.(2) and (5). Although the QFD equations
resemble those of classical fluid dynamics, their quantum identity prevails due to the
presence of the potential V which has no classical analogue. Equivalently, the QFD
equationsmaybeviewedasthoseofa“classical”fluidwithahighlynon-linearconstitutive
law prescribed by V . Various Eulerian or Lagrangian means can be exploited to solve
the QFD equations [28,29], and available fluid dynamics codes may be adopted to treat
these equations [30]. The essential simplifying feature of the QFD equations is that ρ
and j or ρ and S are often slowly varying, which is evident from quantum dynamics
calculations [28,29], thereby permitting relatively coarse gridding. Despite the non-linear
natureoftheQFDequations, thegeneralsmoothnessofρandjobservedleadtosignificant
computational savings [28,29].
III. CONTROL EXPRESSED WITHIN QUANTUM FLUID
Quantum OCT seeks the design of an external field to fulfill a particular dynamical
objective. This section will provide the working equations for OCT-QFD to design an
optimal electric field that drives a quantum wave packet to a desired objective at the
target time t=T. The OCT-QFD formulation could be expressed in the usual way in
terms of the Schro¨dinger equation where QFD would only act as a solution procedure.
Here we will present a general approach by writing OCT directly in terms of QFD. As
an example the control of a non-rotating diatomic molecule will be used as a simple
illustration of the concepts. The treatment of a fully general target expectation value
Θ =< Ψ(T)|Θ|Ψ(T) > may be considered with QFD, but here we will only treat the
common case where the operator Θ(x) is only position x dependent. Then the goal is to
as close as possible to the desired value Θd.
The active spatial control interval is taken as x ≤ x ≤ x over the time 0 ≤ t ≤ T that
the control process occurs. We desire to minimize the cost functional J = J +J
cost target field
where J and J are given by
target field
with ω and ω being the positive weights balancing the significance of the two terms.
The second term represents the penalty due to the fluence of the external field. The
minimization of J with respect to E(t) must be subject to the satisfaction of the
equations of motion for ρ and j in Eqs.(2) and (5). We may fulfill this constraint by
introducing the unconstrained cost functional as
cost Z Z 1 ∂t ∂x
T xr ∂j(x,t) ∂ j2 ρ ∂
Z Z 2 ∂t ∂x ρ m∂x q ext
where λ (x,t) and λ (x,t) are Lagrange’s multiplier functions.
An optimal solution satisfies δJ¯= 0, which is assured by setting each of the functional
derivatives with respect to λ , λ , ρ, j and E to zero. The first two, i.e., the functional
derivatives with respect to λ and λ regenerate the QFD equations in Eq.(2) and (5).
The three others are obtained in the forms :
1 λ 2 q 2 ext 2 2
δE(t) Z 2 ∂x e
S = 2 (12)
2 m ∂x q q 2 ρ2 ∂x
h¯2 ∂2 1 ∂
− [ (λ ρ)]
4m2ρ1/2∂x2 ρ1/2 ∂x 2
4m2ρ3/2∂x2 ∂x 2
q 2m λ 1/2 2m 2 2
The corresponding final conditions are
Several other constraint expressions can be obtained by using equivalent forms of the
continuity and dynamical equations. The form presented above is used in the subsequent
numerical calculations. An alternative form in multi-dimensions symmetric between the
QFD and Lagrange multiplier functions is presented in the Appendix.
The equations (9) and (10) for λ and λ respectively ressemble that of ρ and j with
the only difference being the extra source terms S and S . The source terms depend on ρ
and j. v in the above equations is the ’velocity’ associated with the Lagrange’s multiplier
and is given as v = λ1. There are now two different quantum potential terms, one of
which is a function of ρ(x,t) and the other is a function of λ (x,t). In this formalism
the evolution of λ (x,t) takes place by V (λ ) as well as the difference of the two types
of quantum potential. In obtaining the above equations we have standardly assumed no
variation of either ρ(x,0) or j(x,0). Thus, we start from the initial value of ρ(x,0) and
j(x,0) to solve Eqs.(2) and (5). Eqs.(9) and (10) can be solved for λ (x,t) and λ (x,t)
by integrating backward from time T using λ (x,T) and λ (x,T) given in Eqs.(15) and
(16) respectively. The equations (2), (5), (9) and (10) are non-linear thereby calling for
iteration to solve(cf., the algorithm in Section 4). Finally the desired control electric field
is given from Eq.(11) as
4 APPLICATION TO HCL
The OCT-QFD formulation will be applied to manipulating the vibrational motion of
HCl on the ground electronic state. The initial density ρ(x,0) = |Ψ(x)|2 was obtained
from solving for the vibrational state from the equation
using the Fourier grid Hamiltonian method [31,32] where m is the reduced mass of the
HCl molecule and V(x) is the truncated polynomial presented by Olgilvie [33]
a (2x−xe)2[1+ 9 a (2x−xe)i−1]−b for x < 4
 1 x+xe i=2 i x+xe 1
A[1−tanh(x−4)]3/2 for 4 ≤ x ≤ 6.5 ] (19)
0 for x ≥ 6.5
where x =2.4086 a.u. is the equilibrium bond length of HCl. The parameters in a.u.
entering the potential function are a = 0.961914, a = −1.362999, a = 0.86675, a =
−0.49804, a = 0.1727, a = 0.2687, a = −1.977, a = 2.78, a = 4.89, b = 0.169695
5 6 7 8 9 1
and A = −4.85×10
−2.
Since Ψ(x) is a stationary real function we have zero initial flux
j(x,0)=0. The initial ρ(x,0) is nearly a Gaussian packet centered around x . The dipole
function for HCl is given by [34]
where g(x) = 1 − tanh(β(x − x )) and the parameters are c = 0.279, c = −0.905,
c = 1.029, β = 0.687 and x = 2.555. The following steps were carried out for imple-
mentation of the present OCT-QFD algorithm :
Step 1: Make an initial guess for the electric field E(t), which was zero in the
present calculations.
Step 2: Solve the coupled equations, viz., Eq.(2) and (5) for ρ(x,t) and
j(x,t) respectively starting from ρ(x,0) and j(x,0). The solution was
achieved here by using the Flux-corrected transport(FCT) algorithm
[35] modified for the purpose of solving the QFD equations [28]. In
doing so, we adopt the Eulerian numerical scheme.
Step 3: Evaluate the final value for λ (x,T) given by Eq.(15) and set
λ (x,T)=0 by Eq.(16).
Step 4: Solve Eqs.(9) and (10) for λ (x,t) and λ (x,t), respectively, by back-
ward propagation using the same method as in step 2. Equations
(9) and (10) have source terms which depend on ρ(x,t) and j(x,t)
calculated from step 2.
Step 5: Calculate the difference between the left and right sides of Eq.(16)
for use in the conjugate gradient method [36] and calculate J from
Eq.(7).
Step 6: Iterate steps 2 to step 6 until acceptable convergence is met.
The spatial range of the calculation was 0 ≤ x ≤ 12 a.u., and the time interval was
0 ≤ t ≤ T with T=2000 a.u. The total number of spatial mesh points is 64 which gives
∆x = 0.1875 a.u. Similarly, the total number of time steps was 2048, which corresponds
to ∆t = 0.9765 a.u. No special effort was made to optimize the grid points, as the purpose
here is to demonstrate the QFD-OCT formulation. The weight ω in Eq.(7) was taken as
1, and ω = 1000. The target operator was Θ = x and Θd = 3.0a.u..
Figure 1 shows the control field in atomic units. The slightly non-zero values of the
field at the beginning and end could be arrested by placing additional costs if desired.
This pulse excites several vibrational states(not shown here) mainly by a sequence of
single quantum transitions. Figure 2 shows the average distance < x > as a function of
time. The desired control value of < x >=3.0 a.u. at T is obtained through oscillatory
motion of the packet. The packet is distorted in shape(not shown) while approximately
retaining its original variance during the evolution. During the optimization process the
total integrated probability density remained at unity up to a deviation of 10
−5.
iteration algorithm takes 10 steps to achieve the results shown here at 2 CPU mins. on
an IRIX Silicon Graphics Machine(Release 6.1). Within numerical precision the results
were the same as obtained by solving the original Schro¨dinger equation.
5. CONCLUSION
This paper presents a new QFD based approach for carrying out the optimal design of
control fields with an illustration for the maniputation of the HCl molecule. Our previous
work [28] shows the typical smooth and monotonic behaviour of the fluid dynamical
variables, viz., S and v as opposed to the typical oscillations in the wave functions where
the hamiltonian was time independent. In the present case where the system is driven
with an optimal time-dependent external field we have calculated the spatial dependence
of j, ρ, S and Ψ at t=T shown in Fig.3. The fluid dynamical variables(Fig.3 curves (a),
(b) and (c)) used in the present method are relatively slowly varying spatial functions
compared to the wave function(Fig.3, curve(d)) which apparently enhances the efficiency
and the numerical saving of the present approach to controlling dynamics.
Although the illustration was for one dimension the QFD technique is directly extend-
able to higher dimensions, and a QFD wave packet calculation in four dimension has
already been performed [28]. The alternating direction method can effectively be used
with QFD for high dimensions. Comparison with FFT propagation has been performed
for two dimensional systems [29], showing that QFDis capable of providing a considerable
increase in efficiency(i.e., by a factor of 10 or more). Regardless of the dimension, the key
advantageof OCT-QFD arises fromthe expected smoothnature of QFDvariables. Aspe-
cial circumstance will arise if the control “exactly” leads to a bound state with nodes that
fully separates one spatial region from another. In practice placing a lower limit on the
density of the order of the machine precision overcomes such difficulties. Future studies
need to explore the full capabilities of the computational savings afforded by OCT-QFD.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
BD thanks Drs.Jair Botina and Tak-San Ho for useful discussions. The authors ac-
knowledge support from the NSF and DOD.
Two additional forms for the cost functional and associated initial/final
conditions
The forms here are presented for reference as an alternative QFD approach. They have
the advantages of simplicity and of giving equations for the Lagrange multiplier in the
sameformasthedynamical equations. The formalismforderiving thequations isthrough
the Euler equations corresponding to the minimization of
I = F(f,f ,∇f,∇2f)dtdV (A.1)
Here V denotes the volume in coordinate space. The corresponding Euler equations and
conditions on time and space are
Initial condition: f(x,0) = f (x); Final condition: (∂F)| = f (x) (A.3)
0 ∂ft t=T T
Boundary conditions on dV:
Starting with the continuity and energy conservation equations given in Eqs.(2) and (3)
in the text, we rewrite them as
∇S ·∇S h¯2
AS +A +VA− ∇2A = 0 (A.7)
The use of the dynamical equations above in the cost functional in Eq.(8) becomes
∇S ·∇S h¯2
where Θ = Θ(x)A2(x,T)dV. The corresponding Euler equations are obtained from
the formulas in (A2) for arbitrary variations of A, S, λ , λ and E(t) as
1t 1 1 2 2 2
2t 2 2 1 1 1
Following the formulas given in Eq.(A3) to (A5), the corresponding initial and final con-
ditions become
The first two formulas in A.9 are equivalent to the Schro¨dinger equation. They can
be transformed into various QFD forms in terms of ρ, v and j as in Eqs.(2) to (5) in
the main text. The third and fourth equations in A.9 are the basic equations for the
Lagrange multiplier functions. They are in the same flux conservation form as the QFD
equations. Indeed, the third equation multiplied by λ can be rearranged in the form of
mass conservation for Λ = λ2 as
1t 1 1 2 2 2
The above derivation also can be obtained starting with the usual Schro¨dinger equation
and its complex conjugate. Following this approach the cost functional below assures that
the external field is real
With the substitution Ψ = Aexp(iS), the cost functional reduces to the one in Eq.(A.8)