Orbits of crystallographic embedding of non-crystallographic
groups and applications to virology
ReidunTwarock1,2,3,MotiejusValiunas4,andEmilioZappa 1,3
1DepartmentofMathematics,
2DepartmentofBiology,
3YorkCenterforComplexSystemsAnalysis,UniversityofYork
4FacultyofMathematics,UniversityofCambridge,UK
Thearchitectureofinfinitestructureswithnon-crystallographicsymmetriescanbemod-
eledviaaperiodictilings,butasystematicconstructionmethodforfinitestructureswithnon-
crystallographicsymmetryatdifferentradiallevelsisstilllacking. Wepresenthereagroup
theoretical method for the construction of finite nested point set with non-crystallographic
symmetry. Akintotheconstructionofquasicrystals,weembedanon-crystallographicgroup
G into the point group of a higher dimensional lattice and construct the chains of all G-
containing subgroups. We determine the orbits of lattice points under such subgroups, and
show that their projection into a lower dimensionalG-invariant subspace consists of nested
point sets with G-symmetry at each radial level. The number of different radial levels is
boundedbytheindexofGinthesubgroupof . Inthecaseoficosahedralsymmetry,wede-
termineallsubgroupchainsexplicitlyandillustratethatthesepointsetsinprojectionprovide
blueprintsthatapproximatetheorganisationofsimpleviralcapsids,encodinginformationon
thestructuralorganisationofcapsidproteinsandthegenomicmaterialcollectively,basedon
twocasestudies. Contrarytotheaffineextensionspreviouslyintroduced,theseorbitsendow
virus architecture with an underlying finite group structure, which lends itself better for the
modellingofitsdynamicpropertiesthanitsinfinitedimensionalcounterpart.
1 Introduction
Non-crystallographicsymmetriesareubiquitousinphysics,chemistryandbiology. Prominent
examples are quasicrystals, alloys exhibiting five-, eight-, ten- and twelve-fold symmetry with
long-rangeorderintheiratomicorganisation[1]and,incarbonchemistry,icosahedralcarboncage
structures called fullerenes [2], with architectures akin to Buckminster Fuller’s geodesic domes.
Icosahedral symmetry also plays a fundamental role in virology. Viruses encapsulate and hence
protect their genomic material inside a protein shell, called capsid, that in the vast majority of
casespossessesicosahedralsymmetry. In1962,CasparandKlugproposed,intheirseminalpaper
[3], a theory to describe the geometry of icosahedral viral capsids and predict the locations and
orientationsofthecapsidproteins. Inspiredbythestructureofthegeodesicdome,theyderiveda
seriesoficosahedraltriangulations,calleddeltahedra. Morerecently,[4]proposedageneralisation
of this theory by considering more general tilings of the capsid surface inspired by the theory of
quasicrystals.
∗ez537@york.ac.uk
4v5112.1141:viXra
Caspar-Klugtheoryandgeneralisationsthereofdescibethecapsidofavirusasatwo-dimensional
object rather than in three-dimensional space. Therefore, they do not provide information about
other important features of the capsid, such as its thickness and the organisation of the genomic
materialencapsulatedinside. Experimentsshowedthatmanyvirusesexhibiticosahedralsymme-
try at di erent radial levels: examples are the dodecahedral cage of RNA observed in Pariacoto
Virus[5]andthedouble-shellstructureofthegenomicmaterialofBacteriophageMS2[6]. These
results suggest that the symmetry of the virus should be extended to include information on the
capsidproteinsandthepackagedgenomecollectively.
A first step towards this goal was the principle of a ne extensions, described in a series of
papers [7, 8, 9]. In this work, the generators of the icosahedral group have been extended by a
non-compact generator acting as a translation, with the additional requirement that the resulting
words of the group satisfy non-trivial relations. Such a ne extension can also be obtained via a
construction similar to a ne extensions in the theory of Kac-Moody algebras [10]. In this case,
icosahedralsymmetryisextendedviaanextensionoftheCartanmatrix, resultingintheaddition
ofanon-compactoperatortothegeneratorsoftheicosahedralgroup[11,12,13]. Theorbitsofthe
a neextensionsthusconstructedconsistofinfinitesetsofpointsthatdenselyfillthespace,since
theicosahedralgroupisnon-crystallographicin3D.Sinceviralcapsidsarefiniteobjects,acut-o
parametermustbeintroduced,thatlimitsthenumberofmonomialsofthea negroup. Inprevious
work,wordscharacterisedbyafiniteactionofthetranslationoperatorhadbeenusedtoconstruct
multi-shell structures, in which each radial level displays icosahedral symmetry. However, such
a cut-o implies that the point sets are not invariant under the extended group structure, which
limitstheuseoftheseconceptsintheformulationofenergyfunctions,e.g. Hamiltoniansorinthe
contextofGinzburg-Landautheory.
An alternative to this approach based on a ne extension is Janner’s work, that models viral
architectureintermsoflattices. Inaseriesofpapers[14,15,16,17,18], Jannerembeddedvirus
structureintolattices,andshowedthatthisprovidedapproximationforvirusarchitecture,andpro-
videsanalternativeapproachforthemodelingoftheonion-likefullerenes[19],includingapaper
combining this lattice approach with the a ne extensions mentioned above [20]. Subsequently,
approximationsofvirusarchitectureintermsofquasilatticesweredeveloped[21],whichprovide
an alternative to the lattice approach by Janner, and by construction have vertex sets that contain
the point arrays determined by the a ne extended groups as subsets. All of these approaches
approximate viruses in terms of infinite structures, lattices, quasilattices, infinite groups, which
require a cut-o . In the case of the lattices and quasilattices, the cut-o consists of choosing a
subset of infinite (quasi)lattice, and in the case of a ne extensions the action of the translation
operator has to be limited. This motivates the study of the present paper in which we develop an
approachintermsofmathematicalconceptsthatareintrinsicallyfinite-dimensional,becausethey
arerelatedtoorbitsoffinitegroups.
In this paper we introduce a new group theoretical method to study nested point sets with
non-crystallographic symmetries, based on the embedding of non-crystallographic groups into
higherdimensionallattices[22]. Thisembeddingisastandardwaytodefinemathematicallyqua-
sicrystals, e.g. via the cut-and-project schemes and model sets [23], or the superspace approach
[24]. More generally, in order to model objects in 3D that possess a non-crystallographic sym-
metry at di erent radial levels, it makes sense to embed the non-crystallographic symmetry into
a crystallographic setting and use the long-range order implied to induce in projection informa-
tion on the collective arrangements of di erent radial levels. [25] gave a first approach in this
direction,byanalysingdouble-shellstructureswithfive-foldsymmetryasprojectedorbitsofspe-
cific point groups in higher dimensions. Here we present a more systematic study for general
non-crystallographicsymmetries. Specifically,weembedanon-crystallographicgroupGintothe
pointgroup ofalatticeintheminimalhigherdimensionwherethecut-and-projectconstruction
is possible. Since this embedding is not, in general, maximal, we consider the subgroups K of
containing G as a subgroup, which extend the symmetry described by G. We prove that the
projection of the orbits of lattice points under such subgroups into a lower dimensional subspace
invariantunderGisanestedfinitepointsetwithnon-crystallographicsymmetryG. Weshowthat
thenumberofdistinctradiallevelsintheprojectedorbitsisboundedbytheindexofGin K.
As an illustration of this approach, we provide analytically an explicit construction of planar
nestedstructuresfornon-crystallographicdihedralgroups. Moreover,inordertopavethewayfor
applicationstoicosahedralviruses,weapplythisapproachtotheicosahedralgroup ,whichcan
be embedded into the point group of the simple cubic lattice in six dimensions [26]. We classify
all the -containing subgroups of the hyperoctahedral group, with the aid of the software [27],
which is designed for problems in computational group theory. Since the 6D lattice is infinite,
a cut-o parameter must be introduced in order to select a finite number of lattice points whose
orbitscanthenbeusedtomodelthecapsid. Byconstruction,allpointarrayshavefullicosahedral
symmetry,i.e. containingreflectionsaswellasrotations. Sincevirusesareknowntobechiral,this
mayseemperplexing;however,wenotethatpointarraysdonotfullyconstrainviralarchitecture,
thus proteins can be positioned in the capsid so as to break the full symmetry, as long as they
adhere overall to the blueprint indicated by the points. Therefore, it is not possible to obtain a
full classification of the orbits as was done by [9]. However, these results provide for the first
time a finite group structure, albeit in a higher dimensional space, underlying the geometry of
the multiple layers of material in a virus. This has important consequences for the modelling of
physicalproperties;specifically,conformationalchangesofviralcapsids,whichareimportantfor
thevirustobecomeinfective,canbemodeledintheframeworkoftheGinzburg-Landautheoryof
phasetransitions[28],viatheformulationofanenergyfunctioninvariantunderthegeneratorsof
thesymmetrygroupofthecapsid.
The paper is organised as follows. After reviewing, in Section 2, the embedding of non-
crystallographic groups into higher dimensional lattices, in Section 3 we describe the new group
theoretical setup to model finite nested structures with non-crystallographic symmetry. As a first
application,westudyinSection4planarnestedpointsetsobtainedfromprojectionofextensions
of embedded non-crystallographic dihedral groups. In Section 5 we analyse in detail the case of
icosahedralsymmetry,classifyingthechainofsubgroupscontainingtheicosahedralgroupembed-
ded into the six-dimensional hyperoctahedral group. Finally, in Section 6 we use these results to
obtaingeometricconstraintsonviralcapsidarchitecture,andpresenttwocasestudies,namelythe
capsidsofPariacotoVirusandBacteriophageMS2,whosestructureshavebeenintensivelystudied
experimentally. WeconcludeinSection7bydiscussingfurtherapplicationsoftheseresults.
2 Crystallographic embedding of non-crystallographic groups
Ournewgrouptheoreticalsetupreliesontheembeddingofnon-crystallographicsymmetries
into the point group of higher dimensional lattices. This is a standard method in the theory of
quasicrystals;herewebrieflyreviewitandfixthenotationthatwearegoingtousethroughoutthe
paper. Wereferto[22]and[29]forfurtherinformation.
Thepointgroup ofalattice in
RdwithgeneratormatrixBisthemaximalsetoforthogonal
transformationsthatleavethelatticeinvariant:
( ): = Q O(d): M GL(d,R ):QB=BM . (1)
is afinite group and doesnot depend on thematrix B[22]. The lattice group Λ constitutes
anintegralrepresentationofthepointgroup withrespectto B:
Λ (B): = M GL(d,Z ): Q ( ):B − 1QB=M . (2)
A finite group of isometriesG is non-crystallographic in dimension k if it does not leave any
latticeinvariantin
Rk.
Following[30],weintroducethefollowing:
Definition 2.1. Let G O(k) be a finite non-crystallographic group of isometries. A crystallo-
graphicrepresentationofG isamatrixgroupG(cid:101)satisfyingthefollowingconditions:
(C1) G(cid:101)stabilisesalattice inRd,withd>k,i.e. G(cid:101)isasubgroupofthepointgroup of ;
(C2) G(cid:101)is reducible inGL(d,R ) and contains an irreducible representation ρ ofG of degree k,
i.e.
G(cid:101) ρ k ρ (cid:48) , deg(ρ (cid:48)) =d k. (3)
Thecondition(C1)impliesthatthematricesrepresentingtheelementsofG(cid:101)withrespecttoa
generator matrix B of the lattice are integral or, equivalently, B 1G(cid:101)B is a subgroup of the lattice
group Λ GL(d,Z ) of (cf. (2)). As a consequence, the character χ is an integer-valued
⊆ L G(cid:101)
function. The condition (C2) is necessary for the construction of quasicrystals in Rk via the cut-
and-projectmethod([22],[29]).
Theminimaldimensiond>kforwhichacrystallographicrepresentationG(cid:101)ofGispossibleis
calledtheminimalcrystallographicdimensionofG. Theconditionsχ Z and(3)canbeeasily
G(cid:101)∈
verifiedwiththeaidofthecharactertableofGandMaschke’sTheorem[31]. Theexistence,and
possibly an explicit construction, of lattices in
whose point group contains a crystallographic
representationofGisamoredi ffi culttask. Inthecaseoficosahedralsymmetry,theminimalcrys-
tallographicdimensionissixandthelatticesin
R6havebeenclassifiedin[30](thisisexplainedin
more detail in Section 5). For planar non-crystallographic symmetries described by the dihedral
groups , the minimal crystallographic dimension is ϕ(n), the Euler function of n. We will go
backtothisexampleinSection4.
LetusdenotebyV(k)theinvariantsubspaceof Rd whichcarriestheirrepρ ofG. Letπ: Rd
V(k) betheprojectionintoV(k),i.e. thelinearoperatorsuchthatthediagramme
commutesforallg G:
LetV(d k)denotetheorthogonalcomplementofV(k)in Rd. WerecallthefollowingProposition
(fortheproof,see[22]):
Proposition2.1. Thefollowingareequivalent:
1. V(d k) istotallyirrational,i.e. V(d k) = 0 ;
2. π isonetoone.
Thetriple(V(k),V(d k), )isthestartingpointtodefinemodelsetsviacut-and-projectschemes
with G-symmetry [23], which is a standard way to define quasicrystals mathematically. In this
paper, we construct finite point sets resulting from the projection into V(k) of orbits of points of
under G-containing subgroups of the point group . We explain this construction in the next
section.
3 Nested point sets obtained from projection
The embedding of a non-crystallographic group G into a higher dimensional lattice is, in
general, not maximal. This means that there exist proper subgroups of the point group of
which contain a crystallographic representation G(cid:101)of G as a subgroup. Therefore, we introduce
theset:
: = K :G(cid:101) K , (6)
AG(cid:101) { ≤P ≤ }
which consists of all the G(cid:101)-containing subgroups of . For computational purposes, we fix the
generatormatrix Bof , andconsiderthesubgroupstructureofthelatticegroup Λ inthatrepre-
sentation,i.e. theset (B) = K<Λ : <K ,with : =B 1G(cid:101)B. Noticethatadi ff erentchoice
inthegeneratormatri A x H ofthela { tticeresu H ltsins } ubgrou H psK conjugateto K inGL(d,Z ).
The elements in encode the symmetry described by G plus additional generators that
extend this symmetry A . L H et K be an element of , and let n: = [K : ] be the index of in K.
Let T = g ,...,g be a transversal of in K, A i. H e. a system of repre H sentatives in K of t H he right
cosetsof in K [32]. Letv bealatticepoint,whichcanbewrittenasv= (m ,...,m ),with
m Z (sincewefixedthebasis ). vcanbetakenasseedpointfortheorbit (v) = kv:k K
underK. Withthissetup,weprovethefollowingtheorem.
Theorem3.1. Let (v) (v) = hgv:h betheorbitofv withrespecttothecoset
g,andletusden O ot i eby ≡ P O ( H v) g : i =π( { (v) i )the ∈ or H bit } projectedintoV(k ∈ ), L thesubspaceofdimension
kcarryingtheirrepρ ofG (cf. (4)). Thenwehave:
1. P(v)iswell-defined,i.e. doesnotdependonthechoiceofthetransversalT;
2. P(v)retainsthesymmetrydescribedbyG;
3. P(v) =P (v)ifandonlyif
Stab K (v) (cid:44)∅. (7)
4. If isnormalin K,thenall P(v)havethesamecardinality.
Proof. 1. LetT = (g ,...,g )beanothertransversalfor in K. Thisimpliesthatthereexist
(cid:48) (cid:48)1 (cid:48)n
hˆ ,fori= 1,...,n,suchthatg =hˆ g. Wehave
(cid:48)i i i
g(cid:48)i
(v), i= 1,...,n,
andtheresultfollows.
2. Itfollowsfromthecommutativepropertyin(5);inparticular,wehave
i i k i i k i
fori= 1,...,n. Theorbit ˆ (v)hasG-symmetrybyconstruction.
i j i j i j
⇐⇒ O O ⇐⇒ O (sinceπis1 1)O
hgv;h = hg v:h h,k :hgv=kg v
g −j 1k − 1hg i v=v
g −j 1k − 1hg i
Stab K (v),
whichprovesthestatement.
4. Since is normal in K, the cosets g form the quotient group K/ of size n. Let X : =
:i= 1,...,n bethesetofalltheorbitswithrespecttothecosets g. Inthefollowing,
wewillomitthedependenceonvforeaseofnotation. Wecandefineanactionof K/ on
X as : = . ThisactioniswelldefinedsinceK/ isagroup,anditistransitive
since H , f i o · r O e H v j ery O el H em iH e j nt X, we have = H . Let S : = Stab ( )
denote the stabiliser of OH u i n ∈ der this action H . j W ·O it H h −j 1 s H : i = S OHi we thus H have by t K h / e H o O rb H it-
stabilisertheorem
r: = X = | H| = .
ItfollowsthatthesetsO(v)areinbijectionwiththeleftcosetsofS in K/ . Wedenote
thesecosetsbyA,fori= 1,...,r. Theseformapartitionofthequotie H ntgrou H pK/ ,which
(1),..., (1),..., (i),..., (i),..., (r),..., (r).
H(cid:124) (cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:32)1(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:32) (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:32)H(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:32)s(cid:32)(cid:32) (cid:125) (cid:124)H(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:32)1(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:32) (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:32)H(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:32)s(cid:32) (cid:125) H(cid:124) (cid:32)(cid:32)1(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:32) (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:32)H(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:32)s(cid:32) (cid:125)
Byconstruction, = ,for j,k= 1,...,s. Letusdefinethesets
K(i): = (i) K, i= 1,...,r. (8)
Theset K(i) :i= 1,...,r constitutesapartitionof K,sinceitistheunionofcosets. More-
overtheyallhavethesameorder:
K(i) =s = :N, i= 1,...,r. (9)
| | ·|H| ∀
Let S = ( (1),..., (r) ) be a transversal for the coset of S in K/ . It follows from (8)
thatK(i)= H k 1 K : H kv 1 ,therefore H H
= kv:k K(i) = .
Toconclude,weobservethateach K(i) containscompletecosetsof K/Stab (v). Infact,let
kStab (v)beacosetin K/Stab (v). Ifk K(i),thenanelementinkStab (v)isoftheform
kkˆ, with kˆ Stab (v), and belongs to K(i) since (kkˆ)v=k(kˆv) =kv . Therefore, each
K(i)ispartitionedinto K(i)/Stab (v) sets: eachofthesesetscorrespondstoadistinctpoint
intheorbit . Since K(i) =N forallidueto(9),eachorbit hasthesamenumber
ofpoints,andhencealsoeachP(v),becausetheprojectionisone-to-one.
The decomposition of K into cosets with respect to induces a well-defined decom-
positionoftheprojectedorbitπ( (v))(cf. (4)):
(cid:91)n (cid:91)n
O K O i O ρ k i
The point set defined by (10) consists of points situated at di erent radial levels, since, in
general, π(gv) (cid:44) π(g v) for i(cid:44) j, where denotes the standard Euclidean norm in Rk . Hence
the projected orbit is an onion-like structure, with each layer being the union of the projection of
orbits corresponding to di ff erent cosets. It follows that the number r of distinct radial levels is
boundedbytheindexof inK.
Using these results, we can set up a procedure to extend the non-crystallographic symmetry
describedbyρ inV(k). Inparticular,let x V(k) beaseedpointfortheorbitofρ . Thepre-image
v=π 1(x)isapointofthelattice byconstruction. Let K beanelementof . Theprojection
of (v) contains the orbit (x), which corresponds to the coset (compare with (10)), and
O K O ρ k H
possibly more layers withG-symmetry. This procedure can be iterated; let us consider the chain
ofsubgroupsin :
K K ... K Λ.
By ascending the chain we obtain a chain of orbits (v) (v); the projection of such
orbitsintoV(k) inducesachainofnestedshells. Wecansummarisethesituationinthefollowing
diagramme:
−−−−−→ .
...
...
In the next section we present a first application of these results in the case of planar non-
crystallographicsymmetries.
4 Embedding of dihedral groups and planar nested structures
Let n>0 be a natural number. The dihedral group is the symmetry group of a regular
n-gon,andconsistsofnrotationsandnreflections,withpresentation[32]
D 2n = (cid:104) R n ,S :Rn n =e,SR n =R −n 1S (cid:105) , (12)
whereR isarotationby 2π,andS areflection.
Letξ = exp2πi C beaprimitiverootofunity,andlet Z [ξ ]betheringofintegersofthefield
Q (ξ ). The standard embedding of into a φ(n)-dimensional lattice, where φ(n) denotes the
Eulerfunction,isachievedviatheMinkowskiembeddingof Z [ξ ][29]. Specifically,let denote
the Galois group of Q (ξ ). is isomorphic to Z : = m Z :gcd(m,n) = 1 , the multiplicative
groupof Z , andthereforeconsists ofφ(n)elements. Suchelementsareautomorphismsof Q (ξ )
given by ξ ξm, where n and m are coprime, and they are pairwise conjugate. We can then
onjugateelementsσ in ,whereσ istheidentity. TheMinkowskiembedding
of Z [ξ ]isthengivenby
whichisalatticein Rφ(n). Theprojectionπ: C onthefirstcoordinateis,byconstruction,
one-to-oneonitsimageπ( ) =Z [ξ ].
Wecandefineanactionof in Z [ξ ]inthefollowingway:
R x=ξ x, S x=x¯,
where x¯ denotesthecomplexconjugationin C and x Z [ξ ]. Notethatthisactioniswell-defined
aseveryelementof stabilises Z [ξ ]. Ifgisanelementof I (n),gcanbeliftedtoanelement
g˜ definedby
whichiswell-definedsincetheprojectionisone-to-one. Inparticular,wehave
x)).
Similarlywehave
(cid:18) (cid:19)
(x) .
It follows that the transformations R˜ and S˜ are orthogonal and stabilise the lattice .
Therefore the set g˜ :g is an embedding of into the point group of . We point
2n 2n φ(n)
{ ∈D } D L
outthat,althoughthisconstructionisaprioripossibleandwell-definedforallnaturalnumbers,it
is di ffi cult to find the explicit form of the point group of in (13) for general n. The explicit
formisknown,inparticular,forn= 5,8and12[29].
WenowprovetheexistenceofanextensionK of embeddedinto ( ),i.e. asubgroup
K of ( )suchthat isanormalsubgroupof K. Notethat canbeseenasasubgroup
φ(n) 2n 2n
of the symmetric group S , acting on the vertices of a regular n-gon. More precisely, let R =
n (cid:48)n
(1,2,...,n)beann-cycleandletS bethepermutationdefinedbyS (j) = jmodn,for j= 1,...,n;
(cid:48) (cid:48)
then R ,S definesapermutationrepresentationof . LetT = R Z ,anddefine K asthe
(cid:48)n (cid:48)
(cid:105) D
(cid:48)n(cid:105)(cid:39) n
normaliser[33]ofT:
K : =N Sn (T) =
S n :σ − 1Tσ=T
We point out that K thus constructed is referred to as the holomorph of the group Z , and
denotedbyHol( )[34]. Wehavethefollowing:
Lemma4.1. isapropernormalsubgroupof K =Hol( Z )whenn= 5orn 7.
Proof. Wehave,usingnotationasin(15):
1 T σ(1,2,...,n)σ
1= (1,2,...,n)m
forsomem Z (σ(1),σ(2),...,σ(n)) = (1,2,...,n)m forsomem Z
withgcd(m,n) = 1(otherwise(1,2,...,n)m decomposesintodisjointcycles)
j Z ,σ(j) =mj+lforsomem,l Z withgcd(m,n) = 1.
Tosumup:
S n :
.
K contains R and S , which correspond to m= 1, l= 1 and m= 1, l= 0, respectively. It
(cid:48)n (cid:48)
followsthat isasubgroupofK. Wenoticethat K =φ(n)n,whichisgreaterthan2nforn= 5
or n 7. Hence is a proper subgroup of K for these values of n, which correspond to the
non-crystallographiccases.
Inordertoprovethenormality,wewrite
R R S =T TS .
(cid:39)(cid:104)
(cid:48)n(cid:105)∪(cid:104) (cid:48)n(cid:105) (cid:48)
Define σ K by σ(j) = mj+l. We want to prove that σ = σ. Clearly σT = Tσ
by definition of K (cf. (15)). We are then left to show that σTS =TS σ. For s,j Z we have
((R )sS )(j) =s j,whichimplies (cid:16) σ (cid:0)(cid:0) R )sS (cid:1)(cid:1) σ 1 (cid:17) (j) =ms j+ (cid:48) 2l. The (cid:48) refore,σ (cid:0)(cid:0) R ∈ )s n S (cid:1)(cid:1) σ 1=
(cid:48)n (cid:48)
(cid:48)n (cid:48) −
(cid:48)n (cid:48) −
(R )ms+2lS ,henceσTS =TS σ,andtheresultfollows. (cid:3)
(cid:48)n (cid:48) (cid:48) (cid:48)
Wenowprovethefollowing:
Proposition4.1. K =Hol( Z )isasubgroupof ( ).
Proof. Letusdefinethefunctionst Aut( Z [ξ ])by
a j ξ n mj+l, m
Z n . (16)
Noticethattheelementst ,withm Z ,correspondtotheGaloisautomorphismsσ ,which
constitute the Galois group of Q (ξ ). Let K = t : m Z ,l Z . K is a -containing
n (cid:48)
subgroupofAut( Z [ξ ]). Inparticular,compositionoftwoelementsisgivenby
t m,l t m,l =t mm,ml+l , (17)
· (cid:48) (cid:48) (cid:48) (cid:48)
andtheinverseofanelementt ist . Letθ:K K bethefunction
m,l m − 1, − m − 1l → (cid:48)
θ isanisomorphismbyconstruction. Wedefine : =θ( ). ByLemma4.1,wehavethat
(cid:48)2n
isanormalsubgroupof K <Aut( Z [ξ ]).
(cid:48)2n (cid:48) n
WecanwritetheMinkowskiembeddingof Z [ξ ]as = t (z),...,t (z):z Z [ξ ]
y1 ,0 yφ(n)/2 ,0
C 2 1φ(n)(cid:27)Rφ(n),where1 =y 1 < ··· <y φ(n)/2 < n 2 andgcd(y j ,n) = 1,forall j. Wecanthenliftt m,l as
in(14),andobtain:
(cid:16) (cid:17)
(z)),...,t
(cid:16) (cid:17) (cid:18) (cid:19)
n my1 ,0 n myφ(n)/2
Therefore t˜ just rearranges the coordinates of π 1(z), possibly converting some of them to
theircomplexconjugatesand / ormultipliyingthembyapowerofξ . HenceK stabilisesthelattice
n (cid:48)
,andthisactionisorthogonal. ThusK isasubgroupof ( ),andtheresultisproved. (cid:3)
n (cid:48) n
It follows that we can construct nested point sets with n-fold symmetry using the extension
K= Hol( Z )andtheMinkowskiembedding . Thenumberrofdistinctradiallevelsobtained
viaprojectionisatmost
φ(n)n φ(n)
r [K : ] = = .
4.1 Five-foldsymmetry
As a first example, we consider the case n = 5. In this case, the Minkowski embedding of
10 is isomorphic to the root lattice A 4 [29], whose simple roots are given by α i =e i e i+1 , for
i= 1,...,4,ande denotesthestandardbasisof R5 (cf. also[10]formoredetailsonrootsystems
ofsemisimpleLiealgebras). Withrespecttothebasisofsimpleroots,weobtainarepresentation
of which is a subgroup of the lattice group Λ (A ) (which is isomorphic to the symmetric
groupS ):
1 1 0 0 0 1 1 0
Thisrepresentationsplitsintotwotwo-dimensionalirreps,whichinduceadecomposition
E(1) E(2),whereE(1)andE(2)arebothtotallyirrationalwithrespecttotherootlatticeA . Abasis
Figure1: Examplesofpointsetswithfive-foldsymetryviaprojectionoforbitsofpointsfromthe
A root lattice in R4. The lattice point v= (1,2,4,3) (whose coordinates are written with respect
tothebasisofsimpleroots)istakenasseedpointfromtheorbitsunderthegroups(cf. (21)): (a)
,(b) K Hol( Z )and(c) Λ (A ) S .
H (cid:39)D (cid:39) (cid:39)
foreachofthemcanbefoundusingtoolsfromtherepresentationtheoryoffinitegroups[31]. The
projectionπ(1) : R4 E(1) isgivenby
(cid:32) (cid:33)
2 √2(3 τ) 1 2 τ 2τ (cid:48) 2 τ
(cid:16) (cid:17)
whereτ: = 1 1 + √5 denotesthegoldenratioandτ : = 1 τitsGaloisconjugate. ThespaceE(1)
2 (cid:48) −
carriestheirrepρ :
(cid:42)(cid:32) (cid:33) (cid:32) (cid:33)(cid:43)
2 0 1 2 √τ+ 2 τ
− (cid:48)
With the help of GAP, we study the set of subgroups of Λ (A ) containing (compare
with(6)). Thereisauniquechainofsubgroupscontainingaproperextensionof :
where K is,infact,isomorphictoHol( Z ). TheexplicitrepresentationofK isgivenby
.
0 0 1 1 0 0 1 1 0 1 1 0
Thegroup K correspondstothepointgroup54givenin[16]. Wepointoutthat, byTheorem
3.1, the point sets obtained from projection of orbits of points of the root lattice A consists of
at most two radial levels, which can either be two nested decagons of two nested pentagons. In
Figure1weshowanexampleofsuchpointsets.
5 Nested point sets with icosahedral symmetry
AsmentionedintheIntroduction,icosahedralsymmetryplaysafundamentalroleinvirology,
carbon chemistry and quasicrystals. For applications in the natural sciences, it is important to
distinguish between chiral and achiral symmetry. Chiral icosahedral symmetry is described by
theicosahedralgroup ,whichconsistsofalltherotationsthatleaveanicosahedroninvariantand
admitsthepresentation:
= g ,g :g2=g3= (g g )5=e ,
I (cid:104) 2 3 2 3 2 3 (cid:105)
whereg andg areatwo-andthree-foldrotation,respectively. Ithasorder60anditisisomorphic
to the alternating group A . On the other hand, achiral icosahedral symmetry corresponds to the
full symmetries of an icosahedron (i.e. reflections included), and it is described by the Coxeter
group H ,whoseorderis120anditisisomorphicto Z .
Forapplicationsinvirology,wefocusfirstlyonchiralicosahedralsymmetry,sincenotallviral
capsidareinvariantunderreflections. Sincetheicosahedralgoupcontainsfive-foldsymmetry,itis
notcrystallographicin3D.Itsminimalcrystallographicdimension,inthesenseofDefinition2.1,
is six [22]. In particular, there are exactly three Bravais lattices left invariant by in
the simple cubic (SC), face-centered cubic (FCC) and body-centered cubic (BCC) lattices [30].
Thepointgroupoftheselatticesisthehyperoctahedralgroupinsixdimensions,whichwedenote
by B (cf. (1)):
B = Q O(6):Q=M GL(6,Z ) =O(6) GL(6,Z ),
which consists of all the 6 6 orthogonal and integral matrices. It is isomorphic to the wreath
product Z2 ,whereS denotesthesymmetricgroupon6elements(seeAppendix). Itsorderis
(cid:111)§
266! = 46,080. Inwhatfollows,wewillfocusontheSClattice:
where e, i = 1,...,6 is the standard basis of R6; its point and lattice groups coincide (cf. (1)
and cf. (2)). The crystallographic representations of have been classified in [26]. They are all
conjugatedin B ;arepresentative ˆ canbechosenasthefollowing:
1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0
ˆ leaves two three-dimensional subspaces invariant, denoted by E and E , that are both
(cid:107) ⊥
totally irrational with respect to the SC lattice. It follows that ˆ decomposes, in GL(6,R ), into
two three-dimensional irreps, usually denoted by T and T . An explicit form of T , useful for
computations,isgivenby
τ (cid:48)
(cid:48) 1
(cid:48) (cid:48)
Theprojectionπ : R6 E isgivenby
(cid:107) (cid:107)
0 1 τ 1 0 τ
For achiral icosahedral symmetry, the crystallographic representations of H are easily com-
puted using the direct product structure Z . Specifically, if Γ= 1, 1 is the non-trivial irrep
of Z , then the representation ˆ Γ is a crystallographic representation of H , and is such that
ˆ Γ T Γ T Γ inGL(6,R ). Wepointoutthatthereexistothercrystallographicgroupsin
six dimensions which contain the icosahedral group as a subgroup, and these can be found using
theGAPpackageCARAT[35]. However,therepresentationsof inducedbythisembeddingdonot
split into two three-dimensional irreps of , according to the classification provided by [30], and
hencetheyarenotsuitablefortheconstructionofnestedpointsetsbyprojectionpresentedhere.
In order to construct nested structures with icosahedral symmetry, we consider the set of all
the ˆ-containingsubgroupsof B (cf. (6)):
: = K <B : ˆ <K . (25)
With the help of GAP, it is possible to compute the set . In order to make computations
e ffi cient, we use some results from group theory. In particulaIr, we recall that, if G is a soluble
group,theneverysubgroupofG issoluble[36]. SincetheicosahedralgroupisisomorphictoA ,
itisnotsoluble. Therefore,anysubgroupHofB containing ˆ asasubgroupmustnotbesoluble.
Moreover, it cannot be Abelian (since is not) and the order of H must be divisible by = 60,
as a consequence of Lagrange’s Theorem. With these considerations, we provide the following
algorithm.
Algorithm5.1. Inordertodetermine ,performthefollowingsteps:
1. Computetheconjugacyclasses ofthesubgroupsof B .
2. Listarepresentative K foreachclass .
3. Ruleoutthoserepresentativeswhichhaveoneofthefollowingproperties:
K issoluble;
K isAbelian;
60 (cid:45) K .
4. Foreach K notruledout,computealltheelementG . If ˆ <G,thenaddG to .
i i i i i ˆ
The algorithm was implemented in GAP, and the results are given in Table 1. There are 13
elements in , which we denote byG, for i= 1,...,13. A set of generators for each groupG
is given in theIAppendix. Clearly, G and G are the icosahedral and hyperoctahedral group,
respectively,whereasG isisomorphicto H . InFigure2weshowthegraphofinclusionsofthe
groupsG.
TheprojectionsintoE oftheorbitsoflatticepointsunderthegroupsG producenestedpoint
(cid:107) i
setswithicosahedralsymmetryateachradiallevel. AnexampleisgiveninFigure3. Everyradial
levelcorrespondstotheunionofcosetsofG withrespectto ˆ. Itisworthpointingoutthatevery
groupG,fori>3,contains H aswellas assubgroups. Fromageometricalpointofview,this
implies that the resulting orbits in projection are all invariant under reflections, i.e. each radial
lavel possesses full icosahedral symmetry H . This observation provides a sharper bound on the
numberofdistinctradiallevelsinprojection: infact,thisisgivenbyn/2,whichistheindexofH
inG (recallthatnistheindexof inG).
6 Applications to viral capsid architecture
In this section we show that this group theoretical setup is a powerful tool to rationalise viral
architecture. Specifically, the classification of the chains of subgroups of B extending icosahe-
dral symmetry, derived in Section 5, provides a suitable mathematical framework to understand
structuralconstraintsonviralcapsids. Asafirststeptowardsthisgoal,weidentifyafinitelibrary
ofpointarrays,correspondingtotheprojectedorbitsof6DlatticepointsunderthegroupsG pre-
viously classified. Elements in this library depend on two quantities: the groupG and the
lattice point v . The G are provided by our classification. As can be seen fromIFigure 2
Subgroup Order Index
G 1,920 32
G 3,840 64
G 3,840 64
G 3,840 64
G 7,680 128
G 11,520 192
G 23,040 384
G 23,040 384
G 23,040 384
G =B 46,080 768
Table1: Classificationofthesubgroupsof B containingtheicosahedralgroup asasubgroup.
G11 G12 G10 G8
G9 G5 G6 G7
Figure 2: Graph of inclusions of the subgroups containing the icosahedral group embedded into
thehyperoctahedralgroup.
Figure 3: Projected orbit of the lattice point v= (0,0,1,1,2,1) under the groupG . Each layer in
theresultingnestedpointsetpossessesachiralicosahedralsymmetry.
and Table 1, the first group that gives icosahedral nested shells in projection isG . The index of
G with respect to H is 2, therefore the number of radial levels is at most 2. In order to obtain
deeperinformationaboutthegeometryofcapsids,moreradiallevelsarenecessary. Therefore,we
neglecttheorbitsofG andconsiderthesubgroupsG,fori= 4,...,13. Moreover,vischosenas
follows: since the 6D lattice is infinite, we introduce a cut-o ff parameter N >0 and consider all
latticepointswithinasix-dimensionalcube:
I6 : = [ N,N] ... [ N,N] = [ N,N]6 ,
containing (2N+ 1)6 lattice points. In particular, we consider all orbits of the groupsG within a
boundedareaaroundtheorigindefinedbyN.
Based on this set-up, the library of point arrays is obtained via the action of the groupG on
the set I6, for i= 4,...,13. This action is well-defined sinceG is a subgroup of the point group
ofthelattice,andthereforelatticepointsaremappedintolatticepointsunderelementsofG. Let
D (i) = v (i),...,v (i) be a set of distinct representatives for the orbits of G in I6. Since G G
N { 1 ki} i N 4 ⊆ i
for all i= 5,...,13, and thus their fundamental domains are contained in that of G , the set D (4)
contains the sets of representatives D (i) for the groupsG, i= 5,...,13, which are not necessarily
distinct. SincewedonothaveinformationonthegroupG apartfromitsgenerators,theset D
iscomputednumericallyaccordingtothefollowingprocedure:
1. Forv I6,compute (v);
2. among all v (v) identify vˆ with the largest number of positive components, choosing
atrandomiftwoormorepointsfulfilthisproperty;
3. addvˆ toD (4) andrepeatfromthestartuntilallv I6 havebeenconsidered.
In particular, D (4) thus obtained contains 47, 183 and 529 points for N = 2,3 and 4, respectively.
Withthissetup,thelibraryisgivenby
(cid:110) (cid:111)
4), j= 4,...,13 , (26)
whichbyconstructionconsistsofdistinctpointarrays.
Once the set (N) is computed for a chosen value of N, we retrieve the information of the
viral capsid in consideration from the VIPER data bank [37]. These PDB files contain structural
data of viral capsid, such as the coordinates of the atomic positions of the capsid proteins and in
many cases also of the packaged genome. Following [38], we represent the atomic positions of
the proteins by spheres of radius 1.9 Å in the visualisation tool PyMol. In order to compare the
point arrays with biological data, and hence find those point sets which best represent the capsid
features,weusethefollowingprocedure:
1. ForanygroupG ,wecomputewithGAPatransversalT(i)= (g (i),...,g (i) )fortheright
i ∈A ˆ 1 ni
cosetsof ˆ inG,whe I ren denotestheindexof inG.
2. Givenapointarrayπ ( (v)) (N),wecomputetheset
: j= 1,...,n
.
ThecardinalityofL(i)(v)isthenumberofdistinctradiallevelsinthepointsetπ ( (v)). We
denotebyR (i) (v): = max L(i)(v)thelargestradiallevelwhichcorrespondstotheoutermost
layerinthenesting. Thisisusedtoscalethepointsetsothatthecapsidiscontainedinthe
convexhulloftheprojectedorbit.
3. TherescaledorbitisthencomparedwiththedatainthePDBfile. Westartbyselectingthose
point arrays whose outermost layer best represents the outermost features of the capsid.
Specifically, we consider a coarse-grained representation of the capsid surface by locating
themostradiallydistalclustersofC atomsusingtheproceduredescribedby[38]. Denoting
theseclustersbyC ,k= 1,...,M,theC canbeapproximatedby M spheres B (r˜)ofradius
r˜(forthenumericalimplementation,wechosethecuto ffr˜ = 10Å). Foranyorbitπ ( (v)),
we isolate its external point layer L(out) by computing the points situated at distance R
(introduced above) from the origin. The orbit is then selected if, for every point x L(out),
thereexistsk 1,...,M suchthat x B (r˜).
4. Among the point sets thus selected, we determine those that best match the other capsid
features. For this, we isolate the inner radial levels using the decomposition of orbits into
cosets and compare them with the location of the genomic material and the inner capsid
surface. The cardinalities of the point arrays are not large enough to match with atomic
positions, but they rather map around material as in [9]; this comparison can be achieved
viavisualinspectionusingthesurfacerepresentationofthecapsidinPyMol.
Weconsiderheretwocasestudies: PariacotoVirusandBacteriophageMS2, bothT = 3cap-
sids in the Caspar-Klug classification. These were chosen in order to facilitate comparison with
[9],wherepointarraysderivedfroma neextensionsoftheicosahedralgroupwereusedtogener-
ateblueprintsforviralarchitecture,and[18],wherevirusarchitectureisapproximatedbylattices.
PariacotoVirus PariacotoVirus(PaV)isasingle-strandedRNAinsectvirus,whoseX-raycrys-
tal structure reveals approximately 35% of the RNA organised as a dodecahedral cage of duplex
RNA in proximity to the the inner capsid surface [5]. A characteristic feature of this capsid are
the 60 protrusions of approximately 15Å around the quasi three-fold axes, each formed by three
interdigitated subunits. These are the outermost capsid features that we will match to the largest
radial levels in the point arrays of our library in order to identify the best fit point array. For this
weperformedtheproceduredescribedabove,andfoundthatthebestfitforthiscapsidisgivenby
theprojectedorbitofthelatticepointvˆ = (2,1, 1, 1,0,0)underthegroupG (seeFigure6). This
pointsetconsistsof960points,arrangedinto8radiallevels. Theoutermostlevelisformedby60
pointswhichmapontothespikesatthe60localthree-foldaxes,seeFigure6(b). Thethirdradial
levelfromtheorigindescribestheorganisationoftheRNAinsidethecapsid. Thissetismadeup
Figure4: BlueprintsforthecapsidofPariacotoVirus(basedonpdbfile1f8v). (a)Cross-sectionof
thecapsidsuperimposedwiththeprojectedorbitofvˆ = (2,1, 1, 1,0,0)underthegroupG . The
pointsetconsistsof960pointssituatedat8distinctradiallevelswhichprovidesconstraintsonthe
capsid architecture. (b) Close-up view of the outermost layer of projected orbit, which encodes
thelocationsofthespikesaroundthequasi-threefoldaxes. (c)Thelayersbetweenthespikesand
the genomic material map around the inner surface of the capsid proteins. (d) The third farthest
layerfromtheorigingivesinformationonRNAorganisation: the120points,formingatruncated
icosidodecahedron,maparoundthedodecahedralRNAcage.
of120pointsformingatruncatedicosidodecahedron,whichmapsaroundthedodecahedralRNA
cage, see Figure 6 (d). The fifth radial level from the origin, located between the RNA and the
spikes,consistsof120points,organisedinto10and12clustersof6and5pointseach,whichare
locatedaroundthe3and5foldaxes,respectively. Inparticular,weshowinFigure6(c)aclose-up
view of the clusters with five-fold symmetry. Note that these points provide constraints on the
lengthsoftheproteinhelicesandthepositionsoftheproteinsubunitsoftypeC.
WepointoutthatG isthegroupofsmallestorderintheset thatprovidesablueprintfor
PaVthatcapturesthelocationofbothcapsidproteinsandtheRNAcIollectively. Theorbitofvˆun-
derG inprojection,whichbyconstructioniscontainedinπ ( (vˆ),mapsaroundthespikes,but
4 (cid:107)
totallylacksinformationontheorganisationofthegenomicmaterialinside. Moreover,alltheor-
bitsofvˆundertheG -containingG ,i.e. G andG ,aswellasB (cf. Figure2)coincidein
6 k ˆ 8 12 6
projection,implyingthattheycontainnoIadditionalinformationoncapsidarchitecture. HenceG
canbechosenasthesix-dimensionalsymmetrygroupthatinducesthethree-dimensionalstructure
ofthePaVcapsidinprojection.
BacteriophageMS2 LikePaV,MS2isasingle-strandedRNAvirus,withaT = 3capsid. Cryo-
electronmicroscopyrevealsadouble-shellstructureintheorganisationofthegenomicRNA[6],
and we will demonstrate here that our approach is able to capture this. With our procedure as
above, we found that the projected orbit of v˜ = (2,1,1, 1,0,1) under the group G is the point
set that provides the best blueprint for the capsid (see Figure 6). Specifically, this orbit contains
960 points, that are arranged, in projection, into 9 radial levels. The two outermost layers, L(9)
and L(8), maptotheexteriorofthecapsid: L(9) consistsof60points, arrangedinto12clustersof
5pointseach, positionedaroundthefive-foldsymmetryaxesofthecapsid, whereas L(8) hassize
120andismadeupof20clustersof6points,locatedaroundthethree-foldaxes. Thisisconsistent
withthequasi-equivalentstructureoftheT = 3capsid. Wepointoutthat L(8) and L(9) areinfact
almostsituatedatthesameradiallevel(theratiooftheirradiiis 1.064814),andcollectivelymap
aroundthecapsidexteriorasdemonstratedintheclose-upinFigure6(b).
All other points of the array are from a mathematical point of view related to these outmost
shells, and should therefore also map around material boundaries. We start by comparing the
point array with the icosahedrally averaged cryo-EM structure at 8Å resolution in [6]. As shown
in Figure 6 (a), the innermost radial levels of the point array define the interior of the inner RNA
shell. Moreover, there are points mapping around the outer and inner surfaces of the other shell.
There is a layer of points between the shells that at a first glance seems to float in space, but a
closeinspectionofthedatasetrevealsthattheyareinfactpositionedaroundtheRNAconnecting
the outer and inner shell, see also the close-up in Figure 6 (c). This icosahedrally averaged data
set has been obtained via a superposition of a large number of viral particles, aligned according
to their symmetry axes, in order to enhance the resolution. However, in any individual particle,
the RNA is organised in an asymmetric way, that is consistent with the icosahedrally averaged
density. Sinceourpointarraysarenotfullyconstrainingthestructure,butareprovidingblueprints
for the overall organisation of the virus, we expect the asymmetric organisation to be consistent
with our symmetric point arrays. In order to test this hypothesis, we compare our model with
the asymmetric RNA density of a cryo-EM tomogram at about 39 Å resolution ([39], [40]), see
Figure6. Sincethedensityisshowninacrosssectionalview,thedensityinthetwoshellscannot
beseeninfull. However,asexpected,thedensityisconsistentwiththeradiallevelsdefinedbythe
pointarrays,consistentwithourhypothesisthatthemathematicalmodelindeeddescribesmaterial
boundaries in this virus. Taken together, these results imply that the group G is the group of
smallest order in our classification that provides structural constraints on the capsid proteins and
the genome organisation of MS2, and is therefore the symmetry group in 6D that describes the
structureofthisvirusinprojection.
7 Conclusion
The method presented here is a new way of constructing finite nested point sets with non-
crystallographicsymmetryfromgrouptheoreticalprinciples. Itcomplementspreviousstudies,in
whichsuchpointsetswereconstructedviaa neextensionsofnon-crystallographicgroups. The
latter, being based on the theory of infinite dimensional Kac-Moody algebras, produced infinite
pointsets,andacuto parameterhadtobeintroducedinordertoobtainfinitestructures. Thisim-
pliesthatthepointsetsdonotcorrespondtoorbitsoffinitegroups. Themethoddevelopedinthis
paper,ontheotherhand,providesforthefirsttimeacharacterisationofnon-crystallographicfinite
multishellstructureswhichisentirelybasedonthetheoryoffinitegroupsinahigherdimensional
spacewhichadmitsacrystallographicembeddingofthenon-crystallographicsymmetry.
With application to viruses in mind, we discussed the case of icosahedral symmetry in detail
andprovidedaclassificationofallthesubgroupchainsofthehyperoctahedralgroupthatcontain
acrystallographicembeddingoftheicosahedralgroup. Weshowedthatthepointsetsinducedby
orbitsoflatticepointsundersuchgroupsviaprojectionintoathreedimensionalinvariantsubspace
provide a library of structural constraints on the structural organisation of viruses. In particular,
we presented two case studies, Pariacoto Virus and Bacteriophage MS2, both T = 3 viruses, and
showed that the corresponding constraint sets indicate material boundaries in these viruses. We
notethatalsopreviousapproachesprovidedgoodapproximationforthematerialboundaries([18],
[9], [21]); however, in contrast to these approaches, we approximate here virus architecture via
pointarraysthataregenericallyfinite,becausetheystemfromorbitsoffinitegroups. Asalready
Figure 5: The projected orbits of v˜ = (2,1,1, 1,0,1) under the groupG provides blueprints for
the capsid of Bacteriophage MS2 (based on pdb file 1aq3). (a) Cross section of the capsid: the
point set consists of 9 di erent radial levels which encode information on the position of capsid
proteins and the genomic material of the virus. (b) Close-up view of the outermost layers of the
projected orbit which map around the capsid proteins. (c) Close-up view of the RNA density.
The second and third innermost layers (in blue and green, respectively) map around the five-fold
symmetryaxesandconnectthetwoRNAshells.
Figure6: Acryo-tomogramofbacteriophageMS2, adaptedfrom[39], superimposedonthebest
fitpointarrayforbacteriophageMS2. Thetopofthefigureshowsaportionofthebacterialpilus,
thenaturalreceptorofthisvirus. Thesurfacerepresentationshowsboththecapsidontheexterior
and the genomic RNA. The inner and outer RNA shells follow the blueprints of the array points,
butrealiseitinanasymmetricwayasexpected.
pointedout,thepointsetsdisplayachiralicosahedralsymmetryateachradiallevel,andhencethey
areinvariantunderreflections,i.e. thenon-crystallographicCoxetergroupH . However,sincethe
point arrays only provide constraints on the structural organisation of a virus, but do not fully
determine its structure, this does not imply that the virus must have full H symmetry. Indeed,
as we have discussed above, viruses may realise the blueprints given by the point arrays in an
asymmetricway. Thiscanoccur, e.g., viaasymmetriccomponentsintheviralcapsidsuchasthe
onecopyofamaturationproteinthatisbelievedtoreplaceoneoftheproteindimersinthecapsid
shell of bacteriophage MS2 [39], or the way in which genomic material realises the polyhedral
genome organisation observed via cryo-EM. As an example for the latter, we discussed a cryo-
EMtomogramofthepackagedRNAofBacteriophageMS2. However,knowledgeofthepossible
blueprintsisimportant,asitcanbeused,incombinationwithothertechniques,intheanalysisof
low-resolutiondataofthegenomeorganisationinviruses[40].
Virusesareknowntoexhibiticosahedralsymmetryintheircapsidsduetotheprincipleofge-
neticeconomy: theuseofsymmetryinthecapsidorganisationenablesvirusestocodeforasmall
numberofdi erenttypesofbuildingblocks,thusminimizinggenomelength,whilstbuildingcon-
tainers with a maximal number of repeats (corresponding to the order of the symmetry group) of
thebasicbuildingblocks,thusachievingmaximalcontainervolume. Thehighlevelofsymmetry
that is observed at di erent radial levels, including genome organisation, may seem surprising.
However,thefactthattheinteractionsitesbetweengenomicRNAandcapsidproteinsareatsym-
metry related positions with reference to capsid architecture may provide an explanation for the
correlationbetweencapsidarchitectureandgenomeorganisationintermsoflocalinteractions.
Moreover, ouranalysisofthegrouptheoreticalunderpinningsofviralarchitecturehasimpli-
cations for our understanding of the dynamic properties of viruses. For example, it provides a
framework for the analysis of conformational changes in viral capsid, which are structural rear-
rangements of the capsid proteins that are important for larger classes of viruses to become in-
fective. Specifically,suchstructuraltransitionscanbemodeledwithacrystallographicapproach,
using a generalisation of the concept of Bain strain for multi-dimensional lattices [41] or in the
framework of the Ginzburg-Landau theory of phase transitions [28]. Our work opens up a new
avenueforadescriptionofsuchstructuraltransitionsintermsofHamiltoniansthatareformulated
in terms of the six-dimensional symmetry groups that induce the three-dimensional structures of
thevirusinprojection.
Moregenerally,previousmathematicalworkona neextensionsofnon-crystallographicsym-
metrieshasresultedinapplicationsbeyondtheareaofvirologyforwhichtheseconceptshadorig-
inallybeenintroduced. Forexample,theorganisationofdi erentfullereneshellsofcarbononions
has been modelled with previous approaches ([19], [42]), and we expect that our new approach
shouldberelevantinthiscontextaswell. Moreover,amathematicalformulationofsystemswith
non-crystallographic symmetries is a challenge in wider areas of physics, such as integrable sys-
tems, where models in terms of non-crystallographic root systems have been introduced ([43],
[44]); we expect that the use of projections of the higher dimensional symmetry groups, that
contain non-crystallographic symmetries as crystallographic embeddings, could provide a new
perspectivealsointhiscontext.
8 Appendix
In this Appendix we provide the generators of the subgroupsG, for i= 1,...,13, which con-
stitute the set (cf. Section 5). For the computations in GAP, it is convenient to work with
permutationinsteadofmatrixrepresentations. Inparticular,thehyperoctahedralgroupisisomor-
phictoasubgroupofthesymmetricgroupS . Webrieflyrecallthisresulthere;formoredetails,
wereferto[45].
Leta Z6andletπbeapermutationinthesymmetricgroupS . Theset (a,π):a Z6,π S
∈ 2 6 { ∈ 2 ∈ 6 }
isagroupunderthemultiplication
known as the wreath product of Z and S and denoted by Z S . It is isomorphic to B via the
functionT : Z S B givenby
(cid:111) →
, i,j= 1,...,6.
Thefunctionφ: Z S S givenby
(cid:111) →
is an injective homomorphism; the composition φ T 1 :B S can be used to map B into a
subgroupofS . Inparticular,thegeneratorsof B aregivenby
B (1,2)(7,8),(1,2,3,4,5,6)(7,8,9,10,11,12),(6,12) ,
(cid:39)(cid:104) (cid:105)
andfortherepresentation ˆ of wehave(cf. (22)):
I(cid:39)(cid:104) (cid:105)
Withtheseresults,Algorithm5.1wasimplementedinGAP.ThegeneratorsforthegroupsG,
fori= 2,...,12,arethefollowing:
G = (1,6)(2,5)(3,9)(4,10)(7,12)(8,11),(1,5,6)(2,9,4)(7,11,12)(3,10,8),
G = (3,11)(4,12)(5,9)(6,10),(2,3,5,4)(6,12)(8,9,11,10),(1,2)(3,5)(7,8)(9,11) ,
(cid:104) (cid:105)
G = (1,3)(2,8)(4,5,10,11)(7,9),(1,3,4,7,9,10)(2,5,12,8,11,6) ,
(cid:104) (cid:105)
G = (1,8,9,7,2,3)(4,6,5)(10,12,11),(1,2)(3,5)(7,8)(9,11),(4,10) ,
(cid:104) (cid:105)
G = (3,9)(6,12),(3,4,5,6)(9,10,11,12),(1,7)(6,12),(1,2,9,10,11,7,8,3,4,5)(6,12) ,
(cid:104) (cid:105)
G = (1,7)(6,12),(2,8)(6,12),(1,2,9,10,11,7,8,3,4,5)(6,12),(3,4,5,12,9,10,11,6) ,
(cid:104) (cid:105)
G = (1,8,9,7,2,3)(4,6,5)(10,12,11),(1,2)(3,5)(7,8)(9,11),(3,4,5,6)(9,10,11,12),(4,10) ,
(cid:104) (cid:105)
G = (2,8)(6,12),(1,7)(2,5,3)(6,12)(8,11,9),(1,3,7,9)(2,12,8,6),
(1,3,2,7,9,8)(4,5,12,10,11,6) ,
G = (1,2,6,4,3)(7,8,12,10,9),(5,11)(6,12),(1,2,6,5,3)(7,8,12,11,9),(5,12,11,6) ,
(cid:104) (cid:105)
G = (1,8,9,7,2,3),(1,7)(2,3,4)(8,9,10),(1,7)(2,3,5)(8,9,11),
(2,6,3,5,4)(8,12,9,11,10),(5,11) ,
G = (2,8)(6,12),(1,2,6,5,3)(7,8,12,11,9),(5,6)(11,12),(1,2,6,4,3)(7,8,12,10,9) .
(cid:104) (cid:105)
Acknowledgements. WethankBrionyThomas,EricC.Dykeman,JessicaWardmanandPierre-
Philippe Dechant for useful discussions, and Richard J. Bingham and James Geraets for helping
inthevisualisationofthecrosssectionsofthecapsids. MVthankstheYorkCentreforComplex
SystemsAnalysis(YCCSA)forfundingthesummerproject"TheArtofComplexity",wherepart
of the research for this work has been carried out. RT gratefully acknowledges a Royal Society
LeverhulmeTrustSeniorResearchfellowship(LT130088).