]hp-cos.scisyhp[
2v2703.8090:viXra
Other-regarding preferences and altruistic punishment:
A Darwinian perspective
Moritz Hetzer1 and Didier Sornette1,2
1Chair of Entrepreneurial Risks, Department of Management,
Technology and Economics, ETH-Zurich, CH-8032 Zurich, Switzerland
2Swiss Finance Institute, c/o University of Geneva,
40 blvd. Du Pont dArve CH 1211 Geneva 4, Switzerland
(Dated: September4, 2009)
This article examinestheeffect of different other-regarding preference typeson theemergence of
altruistic punishment behavior from an evolutionary perspective. Our findings corroborate, com-
plement, and interlink the experimental and theoretical literature that has shown the importance
of other-regarding behavior in various decision settings. We find that a selfish variant of inequity
aversion is sufficient to quantitatively explain the level of punishment observed in contemporary
experiments: If disadvantageous inequity aversion is the predominant preference type, altruistic
punishment emerges in our model to a level that precisely matches theempirical observations. We
useanewapproachthatcloselycombinesempiricalresultsfromapublicgoodsexperimenttogether
withanevolutionarysimulation model. Herebyweapplyideasfrombehavioraleconomics,complex
system science, and evolutionary biology.
The convergence of individual behaviors to common traits found in different human cultures may result from
norms and the punishment of norm violators is an of- different evolutionary trajectories as well as distinct rel-
ten observed pattern in groups of animals and human ative influence of the cultural versus genetic heritages
societies [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]. From small cliques, to the so- [8, 25, 26]. A composite picture is emerging, according
cial order in groups and tribes, all the way to the le- towhichtheperceptionoffairness,thereactiontounfair
galframeworks of countries,punishment is a widespread behavior and the individual’s response to its social envi-
mechanism underlying the formation of common norms ronment in general, are encoded both in cultural norms
[6, 7, 8]. In particular, altruistic punishment, i.e., the and in genes [27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33].
punishment of norm violators at one’s own cost without Cultural norms and genes appear to be subjected to
personal benefit, is frequent in social dilemmas and is complex coevolutionary processes occurring over a spec-
oftenusedto explainthe highlevelof cooperationin hu- trum of different time scales. Cultural evolution is
mans[8,9,10,11,12]. Withinstandardeconomictheory, shaped by biological conditions, while, simultaneously,
which relies on rationalselfishness and the dominance of genes are altered in response to the evolutionary forces
self-regardingpreferences,suchbehaviorsarepuzzling,if induced by the cultural context. The co-evolutionary
not disrupting. This observation calls for the identifica- dynamics and inter-dependencies of genes and cultural
tionofthegenerativemechanism(s)underlyingaltruistic norms constitutes our starting point to understand the
punishment and how its occurrence may be context de- properties of social preferences revealed in experimental
pendent. economics, field studies and, of course, in real life.
Laboratory experiments and field studies suggest Experiments on public goods and social dilemma
thategalitarianmotivesandother-regardingpreferences, games provide convenient tools to study social prefer-
which relate a person’s decision to her social environ- ences in well-defined scenarios under controlled condi-
ment, haveasignificantinfluence in socialdilemmas and tions. In particular when designed with the opportunity
in bargaining [13, 14, 15, 16]. Several extensions of topunishothersubjectsatowncosts,altruisticbehavior
the standard economic approach provide descriptions of is manifested [9, 10, 35, 36, 37]. In these experiments,
other-regarding preferences by postulating new terms in one canstudy indetails whatcontrolsthe predisposition
utility functions to account for relative income prefer- ofhumanstobearthecostsassociatedwithpunishments
ences,envy,inequalityaversionandaltruism[17,18,19]. of free riders, and how it may improve the welfare of
While these approaches are based on plausible assump- the group. Even in one-shot interactions in public good
tions, their evolutionary validation remains vague and gamesforwhichreputationandreciprocaleffectsareab-
their quantitative coherence with empirical data unveri- sent, punishment, which is costly to the punisher and
fied. thus in contradiction with rational choice theory, is fre-
There is growing evidence from a variety of studies quently observed [9, 10, 38].
thatpro-socialpreferenceshaveemergedinhominidsover Here we develop computer simulations of synthetic
hundreds and thousands of years, with deep roots go- agents within an agent-based model (ABM), that de-
ing further back as evidencedfrom recentstudies onpri- scribes the long-term co-evolution of norms and genes
mates [20, 21, 22, 23, 24]. The diversity of behavioral in populations being exposed to a typical public goods
dilemma. Our work can be viewed as an extension of interest, since it is rationally optimal not to cooperate,
the literature on ABM approaches to the evolution of while the group is better off if each member cooperates.
cooperation [39, 40]. Specifically, we set our ABM to Hence one canconsider the subjects’ investment as their
compare with the results of two public goods game ex- level of cooperation.
periments conducted by Fehr and Gachter [9, 10]. Our In a second extended run, subjects were additionally
modeling strategy is to see the empirical observations provided with the opportunity to punish other group
in Fehr and Gachter’s experiments as a snapshot within members,aftertheyhavereceivedtheprojectreturnand
a long-term evolutionary dynamic. Our ABM mimics have been informed about the individual contributions.
the norm-gene co-evolution that has occurred over hun- Theuseofpunishmentwasassociatedwithcostsforboth
dreds and thousands of years. We calibrate our model parties, in which each MU spent by a punisher led to
bymeansofempiricaldata,toquantitativelyidentifythe r = 3 MUs taken from the punished subject [10]2. The
underlying preference types that drive the observedcon- fact that punishment is costly and that the cost to the
temporary behavior in the corresponding dilemmas. In punished one is larger (r >1) are important properties
doing so, our goal is to determine the conditions under oftheexperimentaldesign,whicharethoughttocapture
which agents develop spontaneously a propensity to “al- schematicallymanyreallifesituations. Versionswithand
truistically”punish,startingfromaninitialpopulationof withoutpunishmentwereplayedbothinapartnertreat-
uncooperative non-punishers. Here, we specifically look ment, in which the group composition did not change
into a set of common assumptions made by economists acrossperiods,andina strangertreatment. Inthe later,
to account for altruistic punishment behavior within the subjects were reassigned to new groups at each period
frameworkofutility theory: Other-regardingpreferences andthuswereonlyengagedinone-shotinteractionsdur-
in form of inequality and inequity aversion. ing the entire runtime of the experiment. In total, the
Initialized by variants of these other-regarding pref- experiments were played for T = 10 [9] and T = 6 pe-
erences, the traits of our agents converge to statistically riods [10] respectively3.
stabledistributionsafterlongtransients,whicharetaken The data from Fehr and Gaechter as well as from sev-
todescribethepresent-daycharacteristicsofmodernhu- eralotherpublicgoodsexperiments[35,36,37]showthat
mans. In other words, the experiments of Fehr and people,ifprovidedtheopportunity,frequentlypunishde-
Gachter [9, 10] are interpreted as sampling the statis- fectors,evenifthis iscostlytothemselves. Inthe caseof
tically stationary characteristics of a cultural group of repeated interactions, as in the partner treatment, such
subjects1 which have evolved over a long time horizon. behavior can be explained in a standard way as result-
Their response to specific social dilemma situations are ing from a strategic optimization performed by rational
thenrevealedthroughthe present-dayexperiments. One selfish agents, who select the “direct reciprocity” mech-
should, however,keepin mind that other patterns ofbe- anism for cooperation. What is more surprising is that
haviorsmayhaveemergedunderdifferentnormsandge- strangerscontinuetopunishatacosttothemselveseven
netic endowments. in one-shot interactions for which there is no positive
material gain, even in absence of mechanisms associated
with direct, indirect reciprocityand reputation building.
EMPIRICAL MOTIVATION Thisbehaviorisreferredtoas“altruisticpunishment”to
emphasize the conflict with the behavior expected from
purely rational agents. The question we address here is
The design of our ABM is inspired by the two public
whyhumansbehaveinawaythatstrictlycontradictsra-
goodsgameexperimentsconductedbyFehrandGachter
tionalchoice,i.e., they continueto cooperateandpunish
[9, 10]. In these experiments, subjects are arranged in
at a cost to themselves.
groups of n = 4 persons. At the beginning of each pe-
riod, subjects received an initial endowment of 20 mon-
etary units (MUs). Thereafter, subjects could invest
m ∈ [0,20] MUs to a common group project, which re- THE AGENT-BASED MODEL
turned g = 1.6 MUs for each invested MU. The total
return from the project was then equally split and re-
Weextendthesetupofthealtruisticpunishmentgame
distributed to all group members. Thus, the marginal
of Fehr and Gachter [10] to construct an ABM of a pop-
return per capita was g /n = 0.4. As long as g /n < 1,
1 1 ulation of agents who play a public goods game with
the game has a vivid socialdilemma component and the
setup is susceptible to defection through material self-
2 In [9] the punisher paid approximately 2 MUs to take an addi-
tional10%fromthepunishedsubject’speriodprofit.
1 HereundergraduatestudentsfromtheFederalInstituteofTech- 3 Toavoidthelastroundeffect,weconsideronlydatafromperiods
nology(ETH)andtheUniversityofZurich 1−9and1−5,respectively.
punishment, while adapting and evolving over long peri- 4. Adaptation. Given her profit or loss (P&L) de-
ods according to generic evolutionary dynamics. On the finedbyequation5,whichresultsfromtheproject
short time scales of Fehr and Gachter’s experiments, the returnminushercontributionandminusthecostof
traits of the human players probed by the games can be punishments, an agent may adapt her cooperation
considered fixed for each player. In contrast, our evolu- level m (t) and her propensity to punish k (t).
tionary ABM aims at determining which superordinate
5. Evolution. An agentwhose capital drops below 0
regime of other-regarding preferences have led our an-
dies and is replaced by another agent whose traits
cestorstodeveloptraitspromotingaltruisticpunishment
are inherited from the pool of survival agents with
behavior. Thesetraitsmightagainbeencodedinthecul-
some additional mutation.
tural context, in genes, or both. Thus, we let the traits
evolve over time according to standard evolutionary dy- These five steps are now described in details.
namics: Adaptation, selection, crossover and mutation.
In order to capture the possible evolution of the popula-
Cooperation step
tion, agents adapt and die when unfit. Newborn agents
replace the dead ones, with traits taken from the pool
of the other surviving agents. Starting from an initial As denoted before, the first trait of a given agent is
population of agents with no cooperation and with no her intrinsic willingness to cooperate denoted by m i (t).
propensity to punish others, we will find the emergence At each period t, the agent i contributes m i (t) MUs to
of long-term stationary populations whose traits are in- the group project. As in the lab experiment of Fehr and
terpretedtorepresentthoseprobedbycontemporaryex- Gachter, each MU invested in the group project returns
periments, such as those of Fehr and Gachter. g 1 =1.6MUstothegroup. Eachagentreceivesthesame
The results presented below correspond to groups of return
n = 4 agents as in the Fehr and Gachter’s experiments. n
At the beginning of the simulation (time t = 0), each 1 j
agentisendowedwithw i (0)=0MUs4,whichrepresents X j=1
its (humanandmaterial)capital. Eachagent(i)is char- from the group project, resulting in a first-step profit or
acterized by two traits [m (t) : k (t)], her level of coop- loss of
eration and her propensity to punish, that are subjected n
to evolutionary forces. s (t)=r(t)−m (t)=(g /n)· m (t) − m (t) , (2)
for a given agent i equal to the difference between the
ABM algorithm
project return and its contribution in period t.
A given simulation period t is decomposed into five
sub-periods with the following chronology. Punishment step
1. Cooperation. Eachagentichoosesanamountto Punishments in our ABM follow the same design as
contribute to the group project referred to as her in the experiments of Fehr and Gachter [9, 10]. To
level of cooperation. Combining all the contribu- choosethe agents’decisionrules on when andhow much
tionsbyallgroupmembersandsplittingitequally, to punish, we are guided by figure 1 which shows the
this leads to a return per agent given by equation mean expenditure of a given punisher as a function of
(1). thedeviationbetweenhercontributionminusthatofthe
punished individual, as reported empirically [10]. One
2. Punishment. Given the returns from the project
canobserveanapproximateproportionalitybetween the
and the agents’ cooperation levels which are re-
amountspentforpunishing the lessercontributingagent
vealed to all, each agent may choose to punish the
by the greater contributing agent and the pairwise dif-
otheragentsaccordingto the rule defined byequa-
ference m (t)−m (t) of their contributions. The figure
tion (3).
includes data from both the partner and the stranger
treatments in the two sets of experiments [9, 10]. In our
3. Consumption. Each agent consumes the amount
ABM, this linear dependence, with threshold, is chosen
defined by equation (4).
to represent how an agent i decides to punish another
agent j by spending an amount given by
4 Onlythetransientbehaviorissensitivetothechoiceofthisinitial p i→j (t)=
wealthwhilethelong-termresultsareindependentofthisinitial
(0 otherwise.
value. (3)
of average group wealth (w¯(t)) over the last period:
The proportionality between consumption and income
captures the evidence that, for modern societies, con-
sumption is indeed roughly proportional to income, at
least for 99% of the population that exclude the super-
wealthy [41, 42]. In primitive societies, larger human
and material capital led also to larger consumption in
the form of producing more offsprings5. The form of
consumption (eq. 4) is intended to capture the survival
needsandselectionpressurethataredeterminedrelative
to the social group.
Wealth balance
The total P&L sˆ(t) of an agent i over one period of
FIG. 1: Mean expenditure of a given punishing member as i
herlifeisthusthe sumofthreecomponents: (i)Herfirst
a function of the deviation between her contribution minus
stepP&Ls (t)fromthegroupproject(equation(2)),(ii)
that of the punished member, for all pairs of subjects within i
agroup,asreportedempirically [10]. Thestraight linecross- theMUs j6=i p i→j (t)spenttopunishothersand(iii)the
ing zero shows the average decision rule for punishment that punishmentsr p (t)receivedfromothers,where
our agents spontaneously evolve to at long times. Its slope p (t) a P nd p p (t j ) 6=i are j→ g i iven by (3):
−k ≈ −0.2 defines the average propensity k to punish (see P
the main text). The anomalous punishment of cooperators,
correspondingtothepositiverangealongthehorizontalaxis, i i i→j p j→i
is neglected in our model. X j6=i X j6=i
Equation 5 represents the second step P&L of agent i in
period t. Putting this all together, the wealth (fitness)
The coefficient k (t), which represents the propensity
i of agent i thus increases or decreases at each period t
topunish,isthesecondtraitthatcharacterizesagentiat
according to
time t. It is not fixed to the averagevalue k ≈0.2 found
in the experiments. It is allowed to vary from agent to w (t+1)=w (t)+sˆ(t)−c(t) . (6)
agentanditevolvesasafunctionofthesuccessesandfail-
ures experienced by each agent, as explained below. In
addition to being motivated by the data shown in figure Adaptation Dynamics
1, the punishment rule (3) can be thought of as a mini-
malist description of proportional response to defection. The traits [m (t);k (t)] characterizing each agent i at
We will see that, given certain fairness preferences are a given time t evolve with time according to standard
activated, evolution makes the punishment propensities evolutionary dynamics: Adaptation, selection, crossover
k i (t) self-organize towards a distribution closely resem- and mutation. As has been argued (e.g. by Arthur [43]
bling the empirical data. orHolland[44]),humans(andourancestors)arelikelyto
As a result of being punished the wealth of the pun- use inductive reasoningto make decisions. In particular,
ished agent j is reduced by the amount spend by agent thismeansthathumanstendtoreplaceworkinghypothe-
i multiplied by the punishment impact factor r p . As in ses with new ones when the old ones cease to work. We
Fehr and Gachter’s second experiment, we fix the pun- adopt this bounded rational approach to define adapta-
ishment impact factor to r p =3. tion rules determining the propensity to punish and the
level of cooperations chosen by agents.
Adaptation of the propensity to punish. To identify
Consumption step which type of preference norm drive the evolution of
Consumption is introduced as a realistic driving force
to select for successful agents and remove unfit ones. At
5 While we account for this larger proportional consumption, we
each period, consumption absorbs an amount c(t) of the
do not include a population dynamics, as our model assumes
capital of each agent. The amount is assumed to be de- a constant group size n, with each death being followed by a
terminedby thesocialcontext,specificallyasthe change correspondingbirth.
the trait k (t) associated with the propensity to pun- same time, has received a total P&L sˆ(t) defined
ish to a level, that is observed in the experiments, we in (5) larger than or equal to the group average
test a distinct set of adaption rules. Each adaption rule (sˆ(t) ≥ s¯(t)), where the average s¯(t) is performed
corresponds to a specific subset of other-regarding pref- over the other group members)...
erence relations. Here, we specifically focus on differ-
(downside inequity) ...or she has contributed more
ent variants of inequality and inequity aversion prefer-
thanorequallytohergroupfellows(m (t)≥m¯(t))
ences and therefore consider the five following types of
and,atthesametime,hasreceivedatotalP&Lless
agents: (A) self-regarding, (B) inequality averse, (C) in-
than or equal to the group average(sˆ(t)≤s¯(t)).
equity averse,(D) disadvantageousinequality averseand
(E) disadvantageous inequity averse. Here “disadvanta- D: disadvantageous inequality averse agents: In
geous”indicatesthatagentsareonlyinequality/inequity thisuniverse,agentsonlydislikesituationsinwhich
averse if the inequality/inequity plays to their disadvan- the inequality is to their’s disadvantage:
tage, whereas pure inequality or inequity avers agents
(downside inequality) An agent i updates her
dislike both, situations in which they have been discrim-
propensitytopunishonlyifherP&Lsˆ(t)givenby
inated as well as situations in which they discriminated i
(5) is smaller than the average P&L of the other
others.
members of her group, i.e. (sˆ(t) < s¯(t)). When
In each given simulation, we use only homogeneous i
this occurs for an agent i, she updates her k (t)
populations, that is, we group only agents of the same i
according to equation (7).
type.
E: disadvantageousinequityaverseagents: Like-
A: self-regarding agents: In this universe,anagent
wise to setup (C), agents set their P&L in relation
updates her propensity to punish only if her P&L
totheircontributions,howevertheyonlydislikesit-
sˆ(t) given by (5) obtained on the previous invest-
i uationinwhichtheinequityisdetrimentaltothem.
ment period turns out to be smaller than her re-
(downside inequity) If an agent i has contributed
quired consumption c(t). The update consists in
an unbiased random increment according to6 equally or more than her fellows in the group
(m (t)≥m¯(t)) and,atthe sametime, hasreceived
k i (t+1)=k i (t)+κ [−0.005,0.005] , (7) a total P&L sˆ i (t) defined in (5) smaller than or
equal to the group average (sˆ(t)≤ s¯(t)), then she
whereκ is a uniformly distributedrandomnumber updates her propensity to punish according to eq.
drawnfrom the interval indicated in the subscript. (7).
Onlydrawsofκ’sthatensurepositivenessofk (t+
1) are allowed. Adaptation of the cooperation level. Following the
proverb“necessityis the motherofallinvention,”agents
B: inequality averse agents: In this universe, an adapt their cooperationlevel m (t) under adverse condi-
agentiupdatesherpropensitytopunishifherP&L tions, i.e., when their P&L in the last investment round
sˆ i (t) given by (5) is not within a specific tolerance is smaller than the required consumption c(t). When
range[−l,+l]aroundtheaverageP&Loftheother this adverse situation occurs, an agent randomly up-
members of her group, i.e. if (sˆ i (t) < s¯(t) − l) dates her contribution according to m i (t+1)=m i (t)+
or (sˆ i (t) > s¯(t) + l). When this occurs agent i ǫ [−0.005,0.005] ,whereǫisarandomnumberuniformlydis-
updatesherk i (t)accordingtoequation(7). Werun tributedintheintervalindicatedinthesubscript.7 Since
multiple simulations initialized by different values contributionsarenon-negative,only those drawsofǫ are
for l as presented in the results section. kept that ensure the positiveness of m (t+1).
C: inequity averse agents: In this universe, agents
settheirP&Linrelationtotheircontributions: An
Replicator Dynamics: Selection, crossover and
agentiupdates herpropensitytopunishaccording mutation
to eq. (7), if...
(upside inequity) ...shehascontributedlessthanor In addition to the adaptation of the agents’ traits
equally to her group fellows (m (t)≤m¯(t)), where [m (t);k (t)]describedabove,evolutionoccursbyreplac-
the average m¯(t) is performed over the contribu- ing under-performing agents. When an agent’s wealth
tionsoftheothermembersofhergroupand,atthe w (t) drops below zero,the agentdies and is replacedby
6 Ourresultsarerobusttochangesofthewidthoftheinterval,as 7 Ourresultsarerobusttochangesofthewidthofthisintervalas
longasitremainssymmetricaroundzero. longasitremainssymmetrical.
a new one with different traits [m (t+1),k (t+1)], de- In contrast, for agents endowed with inequality or in-
termined by those of the surviving agents of the group. equity aversion (adaptation rules B to E), stationary
The following variants give essentially the same results. statesofthe propensityto punishemergespontaneously,
each with different characteristics. For all adaptation
• To capture the phenomenon that norms and genes
rules (B to E) it holds, that altruistic punishment has
are inherited from the pool of existing agents, a
emerged endogenously as an evolutionary stable trait in
first variant assumes that the new agent has her
the competitive resource-limited world described by our
traits simply equal to the average of those of the
model. The responsible key ingredients are the variants
surviving agents.
of other-regarding preferences (B,C,D or E). It should
• A second variant consists in assuming a noisy in- be stressed that a symmetric (upside and downside) in-
heritance of the average traits of the group mem- equity/inequalityaversionisnotneededasaconditionto
bers. Specifically,thenewagenthastraitsequalto let altruistic punishment emerge. The selfish disadvan-
the average of those of the surviving agents plus a tageousinequality or inequity aversion(dynamics D and
noise proportionalto the standarddeviationof the E) is sufficient.
surviving agents’ traits. We now turn to a quantitative characterization of the
properties of the altruistic cooperators that evolved in
• A third variant first determines clusters among ourABM.Figure2comparesthestationarydistributions
the agents, including the newborn, using a stan- of the propensities to punish obtained with our ABM at
dardclusteringalgorithmonthe vectorsofthe two long times for the four adaptation dynamics (B to E)
traits. The existence of several clusters is taken with that obtained in Fehr and Gachter’s experiment9.
to account for the possible emergence of heteroge- Thepropensitiestopunishintheexperimentaldatahave
neous sets of norms within the group. Then, the beeninferredasfollows: Knowingthecontributionsm >
newborn takes the average traits of the agents in m of two subjects i and j and the punishment level
her cluster, decorated by an additional mutation p of subject i on subject j, the propensity to punish
implemented by adding a random number to each characterizing subject i is determined by
trait proportional to the standard deviation of the
surviving agents’ traits. i→j
k =− . (8)
THE EMERGENCE OF ALTRUISTIC Applying this recipe to all pairs of subjects in a given
PUNISHMENT group,weobtaintwelvemeasuresofpropensitiestopun-
ishpergroup. Wethentaketheaverageoverthesetwelve
We haverunourABMwith thousandsof independent values to obtain a single robust estimation associated
groups of n = 4 agents over one million simulation pe- with a given group. Sampling all groups and allperiods,
riods t. The agents have a double peak distribution of we obtain the distribution shown in figure 2 (continuous
lifetimes, with a mean of the order of 1.7·104 periods thick line (emp)).
and a median of the order of 1.5 · 104 periods8. This Figure2suggeststhattheadaptationdynamicsE(dis-
expresses that, while many agents die at an early age, advantageousinequityaverseagents)istheonlyoneable
also many survive beyond their “childhood”, enabling tofittheempiricaldistribution. Indeed,theKolmogorov-
them to adapt their traits. Each run thus corresponds Smirnovtestcannotrejectthe hypothesisthatthe k val-
to several hundreds of generations. Each simulation has uesevolvedinourABMworldfortheadaptationdynam-
beeninitialized withallagentsbeing uncooperativenon- ics E and the empirical values are drawn from the same
punishers, i.e., k (0) = 0 and m (0) = 0 for all i’s. Af- distribution at the 80% confidence level (p-value ≃ 0.2).
ter a long transient, we observe that the distribution In contrast, the other adaptation dynamics A to D are
of propensities to punish converges to different station- strongly rejected (p-value = 0). Given the simplicity of
ary functions depending on which adaptation dynamics our ABM and of its underlying assumptions, it is strik-
(A,B,C,D or E) for k is active. ing to find such detailed quantitative agreement for one
In the following we give a qualitative analysis of of our dynamics.
our simulation results. Selfish agents adapting their For selfish agents (dynamics A), we found that the
propensity to punish according to dynamics (A) remain weak level of punishment that evolved in the ABM is
weak punishers, and no significant “altruistic punish- entirely controlled by selection pressure, and thus the
ment” is observed as shown in the inset of figure 2. presenceofconsumption. Inparticular,intheabsenceof
any selection pressure, the level of altruistic punishment
8 These lifetimes correspond to a population of disadvantageous
inequityaversagents (E) 9 Weusedthedatafromthe[9,10]strangertreatments.
equityaversioninthepresenceofsimpleinductivestrate-
gies,leadingto self-sustainedco-evolvingtraits madero-
bust by reinforcing feedbacks.
Thedistributionofpropensitiesk topunishexhibitsa
mode around k =0.2, which means that most punishers
spendanamountapproximatelyequaltoone-fifth ofthe
experienced differences in contributions. Note that the
value of the mode around k =0.2 is close to the slope of
the straight line fitting the empirical data shown in fig-
ure 1 providing another confirmation of the explanatory
power of our ABM. This most probable value k = 0.2
has also been obtained analytically by assuming an evo-
lutionaryoptimizationoftheexpectedgainswithrespect
to potential future losses due to punishment [34].
THE EFFECT OF THE PROPENSITY TO
PUNISH ON COOPERATION
FIG. 2: Distributions of propensities to punish in Fehr and
Gachter’s experiments (emp) and in our ABM at long times We nowdemonstrate withourmodelthat punishment
under the five different adaptation dynamics (A to E) under is a key stabilization mechanism for sustaining coopera-
800 system realizations. The inset shows the smoothed dis- tion. For this, we need some destabilizing process that
tribution for the self-regarding agent population (adaptation
tends to destroy cooperation in the absence of punish-
dynamics A), while the main frame plots the smoothed dis-
ment. The experiments of Fehr and Gachter suggest
tributions obtained by the adaptation rules B to E as well
such a mechanism. A detailed analysis of the period-
as for the empirical data (emp). All distributions has been
smoothed by a standard kernel method. (emp): Distribution by-period decision outcomes made by human subjects
estimatedfromFehrandGachter’sexperimentsusingthepro- showsevidenceofshort-termpersistenceintheirupdates
cedureexplainedinthetext;theotherdistributionestimates of cooperation levels: Previous changes m (t − 2) →
correspond to the adaptation dynamic A to E. For adapta- m (t−1) of contributions that led to larger return from
tion dynamic (B) the plot shows the obtained distributions
the project (s (t−1)>s (t−2)) are followed by subse-
for all tolerance range parameters l∈0.1;0.075;0.05;0.025;0 i i
quent updates m (t−1) → m (t), with the same trend:
(from themode close to theorigin (l=0.1) to the mode far- i i
thest (l = 0). The parameters of our ABM simulations are: i i i i
n=4,g1 =1.6,r p =3. to this behavior as using a “trend-following strategy.”
When we add the trend-following strategy to our 4-
step algorithm as described above but, in the absence of
punishment(allk’sareimposedequalto0),wefindthat
drops to zero. In all other cases, it remains too small to cooperation that was maintained previously in the pres-
explain the empirical results of Fehr and Gachter. For ence of punishment decays after a few thousand periods
the inequality averse population (B) it become obvious, as shown in figure 3. In contrast, if punishment is re-
that within a symmetric variationof the tolerance range storedinthepresenceofthedestabilizingtrend-following
parameter l the empirical distribution can not be repro- strategy, cooperation remains stable. Note also that the
duces: Figure 2 shows the resulting distributions for the emergenceofthestabledistributionofpropensitytopun-
tested values l ∈[0;0.025;0.05;0.075;0.1]as thin dashed ish reported in figure 2 is robust to the addition of the
lines, with l = 0.1 corresponding to the mode close to trend-following strategies used by the agents.
the origingoingstepwisetol =0withthe mode farthest Figure 4 shows the average level of cooperation in a
from the origin. For inequity avers agents (dynamics C) group of 4 agents after a transient period of 20,000 sim-
and disadvantageous inequality averse agents (dynamics ulation periods for 800 system realizations as a function
D), we find levels of altruistic punishments that far ex- of the propensity k to punish, when the level of cooper-
ceed the empirical evidence. Our quantitative compar- ation for all agents is initially drawn from a uniformly
ison with Fehr and Gachter’s experiments supports the distributed random variable in {49,51}. It reveals that
hypothesisthathumansubjectsarewell-describedasbe- thelevelofcooperationundergoesabifurcationfromzero
ing disadvantageous inequity averse, corroborating and to significant levels of cooperation, for a value of k close
complementing previous evidence [17, 18, 19]. The re- to the mode of the empirical distribution of the propen-
sults obtained with our ABM simulations suggest that sities to punish. This suggests that evolution may have
the co-evolutionofnormsandgenespromotingaltruistic selected an “optimal” propensity to punish altruistically
punishment havebeen influencedby disadvantageousin- defectors in order to sustain cooperation.
FIG. 5: Average punishmentspent to punish defectors for a
groupof4agentsasafunctionofk afteranequilibriumtime
FIG. 3: Average group contribution for a group of 4 agents
of 20000 simulation periods and 800 system realizations. k is
withpunishment(k=0.2-continuousline)andwithout(k=
fixedto thecorresponding valueon thex-axisand theinitial
0-dashedline)over20,000simulationperiodsand16system
contribution m i(0) in period 0 for all agents i of a group is
realizations. The initial contribution m i(0) for all agents i
randomly drawn form a uniform distribution in {49,51}.
of a group is randomly drawn form a uniform distribution in
{49,51}.
formity, respectively. This responsive behavior has been
manifested in many empirical observations [46, 47].
Given, that disadvantageous inequity aversion is the
dominantpreferencetype, cooperationandnormconfor-
mity can be maintained at lower costs if the propensity
to punish, i.e. the level of deterrence, exceeds the tip-
ping point of k at ≃ 0.2. This again substantiates, that
evolution may have selected an “optimal” propensity to
punish to sustain cooperation and prevent defection in
contexts where people behave disadvantageous inequity
averse. Comparableresultshavebeenobtainusing adif-
ferent simulation model as has been reported in [45].
FIG. 4: Average group contribution for a group of 4 agents CONCLUSION
as a function of k after an equilibrium time of 20000 simu-
lation periods and 800 system realizations. k is fixed to the
Our first principal result is that a high level of altru-
correspondingvalueonthex-axisandtheinitialcontribution
istic punishment behavior emerges spontaneously from
m i(0) for all agents i of a group is randomly drawn form a
a population of agents who are initially uncooperative
uniform distribution in {49,51}.
andnon-punishers. Wehaveshownhowthisresultsfrom
evolution with adaptation, selection, crossover and mu-
tation, in a population of agents endowed with different
To corroborate this hypothesis, figure 5 plots the av- variantsofinequalityorinequityaversion. Westressthat
erage amount of MUs spent to punish a defector during our use of the terms “inequality” or “inequity aversion”
10000 simulation periods for 3200 system realizations as does not mean that a new term is added in the agents’
afunctionofthe propensityto punishk. As inthe setup utility function that controls their decisions; in contrast,
of figure 4, the level of cooperation m (t) for all agents we only assume that agents may punish as a reaction to
is initialized at period t = 0 by a random variable uni- differences in observed contributions to a group project.
formly distributed in {49,50}. We now consider the in- Thus,akeyingredientisthepossibilityforagentstopun-
trinsic propensity to punish k as the potential exposure ish, at a cost to themselves, and that the punishment be
of defectors to being punished. The results show clearly, efficient(inthesenser >1). Asaconsequenceoftheco-
that a higher deterrence, i.e. a higher value of k, effec- evolutionoftraitscharacterizingagents’cooperationand
tively causes less exertion of costly punishment in order punishment, we obtain the emergence of altruistic pun-
to maintaina certainlevelofcooperationandnormcon- ishment behavior. A fully symmetric (upside and down-
side)inequity/inequalityaversionisnotneededtoobtain procity, human cooperation, and the enforcement of so-
ourresults,withtheselfishdisadvantageousinequalityor cial norms. Human Nature 13:1–25.
inequity aversionbeing sufficient. [7] Fehr,E,Fischbacher,U (2004) Socialnormsandhuman
cooperation. Trends Cogn Sci 8:185–190.
Our second main result is the identification of disad-
[8] Henrich,Jetal. (2006)Costlypunishmentacrosshuman
vantageousinequityaversionasthe mostrelevantunder-
societies. Science 312:1767–1770.
lyingmechanismtoexplaintheemergenceandthedegree
[9] Fehr,E,Gachter,S (2000) Cooperation andpunishment
of altruistic punishment observed in public goods exper- in public goods experiments. The American Economic
iments. This result has been obtained by combining em- Review 90:980–994.
piricaldatawith anevolutionaryagent-basedsimulation [10] Fehr, E, Gachter, S (2002) Altruistic punishment in hu-
model in an innovative way. Our ABM is able to repro- mans. Nature 415:137–140.
[11] Rockenbach,B,Milinski, M (2006) Theefficientinterac-
duce quantitatively, without adjustable parameters, the
tionofindirectreciprocityandcostlypunishment.Nature
experimental results concerning the most likely levels of
444:718–723.
punishment behavior, as well as their full distribution.
[12] Herrmann, B, Thoni, C, Gachter, S (2008) Antisocial
Thisresultisofparticularimportancetosubstantiatethe punishment across societies. Science 319:1362–1367.
assumptionsmade by economistsinorderto describere- [13] Fehr, E, Fischbacher, U (2002) Why social preferences
alistic behavior within the framework of rational choice: matter - the impact of non-selfish motives on competi-
Humans exhibit other-regarding, and in particular, dis- tion, cooperation and incentives. The Economic Journal
112:C1–C33.
advantageous inequity aversionpreferences in their deci-
[14] Fowler, JH, Johnson, T, Smirnov, O (2005) Human be-
sion process.
haviour: Egalitarian motive and altruistic punishment.
In conclusion, we believe that the combination of em-
Nature 433:E1+.
pirical research and agent-based modeling as done here [15] Fehr, E, Bernhard, H, Rockenbach, B (2008) Egalitari-
can provide deeper insights into the apparently non- anism in youngchildren. Nature 454:1079–1083.
rational behavior of humans. For instance, with regard [16] Tomasello, M, Warneken, F (2008) Human behaviour:
to the often-cited importance of altruistic punishment Share and share alike. Nature 454:1057–1058.
[17] Fehr, E,Schmidt,KM (1999) A theory of fairness, com-
in promoting cooperation, our ABM provides a flexible
petition,andcooperation.TheQuarterlyJournalofEco-
andpowerfulmethodologytoanswermanyremainingre-
nomics 114:817–868.
searchquestions,includingtheinfluenceofgroupinterac-
[18] Bolton,GE,Ockenfels,A (2000)Erc: Atheoryofequity,
tions, competitions between variants of other-regarding reciprocity, and competition. The American Economic
preferences orthe interplay ofother mechanisms, as well Review 90:166–193.
as morerealistic set-ups inwhichagents areplayingsev- [19] Fehr, E, Schmidt, KM (2006) The Economics of Fair-
eralgames simultaneously so as to mimic a reallife situ- ness, Reciprocity and Altruism - Experimental Evidence
and New Theories,edsKolm,S,Ythier,JM (NorthHol-
ation in which cognitive abilities and human capital are
land), 1 edition.
scarce resources.
[20] Brosnan,SF,deWaal,FB(2003)Monkeysrejectunequal
We are grateful to E. Fehr and S. Gachter for shar-
pay. Nature 425:297–299.
ing their unpublished data with us and to U. Hoffrage [21] de Waal, FB, Leimgruber, K, Greenberg, AR (2008)
for constructive remarks on the manuscript. The work Giving is self-rewarding for monkeys. Proceedings of the
has beenpartiallysupportedby ZKB(Zu¨rcherKantonal National Academy of Sciences 105:13685–13689.
Bank). We also acknowledge financial support from the [22] Robinson, GE, Fernald, RD, Clayton, DF (2008) Genes
and social behavior. Science 322:896–900.
ETH Competence Center “Coping with Crises in Com-
[23] Takahashi,JS,Shimomura,K,Kumar,V (2008) Search-
plexSocio-EconomicSystems”(CCSS)throughETHRe-
ingforgenesunderlyingbehavior: Lessonsfromcircadian
search Grant CH1-01-08-2.
rhythms. Science 322:909–912.
[24] Fowler,JH,Schreiber,D(2008)Biology,politics,andthe
emerging scienceofhumannature. Science322:912–914.
[25] Cason,TN,Saijo,T,Yamato,T(2002)Voluntarypartic-
ipation and spite in public good provision experiments:
[1] Homans, GC (1974) Social Behavior: Its Elementary An international comparison. Experimental Economics
Forms (Houghton Mifflin Harcourt P). 5:133–153.
[2] Coleman, J (1998) Foundations of Social Theory (Belk- [26] Hil, K, Gurven,M (2004) Economic Experiments to Ex-
nap Press of Harvard University Press). amineFairnessandCooperationamongtheAcheIndians
[3] Whiten,A,Horner,V,deWaal,FBM (2005)Conformity of Paraguay eds Henrich et al. (Oxford Scholarship On-
to cultural norms of tool use in chimpanzees. Nature line Monographs) Vol. 1, pp 382–413.
437:737–740. [27] Boyd, R, Richerson, PJ (1988) Culture and the Evolu-
[4] Bernhard, H, Fischbacher, U, Fehr, E (2006) Parochial tionary Process (University Of Chicago Press).
altruism in humans. Nature 442:912–915. [28] Laland,K,Smee,JO,Feldman,M(2000)Nicheconstruc-
[5] Gu¨rerk, O, Irlenbusch, B, Rockenbach, B (2006) The tion,biologicalevolutionandculturalchange.Behavioral
competitive advantage of sanctioning institutions. Sci- and Brain Sciences 23:131–146.
ence 312:108–111. [29] Gintis, H (2003) The hitchhiker’s guide to altru-
[6] Fehr, E, Fischbacher, U, G¨achter, S (2002) Strong reci- ism: Gene-culture coevolution, and the internalization
of norms. Journal of Theoretical Biology 220:407–418. Games and Economic Behavior 54:1–24.
[30] Sinha, A (2005) Not in their genes: Phenotypic flexibil- [39] Axelrod,R (1985) The Evolution Of Cooperation (Basic
ity,behaviouraltraditions and culturalevolution in wild Books).
bonnet macaques. Journal of Biosciences 30:51–64. [40] Axelrod, R (1997) The Complexity of Cooperation:
[31] Jablonka,E,Lamb,MJ (2007)Precisofevolutioninfour Agent-Based Models of Competition and Collaboration
dimensions. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 30:353–365. (Princeton StudiesinComplexity) (PrincetonUniversity
[32] Jasny,BR,Kelner,KL,Pennisi, E (2008) Fromgenesto Press).
social behavior. Science 322:891+. [41] Keynes,JM (2006)TheGeneral Theory of Employment,
[33] Efferson, C, Lalive, R, Fehr, E (2008) The coevolu- Interest and Money (Atlantic Publishers & Distributors
tion of cultural groups and ingroup favoritism. Science (P) Ltd.).
321:1844–1849. [42] Mehra, YP (2001) The wealth effect in empirical life-
[34] Darcet, D, Sornette, D (2008) Quantitative determina- cycle aggregate consumption equations. Federal Reserve
tion of the level of cooperation in the presence of pun- Bank of Richmond - Economic Quarterly 87/2.
ishment in three public good experiments. Journal of [43] Arthur, WB (1994) Inductive reasoning and bounded
Economic Interaction and Coordination 3:137–163. rationality. TheAmericanEconomicReview84:406–411.
[35] Decker, T, Stiehler, A, Strobel, M (2003) A compari- [44] Holland, JH, Holyoak, KJ, Nisbett, RE, Thagard, PR
son of punishment rules in repeated public good games: (1989) Induction: Processes of Inference, Learning, and
An experimental study. Journal of Conflict Resolution Discovery (The MIT Press).
47:751–772. [45] Kleiman,M,Kilmer,Beau(2009)Thedynamicsofdeter-
[36] Masclet, D, Noussair, C, Tucker, S, Villeval, MC (2003) rance Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
Monetaryandnonmonetarypunishmentinthevoluntary 106:14230–14235.
contributions mechanism. The American Economic Re- [46] Kleiman, M, Kilmer, Beau (2009) When Brute Force
view 93:366–380. Fails: How to Have Less Crime and Less Punishment
[37] Noussair, C, Tucker, S (2005) Combining monetary and (Princeton University Press)
social sanctions to promote cooperation. Economic In- [47] Kleiman, M, Kilmer, Beau (2008) Deterrence and
quiry 43:649–660. Crime Prevention: Reconsidering the Prospect of Sanc-
[38] Anderson, CM, Putterman, L (2006) Do non-strategic tion(RoutledgeStudiesinCrimeandEconomics) (Rout-
sanctions obey the law of demand? the demand for ledge)
punishment in the voluntary contribution mechanism.