Out of the Loop: Problems in the development of
next generation community networks
Murali Venkatesh
Ph.D., Associate Professor & Director
School of Information Studies
Community & Information Technology Institute (CITI)
4-279 Center for Science & Technology
Syracuse University
Syracuse, New York 13244-4100
(315) 443-4477 mvenkate@syr,edu
Donghee Shin
Doctoral Student
School of Information Studies
4-227 Center for Science & Technology
Syracuse University
Syracuse, New York 13244-4100
(315) 443-5618 dhsin@syr.edu
Abstract. Drawing on an ongoing longitudinal research study, we discuss problems in the
development of five next generation community networking projects in central New York. The
projects were funded under a state program to diffuse broadband technologies in economically
depressed areas of the state. The networks are technologically complex and entail high costs for
subscribers. The political economy of the development process has biased the subscriber base
toward the resource rich and away from the resource poor, and toward tried-and-tested uses like
Internet and intra-organizational connectivity and away from community-oriented uses. These trends
raise troubling questions about network ontology and function, and about the relation between the
network and its physical host community. The need for appropriate social policy, and new planning
practices, is argued to effect desired change.
1. Introduction
Telecommunications design and deployment decisions are powerfully shaped by market forces. A political
economic view holds that the forces “shaping the application and development of telecommunications are
the political, economic, social and cultural dynamics of capitalism itself. Above all, especially in the neo-
Marxist accounts, the development and application of telematics are seen to be driven by the imperative of
maintaining capital accumulation of firms…” (Graham & Marvin, 1996, p. 95). A key premise of this
view is that technology is not neutral. “Telecommunications are not neutral technologies. They are not
equally amenable to all users…an inherent bias is already “locked in” to them through the network design
process” (Gillespie, 1991, p. 225). This inherent
development of solutions in the public interest.
In this paper, we trace the development of five advanced technology community networks in central New
York; we refer to these as next generation community networks. These networks are funded under a New
York State program dedicated to diffusing advanced technology in economically depressed
neighborhoods. Only public, non-profit and small business entities are eligible to subscribe to these
networks; individuals and households, and state government organizations, are not eligible. Their
technological complexity and subscription costs, both of which are significantly higher relative to dial-up
community networks such as Freenets (see Serra, 2000, who views Freenets as examples of first
generation community networks), have helped bias subscription toward resource rich and away from
resource poor organizations. They threaten to polarize and exclude and, at this point in their development,
favor the development of tried and tested uses of the network at the expense of innovative and locally
responsive uses. Given their resource demands, the political economic view of telecommunications
development applies even more urgently in the case of next generation community networks.
Their developmental trajectory raises basic questions for civil society. Are community network subscribers
merely consumers or are they also citizens, with civic obligations to complement their rights as
institutional members of the host community? As an instrument of civil society in the host community,
such a network should mediate between a community’s institutions and its residents. The evolution of the
network, ideally, would be in response to local needs and values, shaped by social policy choices identified
participatively in the locality. Although political economic forces have been prominent thus far in the
developmental effort, effective social action to promote civil society ideals and resist the influence of
commodifying forces will be critical in shaping the networks’ evolution. We identify focal areas for social
policy development and a new planning praxis in advanced telecommunications in the public interest.
2. Background
In 1995, as part of a settlement of a regulatory case before the NY State Public Service Commission, the
incumbent local exchange carrier in the state (hereafter the carrier) committed $50 million to develop and
deploy broadband telecommunications services in economically depressed communities across the state.
The program1 that came into being as a consequence established a competitive request for proposals
process2 to solicit proposals from eligible consortia of non-profit and public sector organizations -- city
and county government agencies, K-12 schools and higher educational institutions, healthcare and human
service agencies -- and small businesses. Organizations had to be located in or provide services to
approved low-income zip code areas to be eligible for subsidies. State government agencies could not
participate in the program. Two rounds of grants were awarded before the program concluded in 2000. In
all, twenty-two projects were funded -- 14 urban/suburban, six rural, with two qualifying as
urban/suburban/rural combination projects (Evaluation Report, 2001).
Subscribers would pay reduced monthly service charges and were eligible for some financial support
toward computer and networking equipment at the user premise (customer premise equipment or CPE).
Eighty per cent of every grant went back to the carrier for infrastructure and services development and
deployment. The remainder could be applied toward CPE or training at the subscriber site. Grant funds
could not be used to hire technical consultants or administrative staff, or to support applications
development.
The goal of the program was to bring “advanced telecommunications services to economically
disadvantaged areas of New York State that would not be available in the near future on account of
limitations in the advanced telecommunications infrastructure and related equipment marketplace”
(Evaluation Report, 2001, citing program documents). In other words, these areas would not have access
to advanced services if it were left to market forces. Less formally but no less important as a goal, the
program sought to encourage public sector, non-profits and small business entities to come together to
solve problems local to the host community. Program selection committee members pointed to the
strengthening of existing local relationships and forging of new ones in grantee communities as an
important program goal. This idea of diverse institutions and interests coming together voluntarily for the
The program required that approximately 80% of funds be allocated to urban-suburban regions of the state and the remaining 20% to
rural areas. Additionally, the plan specified that approximately 80% of the funds were to be disseminated for network infrastructure 20%
for customer premises equipment and associated training”.
The committee established to evaluate proposals and make comprised representatives from the carrier, the state Consumer Protection
Board, the Public Utilities Law Project, the NY State Senate and Assembly, the NAACP, the NY State Board of Regents, the Empire State
Development Corp., the NY State Departments of Health and State, and the Office of the Advocate for Persons with Disabilities).
public good was a recurrent theme in their conceptualization of a community. They viewed a program-
funded network as an instrument to further cement social and institutional relationships, promote
convergence and reciprocity, augment the community’s ability cooperatively to address problems and
opportunities, and to serve as a bridge across the Digital Divide. “Community networking”, forging
“community coalitions and partnerships”, “finding common ground”: these were some of the terms used
by respondents to characterize “community”. The network would amplify such sentiments: “Recall that, to
be eligible, organizations had to connect to a common (technology) backbone: this reinforced the notion of
community and information sharing”. Cross-sectoral connectivity (i.e. where a K-12 school connected not
just to other schools but, say, to the public safety building) was a “preferential factor” used to score
proposals for awards under the program. “Applications (network uses) should cover a cross-section of the
community” was offered as a condition for success. Program selection committee respondents’ construal
community”, “community networking” and “community network” was “aspirational” rather than
empirically grounded (see Kling & Courtright, forthcoming), and envisioned a desired end-state.
Explaining the decision to use a competitive request for proposals process, a selection committee member
said: “We were not interested in putting technology in place. (Proposers) had to make a strong case that
the investment would make a difference to the community in economic and social terms”. To be eligible
for program subsidies, subscribers were required to connect to a common backbone. This way, subscribers
could connect to the world at large through the Internet but would also be connected to other subscribers
locally, in the host community. In the latter sense, a program-funded network was intended to serve as an
inter-organizational infrastructure. To qualify for an award, proposals had to show sustainable, broad-
based support for the project within the local community and lasting benefit from it, a well thought out,
robust work plan, and sensitivity to the needs of citizens with disabilities.
2. Background to research
Our ongoing research program examines the process through which advanced community networks
develop and evolve. As such, it is longitudinal in nature. We include planning, design and
implementation under the term development. Our research is guided by two broad questions: How do
advanced community networks develop and evolve? What are the dynamics behind and consequences of
technology choices? We refer to these advanced technology networks as next generation community
networks (NGCNs), and define NGCNs below.
In this paper, we trace the development of five next generation community networks in six communities in
central New York (Table 1). These projects – one urban/suburban and four rural – were awarded over $11
million in funding in the program’s second round.
Project Program Category Grant Amount
Central New York State Urban/Suburban $3.7m (revised)
(one project, two communities)
Western New York State Rural $2.9m
Southern New York State Rural $1.5m
Northern New York State Rural $1.5m
Eastern New York State Rural $1.5m
Number of projects 5
Number of communities 6
Total Program funding for five projects $11.1m
Table 1 Communities and Projects Surveyed in Research
The program identified certain zip codes in the carrier’s service area as economically depressed. In these
zip codes, the median household income was below 75% of the statewide median, as determined by
program authorities from 1990 census figures. Additionally, in several of these areas, the percentage of
households without telephone service was determined to be at least 50% above the statewide average.
We refer the networks being developed in these communities as community networks in the empirically
grounded sense that their physical context is defined by economically depressed zip code areas in the host
communities. We tracked the work of volunteer planners in these communities for this research;
additionally, we also gathered data from carrier design staff and program selection committee members.
We have tracked these communities since 06/1996, starting with NGCN planning process in our
community. Data on NGCN design (technical specification) was collected in two phases (06/1998 to 05/
2000). In Phase 1, we interviewed planners from the six communities to document their view of the design
process. In Phase 2, which concluded in May 2000, data was collected from program selection committee
members and carrier staff from engineering, marketing and sales functions.
The groups we call “planners” typically were white collar residents of the host communities. Some had
knowledge of technology; most did not. None had a background or experience in urban planning. Most
represented public institutions or non-profits in the community; others were private citizens with an
interest in the project. The groups formed voluntarily and were self-selected, with the initial impetus to
organize coming from the carrier, and came into being in response to the funding opportunity. By and
large, the groups shared the aspirations of the program selection committee for the network. These groups
are referred to as the “planners” in this paper, as they were responsible for securing the grant and
represented the community’s interest in developing the network.
The first author recently completed his biannual survey/interview of project principals at all five project
sites for an update on heir development and governance. This data is referenced in this analysis as well.
3. Advanced Technology Community Network, or NGCN
As a broadband network infrastructure, the advanced technology network described here is significantly
more complex compared to dial-up community networks (powered by the telephone modem) of the first
generation (see Serra, 2000). We refer to such a network as a next generation community network – an
NGCN. Our characterization is limited to the projects described here and should not be taken to represent
advanced community networks in general.
Tariffed telecommunications services (i.e. widely available services governed by rates and rules subject to
review by the Public Service Commission) were ineligible for subsidies in the program’s second round.
The carrier would offer non-tariffed broadband services as a limited service offering (LSO) to subscribers.
The fact that the services were not tariffed rendered them discontinuous with existing infrastructures and
contracting arrangements for subscribers; carrier design staff were also impeded to an extent by the
relative novelty of these services.
The community networks examined share the following technical and related features, which constitute
our definition of an NGCN. In the remainder of the paper, these networks are referred to as NGCNs.
Ø High technological complexity: The NGCN is a technologically complex, broadband, open, multi-
service and multi-layered community intranet with high-speed Internet access. It can support data
transfer at high to very high rates (1.5 Mbps to 1 Gbps range). Gigabit Ethernet and Asynchronous
Transfer Mode (ATM) cell relay service are the services available to subscribers. As a broadband
environment, the NGCN can support delivery of high-touch services (high-bandwidth services with
rich media content, like video-conferencing) while also supporting conventional uses (information
exchange and email). The NGCN is not merely a logically carved-out and locally focused segment of
the Internet (see Serra, 2000) but inverts the paradigm: it is a hardwired, broadband, intranet (access
restricted to eligible organizations) that also connects subscribers to the Internet.
Ø Costly and complex applications development: Developing applications for the NGCN is resource-
intensive and technically complex. For example, the community library system would like to digitize
its holdings and place them online through a portal accessible over the NGCN and the Internet. The
design and development of such a multi-media application with adequate security and service quality
assurance calls for complex skill sets and significant resources.
Ø Complex services contracting: Contracting for NGCN services can be complex. Figure 1 analyzes the
services needs and contracting challenges from the subscriber’s viewpoint. As their needs evolve,
subscribers will be faced with in-source vs. buy decisions on a broad range of services across the
architecture, potentially from multiple service providers in a competitive marketplace. While this will
benefit subscribers, it will also complicate contracting.
Ø High subscription costs: Subsidized subscription charges range from approximately $300 a month for
Gigabit Ethernet to 15 times that for high-end ATM service. Subscribers pay extra for Internet access,
and an additional charge for network management and related services. Additional resources would
be required if software applications had to be developed or acquired. In 1998, relatively cheaper DSL
was eligible for program subsidies. Many non-profits were interested in DSL for its affordability.
However, it subsequently became a tariffed service and became ineligible. The technology committee
suggested variations on the tariffed DSL service that might be eligible for subsidies, but the carrier
was not open to exploring these options.
Application Layer Services: Network management, application troubleshooting (help-desk
fun ctions)
Application Implementation Services: Developing and implementing World Wide Web-
ena bled applications, security and privacy, integration of data conferencing with World Wide
Web applications and videoconferencing, MPEG/JPEG conversion
Value-added Internet (IP ) Services: Multicasting, video bridging, switching and gateway
serv ices, Internet (IP) telephony
Basic Internet (IP) Services: Management of standard IP services up to and within
par ticipant site
Layer 2 Services: Gigabit Ethernet, Cell Relay/ATM, Frame-to-Cell Conversion, LAN
Em ulation, integration with existing LANs, (re)designing LANs for multi-media applications
Physical Layer Services: DSn over copper and fiber, SONET.
Figure 1: Services Reference Architecture (SRA), showing a sampling of technical support services needs
in the NGCN
Copyright Community & Information Technology Institute (CITI), 1999
4. Findings: Political economy of NGCN Development
Recall that the NGCNs were designed to serve as an interorganizational system infrastructure. It is not
surprising then that their development has been powerfully influenced by the economic interests of large
public institutions. Proponents of the system resource view argue that access to resources and power are
basic goals in organizations and in inter-organizational relations (Benson, 1975). “Political economy”
links a polity – the political environment -- with an economy (Wamsley & Zald, 1973). The polity refers
to power systems and structures internal and external to the firm and the ends or values they are used to
achieve. A firm’s economy, similarly, has internal and external connotations. Intern
to the resources a firm commands and how they are allocated; externally, it refers to the framework – the
rules, mechanisms – that govern its relations with the larger economic environment. The polity and
economy are interrelated: internally, power systems affect resource allocation and division of labor, and
access to resources provides power. Externally, firms that can command resources are seen as powerful by
other entities in the environment.
Currently, there are very few small non-profit or small business entities that are NGCN subscribers in the
communities surveyed; large public institutions dominate the subscription lists. For example, the Syracuse
NGCN currently has 12 subscribers, with a total of 204 endpoints (connections) among them. The list
includes city and county government agencies, K-12 public schools, and large non-profits like Syracuse
University and a major hospital. Small non-profits in the social sector (independent of government) and
small businesses are notably absent from the list. These entities often provide key services in low-income
neighborhoods. Eight such entities, as part of a separate coalition outside the program, have negotiated
subsidized digital subscriber line (DSL) service with a competitive local carrier for Internet access and
internal connectivity. The coalition is linked to the program-funded network.
A recent report by an independent consultant, which reviewed all 22 projects funded under the program,
concluded: “those institutions already involved in technology and advanced technology such as BOCES (a
county-level technology resource organization for K-12 schools), community colleges and hospitals were
predisposed to or ready to take full advantage of the program” (Evaluation Report, 2001, p. 29). Generally
speaking, public institutions like these have the resources – money, people, technology -- to support use of
advanced technology and are significantly better off in this respect relative to the average non-profit and
small business. They also have the power – the clout -- in communal deliberations to sway decisions. The
NGCN development process, consequently, has been shaped by their economic interests. This is not to say
that they exercised power consciously to manipulate project goals. They were seen by planners as vital “to
get the network up and running” by being early adopters, and their influence stemmed from their putative
role as guarantors of the project going forward. As early adopters, their interests were considered crucial
to the community having an NGCN at all.
At one point during the design, there was an implied threat from program authorities to revoke the grant
if not enough institutions signed on as subscribers. As an expedient response, a Mall model of diffusion
was adopted by planners. The argument was as follows: get anchor tenants (early adopters) to sign on and
then worry about recruiting others. The Mall model was useful in starting up the network. But in the
absence of a covenant requiring subscribers to assist the resource-poor, the model likely will have limited
impact as a broad diffusion mechanism. Market forces will continue to apply to narrow the subscriber base
to those that can afford to pay. The more the use of a network “depends on social organization and
mobilization of significant resources, the more it will tend to be controlled by those who are already
organized and well-off” (Calhoun, 1998, p. 383). This assertion applies with even greater urgency to
NGCNs because of their resource demands on subscribers.
The Mall model was also attractive to the carrier. The carrier operated in a highly competitive market,
with competing local exchange carriers vying for the same large accounts. Locking in large accounts early
was an outcome attractive to the carrier.
High subscription costs and the NGCNs’ technological complexity raise troubling questions about access
equity and distributional justice. Continuance of the program subsidies to address the needs of community
organizations was proposed recently before the Public Service Commission:
“Because of the funding constraints which they experience…community service organizations in
low income areas are often unable to incorporate…advanced technologies into their
operations…By focusing the available rate reductions on this sector of service providers in low
income communities …(the continuance of the program) will help bring these customers more
directly into the digital economy and…bridge the digital divide” (Public Utility Law Project and
NY State Community Action Association, Comments filed with the PSC, 2000, pp. 3-4).
The document continues:
“The non-profit organizations eligible for the reduced rates would include community action
agencies, day care centers, Head Start providers, community centers, community health care
clinics, legal aid offices, and other service providers located within low income communities. By
reducing broadband rates for these organizations, real assistance is provided to the organizations
which create the social infrastructure on which low income communities depend and, therefore,
to the low income families and households which make up that community” (p. 3).
Importantly, besides rate reductions (subsidized network access charges), the document seeks assistance to
cover technical support and equipment purchase at the customer premise.
The high subscription costs have favored tried-and-tested uses of the NGCN. Subscribers have replaced
existing service contracts for Internet access and internal connectivity with the subsidized services, saving
significant amounts of money. However, such uses balkanize the NGCN. Subscribers are connected to the
world and to their branch offices, not necessarily to one another or to community residents. Internet access
and internal connectivity alone do not call for a community network. Applications that deliver
information or services to community residents are more fitting uses, but these can be costly and complex
to develop. Most of the 22 projects examined, including all five projects surveyed here, cited resource
constraints as the most serious challenge to ongoing development of the NGCN (Evaluation Report,
2001). Community-oriented uses of the NGCN, of whatever kind, may never materialize due to resource
constraints.
Recall that the program required that the NGCN be based in and advance the interests of the poorer
sections in the host community, and planners’ aspirations for it were consistent with this focus on locality.
Descriptive, non-evaluative definitions of the term “community” start with the notion of locality: a
community, in its basic sense, is tied to a particular physical locale (see Khatchadourian, 1999).
Accordingly, it has been argued that a community network should be “as grounded as possible by
primarily gearing toward local users” (Aurigi & Graham, 2000, p. 498). What, then, is the relationship
between the NGCNs and their physical host communities? Our research shows that this relationship is
tenuous at best.
Take, for example, the NGCN in Syracuse. The NGCN, it was hoped, would foster the economic and
social revitalization of Syracuse. But it was not seen by the urban planning establishment as part of the
city’s present social reality or its future. City and county planners played only a small, non-substantive
role in the development process: they generated GIS maps on eligible zip codes at the project’s outset.
They viewed the project as “too esoteric” and as “not impacting the grassroots”, alluding to the NGCN’s
technological complexity and high subscription costs. Elected officers and the mass media played no part
in the project (one elected official, the county sheriff, participated briefly early on in the project; see
Castells, 1996, and Mino, 2000, on need for strong political and media participation in such community
initiatives). This meant that the NGCN was not part of any transforming, inclusive, strategic vision for the
city, nor was it viewed in relation to tactical urban planning initiatives or goals. In other words, the
NGCN was not part of anything larger than itself. A master plan for the city is currently in preparation by
the Mayor’s office and is expected to reference the NGCN. However, the civic vision was unavailable to
inform, or be informed by, the NGCN in its crucial formative stages, when questions of equity and
network ontology and function could have been debated most profitably (Aurigi, 2000, notes a similar
disconnect between urban planners and “digital city” projects in Europe). Consider the following:
Ø The over-65 population in the four county region, including Syracuse, rose by over 4% since 1990
(Syracuse Post Standard, June 15, 2001). This increase is stretching the capacity of nursing homes
and retirement communities, and the situation is expected to get worse. Lack of transportation options
is also an issue, particularly in suburban and rural areas, for the growing number of elderly in the
region.
Ø Syracuse City’s racial makeup grew more varied between 1990 and 2000. The black, Asian and
Hispanic populations grew, and that of whites declined. Non-Hispanic whites make up 62% of the
city’s population, but constitute only 42% of the under 17 population. By 2010, the white population
is predicted to be under 50% in the city (Syracuse Post Standard, March 26, 2001).
There are no service applications, and no proposals for such applications, targeting the needs of the
elderly or the city’s many racial and ethnic groups. Currently the poor, whose numbers and spatial
concentrations provided the physical and moral context to the project, are not covered either. Diverse
populations and minority groups in the K-12 schools have faster access to the Internet via the NGCN, but
it is unclear how adult populations stand to benefit from such uses. There are no proposals to use the
NGCN to combat urgent social problems such as adolescent pregnancy and infant mortality (in the late
90s, the county’s infant mortality rate was the nation’s highest). Socially responsible and community-
oriented applications may yet develop as the NGCN evolves, but will be dependent on the vagaries of
external funding. Meanwhile, the community at large may see little benefit from the grant.
This raises a fundamental question: Do subscribers have obligations to the physical host community?
Should subscribers be viewed as (institutional) citizens or merely as consumers? The right of an eligible
agency to program subsidies was recognized among planners and community institutions and came up in
discussions of NGCN development policy. The corresponding notion of subscriber obligations to the host
community came up only once. A city agency representative argued: “Since large players are getting such
a good deal (from subsidized services), couldn’t we require them to provide resources and services to
smaller agencies? Large players have to see themselves as resource providers. This is part of their
responsibility”. Arguably, resource-rich subscribers could have helped, or could have been required to
help, to promote the project’s social goals, thus reducing reliance on external funding for the development
of the NGCN. In the dialectical sense, requiring obligations of subscribers to meet the needs of the host
community is a change mechanism that might have worked in this context. But it was never pursued.
Citizenship in a polity confers rights and requires obligations of rights holders. It is central to the ideal of
civil society – which is founded on reciprocity and convergence of interests and values in the community.
Aspirations consistent with those of civil society were an integral part of the morphology of the NGCNs,
as both planners and selection committee members agreed. Mandelbaum (2000) notes: “the beginning of
the search for a craft of community design is the notion of membership. Members are bound to one
another by a web of rights and obligations” (p. 10). To the extent that it seeks to further the community it
is a part of, an NGCN and its subscribers cannot escape the reciprocity of obligations (if only in the
contractual sense), especially when the network is funded with rate payers’ monies (public funds).
Surprisingly, by-laws for NGCN governance in the projects surveyed make no mention of subscribers’
obligations, of any kind, to any quarter. Subscribers were expected/encouraged, but not required, to
“support projects that will benefit the underserved in the community”, according to the project leadership
responding to the first author’s recent biannual survey. In the follow-up interview, respondents talked
about their preoccupation with “getting the network off the ground”. One of them implied that subscriber
obligations would follow:
“I hadn’t thought of that (subscriber obligations). Maybe we could have language to that effect in
the by-laws or in the governance somewhere. Currently, each of the large agencies has its own
contract with the carrier. But we will have to pull together the board of directors…to begin to
think collectively as a community, and think of obligations”.
At present, subscribers have no obligations to be citizens, merely to be consumers. This emphasis is
consistent with the Mall model of development and was, according to this respondent, occasioned by its
imperative: to “get the network off the ground”. This could only be done by signing up early adopters. It is
not clear how a generalized expectation or non-specific obligation outside the by-laws, as in “support
projects that will benefit the underserved in the community”, can be enforced.
In the realm of citizenship, as O’Neill (1998) has argued, “it is the discourse of obligations rather than
that of rights that is the primary vocabulary of action-centered ethics. When we discuss obligations, our
direct concern is with what should be done” (p. 105). Increasingly, the focus is on our obligation as
citizens to meet the needs of others in the community (see Brock, 1998). Specialized needs – such as
healthcare for jail inmates or the elderly or sign language services for the hearing-impaired – constitute a
large part of “our most urgent needs…And a large proportion of the cases in which people are not
currently satisfying their own needs are cases in which the social structures in which people find
themselves provide them with no feasible opportunity for doing so” (Baker & Jones, 1998, p.220).
Community networks capable of delivering services can extend the reach of, and accessibility to, the social
support infrastructure available in the community for need fulfillment; they can help adapt these social
structures to the needs of residents with impairments and disabilities. As an extender of the support
infrastructure, community networks can alter the social structure of choice and make it more convenient
for the needy to avail of ameliorative services (see Baker & Jones, 1998). The NGCNs surveyed are fully
capable of supporting delivery of both informational and high-touch services.
It is in the enhancement of the quality of day-to-day living, particularly for the less privileged, that
NGCNs must find their true role and justification. Such a role is in fact emphasized in current visioning
of electronic government or a teleserviced “e-polity” where a broad range of public services are delivered
over telecommunications connections (see, for example, New York State Lt. Governor’s Taskforce on
Quality Communities, 2000). Informational services may be differentiated from high-touch services. The
first delivers information to and may collect information from residents through electronic forms. For
example, someone who has just moved from welfare to work should be able to apply for child-care
vouchers, food stamps and other benefits online. The biggest advantage of online access to services is
flexibility: users can go online at their convenience for asynchronous access to information and services.
The ability to time-shift is critically important to individuals in low-wage jobs, which are far less flexible
in allowing workers time off relative to white collar jobs (Wall Street Journal, August 27, 2001). As noted
earlier, there are no plans at present to offer such services over the NGCNs surveyed.
The second enables live, synchronous, person-to-person interactive transactions, often video-based, such
as telemedicine. Informational services can be (and indeed routinely are) delivered over dial-up
technologies; one would not need broadband to deliver such services. High-touch services, on the other
hand, are best delivered over broadband. For a person who urgently needs, say, a medical diagnosis, a
network that delivers such a service is more valuable than one providing access to information alone (see
Ishida, 2000). Considering that their high subscription costs has put the NGCN out of reach of community
organizations and their clientele, online delivery of public services may be the only way (at least in the
near term) to spread the benefits of expensive public investments in socially responsive ways. How the
digital intersects with day-to-day life in the physical host community is a fundamental question for an
NGCN. If used well, an NGCN can enrich and expand the interface between a community’s residents and
its social support infrastructures for need fulfillment and, more generally, for what Friedmann and
Douglas (1998) call “human flourishing”. But whether the digital intersects with life in the community at
all will depend on whether subscribers are willing to be citizens first.
5. Conclusion
The foregoing analysis was not intended to assign blame to planners or the carrier for the way the NGCNs
have turned out. The objective was to show the bias inherent in telecommunications (Graham & Marvin,
1996) and demonstrate how such a bias, which tends to favor the resource rich, may operate less
equivocally in the case of advanced technologies. Furthermore, in this case, the bias was in play despite
the community centered aspirations for the NGCN voiced by planners early on.
Telecommunications design and deployment decisions, in general, are powerfully shaped by market
forces. Community networks have the opportunity to follow a different path, to envision new styles of
community, a more equitable social order. A social activist view believes in the possibility of
reconstruction and change in social systems. However, fundamental to this conception of social
construction of technological outcomes is human agency. As Graham and Marvin (1996) have argued, a
purely political economic analysis tends to view developmental processes in telecommunications as
determined by “abstract and macro-level” power systems. We have tried to avoid this pitfall. While such
forces are doubtless important, and have been key in the NGCN’s early development, we believe that
human agency can influence how it evolves. Combining the political economic and social activist views
permits consideration of the developmental process at both societal and social interaction levels; such a
combined view is emphatically contra determinism – of the technological or political economic variety.
Apropos urban development in general, Imrie, Pinch and Boyle (1996) note the relevance of the political
economic view and of social activism:
“variants of political economy recognize …the need for taking a stand, for (re)engaging
politically, for subjecting the (academic) analytical gaze to the materialities of cities…It is to be
hoped that the (re)activation of political economy will become the core concern to those within
urban studies” (p. 1260).
A social activist agenda would include a multi-level effort as well: at the macro level, there is the need for
social policy fostering the delivery of teleservices over the NGCN as a way to reduce the effects of social
exclusion; at the micro-level, the planner of advanced telecommunications solutions in the public interest
has to be sensitive to the dynamics of development of the host community. In other words, the host
community provides the necessary context within which the development of the NGCN should be located
and analyzed.
Using the NGCN as a teleservice delivery mechanism can cut social isolation for certain populations. We
noted above that the increase in the over-65 population in central New York has highlighted the lack of
transportation options for the elderly in certain areas. Availability of transportation and convenient access
to information and services are key elements of social inclusion in urban developmental analyses. Remote
delivery of information and services using telecommunications to combat such problems makes a lot of
sense, but is not common:
“there are…major social, economic and political problems for which electronic solutions offer
considerable potential, and which are as yet receiving less consideration. …electronic solutions
can improve access to public services…the literature on contemporary urban environments has,
for the most part, paid little attention to the development of such electronic solutions” (Turner,
Holmes & Hodgson, 2000, p. 1724).
A community may be defined as a structure of social relations that ties its residents to one another and to
its institutions. These social relations may serve a broad range of purposes, ranging from need fulfillment
to protection from external or internal threats to fostering a sense of community. In terms of need
fulfillment through access to public services, NGCNs can effectively disembed the social support
infrastructure in a community from its spatial infrastructure (roads, transportation, parking), helping to
develop a purely “relational” community connecting the needy with teleservice providers. To assign such
a role to the NGCN is not to reduce it to a utilitarian function but to use it to actively cut social isolation
and exclusion and make its benefits available to marginalized populations in meaningful ways. To use it
thus is to use it as a vehicle to deliver stated social policy objectives, such as improved care of the elderly.
However, as Nelson (1962) astutely noted, “there are orders of needs or values which vary with structure
(a community’s structure of relations). These orders may be called the hierarchy of values” (p.21). At
present, the delivery of teleservices or the reduction of social isolation for such populations are not high on
the list of priorities of the NGCNs surveyed. A deliberate aligning of the NGCN development effort with
that of the host community, so notably absent in the communities surveyed, might have helped
synchronize the two value hierarchies.
The use of telecommunications networks to deliver public services is relatively uncommon (see Turner,
Holmes & Hodgson, 2000, on trends in the UK). A recent survey of networks in US communities suggests
a similar trend (see Aurigi & Stephen, 2000). As we noted earlier, to use it as a mechanism to deliver
urgently needed public services would be to spread the NGCN’s benefits broadly in the host community.
As has been argued (Turner, Holmes & Hodgson, 2000), we need a social technology policy to ensure that
such uses are part of the thinking on NGCNs. The technological tools exist to deliver informational and
high touch services remotely; we need to mobilize the will and develop the requisite policy instruments to
effect the desired ends.
Social policy in this instance can serve to reorient the NGCN toward local needs and toward the NGCN’s
obligations to meeting these local needs. A focus on locality would dictate that each NGCN develops with
reference to the needs and interests, and the hierarchy of values prominent in the community it is designed
to serve. The determination of such needs, interests and values will ideally be the work of an empowered
cadre of community residents. Lessons learned from the Acts of Enclosure in 18th and 19th century
England are instructive here. These laws helped the powerful new (private) proprietors to bypass the local
in favor of remote control and management. These laws, Smith (2001) explains
“transferred open spaces into discrete areas bounded by fence or hedgerows, from places where
social and economic practices were determined by tradition and local agreement to private
domains for the privileged to own and exploit…the common lands were usually locally run with
minimal outside interference, and for this reason they varied considerably, reflecting local
environmental and sociopolitical histories” (p. 155).
Graham and Marvin (1996) argued that a “paradigm crisis” threatened urban studies and planning:
“…many urban analysts and policy-makers still see cities through analytical lenses which…have
less and less to do with the real dynamics of telecommunications-based urban development” (p.
48).
They call for education in and improved understanding of telecommunications in urban development. We
see the need for the opposite to occur as well: community networking is imperilled if it is not informed by
the dynamics of community development. During the planning process, planners had assumed that the
city or community planning establishment would represent community needs. This turned out to be a
mistake: the planning establishment did not play a major role in NGCN development, as noted earlier,
which meant that the community’s needs went under-represented. The new planner would be well enough
informed about the community’s needs to work with the planning establishment to represent them, or
represent them herself, in the developmental process.
Community network development in the public interest cannot be removed from the concerns of the host
community. In bridging this distance, community network planners can learn much from the evolution of
urban planning to its contemporary emphasis on radical practice:
“Radical practices emerge from experience with and a critique of existing unequal relations and
distributions of power, opportunity and resources. The goal of these practices is to work for
structural transformation of these systemic inequalities and, in the process, to empower those
who have been systematically disempowered (Sandercock, 1998, p. 176).
What then might be the role of the new, radicalized planner in community network evolution? We see
three ways into the new praxis:
Ø Despite their sympathetic view of planners’ aspirations, the carrier design staff were more attuned to
a technical rational view of network development, which seeks to optimize outcomes on conventional
design criteria such as network performance and efficiency. The new planner has to ensure that the
question of ends is not lost sight of in the shuffle of purely technical rational preoccupations. Design
choices can divide and balkanize and have the force of implicit policy (Guthrie & Dutton, 1992). The
planner has to resist and reorient such trajectories. Technical criteria are critical in design, but so are
the larger issues – the ontology, the ends – that design must serve. In her new role, the planner would
use means and viewpoints considered vital in current urban planning practice – the ability to listen
and question in order to learn (Sandercock, 1998), and a post-modern sensibility (Graham & Marvin,
1996), to keep the focus on the community’s interests and needs.
Ø The new planner would combine technical and contextualized knowledge with an understanding of
“radical” developmental methods to empower and invite participation from diverse publics. Given the
high knowledge demands of NGCN development, the new planner has to fulfill the role of an expert
advocate in the network infrastructure design process. Her role as expert advocate is indispensable,
and unavoidable, given the technical nature of the process. However, in terms of ideas for network
use, the community (or communities) should be in charge, with the planner as an ally. Radical
methods like applications prototyping can be used to highlight urgent needs in the community and to
influence the agenda for network uses around such urgent needs. Working with a mediating
institution would be especially beneficial if prototyping is involved, on account of the resources that
would be needed. There are other methods to build a constituency. For example, the new planner can
publicize exemplars of innovative uses of technology for pro-social ends to develop grassroots
momentum.
Ø Political economic forces cannot be wished away. Radical praxis has to acknowledge the pragmatics
of NGCN development. The new planner would be an activist willing to take sides and work through
politics and conflict to recenter marginalized interests. In this, she has to work to convert community-
centered aspirations into explicit social policy instruments to effect desired change. As we showed,
this conversion has not occurred with the NGCN. It is vitally important that subscribers be made
aware of their obligations to the host community. This must occur in a timely fashion, in order to
shape the evolution of the NGCN such that it intersects substantively and meaningfully with
community life.