Parameterization of geophysical inversion
model using particle clustering
UniversityofBritishColumbia
yangdikun@gmail.com
This paper presents a new method of constructing physical models in a geophysi-
cal inverse problem, when there are only a few possible physical property values in
the model and they are reasonably known but the geometry of the target is sought.
The model consists of a fixed background and many small “particles” as building
blocks that float around in the background to resemble the target by clustering. This
approach contrasts the conventional geometric inversions requiring the target to be
regularly shaped bodies, since here the geometry of the target can be arbitrary and
does not need to be known beforehand. Because of the lack of resolution in the data,
the particles may not necessarily cluster when recovering compact targets. A model
norm, called distribution norm, is introduced to quantify the spread of particles and
incorporated into the objective function to encourage further clustering of the par-
ticles. As proof of concept, 1D magnetotelluric inversion is used as example. My
experiments reveal that the particles, starting from a fully scattered distribution, are
able to move towards the actual target location; the quality of recovery depends on
whetherthereisenoughmaterial(verticalconductancein1D)intheparticlestobuild
the target; and the use of distribution norm can help produce tightened clustering.
Whentheinversionstrugglestofitthedata,itmayindicatethatthepriorinformation
abouttheparticles’conductivityandsizeareincorrect.
I. Introduction
Geophysicalinversionsrecovertheunknowndistributionofphysicalpropertyoftheearthusing
theobserveddata. Thedistribution,usuallyreferredtoas“model”,canbeparameterizeddiffer-
ently depending on the knowledge of the earth we may have prior to the inversion. In the most
∗OriginallyacourseprojectreportinApril2009titled:Preliminarystudyofelementaryinversionandd-norm.
]hp-oeg.scisyhp[
1v49860.1051:viXra
genericmodel,theearthisdiscretizedintomany“pixels”,eachofwhichhasaphysicalproperty
valuethatissearchedbytheinversion;themodelparametersarethevaluesofthepixels(Consta-
ble et al., 1987). Another well-established parameterization is to assume the recovered target to
be some regularly shaped bodies, like sphere, plate, prism, etc.; the model parameters therefore
includethephysicalpropertyofthetargetand/orthegeometricparametersofthebody(Keating
and Crossley, 1990; Smith and Lee, 2002). The pixel inversion is highly flexible and works with
arbitrarilycomplicatedearthmodels,butitsinversionoftenhashighdegreeoffreedomasevery
pixel is an unknown. This high degree of freedom can bring severe non-uniqueness and often a
largeamountofcomputationininversions. Thegeometricinversion, havingreducednumberof
model parameters, is usually much fasterin computation thanks tothe analytic or semi-analytic
solutions,andprovidesrobustmodelrecovery. However,itrequiresthetargetcanberepresented
by some simple bodies and the geometry of the body must be reasonably known before the in-
version. This paper presents a new method of constructing the model using both the concept
of pixel and geometric parameters: the earth is described by many freely moving elementary
particles in a given background; the particles are assigned pre-determined physical properties;
themodelparametersarethelocationsoftheparticles.
Thenewapproachisdesignedtoworkwhenspecificinformationaboutthephysicalproper-
tiesofthetargetsandbackgroundareavailableanddesiredtobeincorporatedintotheinversion.
Previously,thistypeofinformationcanbedealtwithundertheframeworkofthepixelinversion
by using upper and lower bounds (Musil et al., 2003), but one needs to know where the bounds
shouldbeappliedoverthemodelingdomain. Theadvantageoftheparticleclusteringisthatthe
particlesaredrivenbythedatatothelocationswherethephysicalpropertyisrequiredtobedif-
ferent from the background. The reduced model space, now spanned by the particles locations,
makestheparameterizationsimpleandtheinversionrobust.
If, due to the intrinsic non-uniqueness, the particle locations cannot be uniquely determined
by the data, additional constraints are necessary to ensure the inversion results are geologically
plausible. Since the conventional model norms that encourage “small”, “simple” or smooth
models in a pixel inversion do not apply to the location parameters. I therefore propose some
model norms that measure the distribution of the particles and penalize heavily if the particles
arewidelyspread. Themodelnormsthatconstraintheparticles’locationsarecollectivelycalled
“distribution norm” or “d-norm”. I will show the use of d-norm calculated with two formulas
usingthevarianceandrange.
Asthefirstpass,Iinvestigatetheapplicationoftheparticleclusteringinversionin1Dmagne-
totelluric (MT) inversion problem because the forward solution can be rapidly computed. Many
different scenarios are experimented to show the performance of the new parameterization if
somepriorinformationisincorrectandtheearthcontainsmultipletargets.
II. Methods
ThebasicideaoftheparticleclusteringinversionisillustratedinFigure1,inwhichthelocations
of the particles are shown on the snapshots at four inversion iterations. Initially the background
is assigned a known structure, for example, a uniform half-space for the simplest case. The
particlesarescatteredovertheentiredomain. Ateachiteration,theinversiongraduallymovesthe
particles around in attempt to fit the observed data. Eventually the particles cluster to resemble
the desired target and the model should reproduce the data if the physical property values are
correctlyassignedandthereareenoughparticlesintotalvolume.
Figure1: Particleclusteringinversionin2D.
III. 1D Magnetotelluric Inversion Problem
To verify the basic idea of particle clustering parameterization, I choose the 1D magnetotelluric
(MT) inversion as example because the forward solution can be analytically computed and the
frequency sounding has inherent depth resolution (Cagniard, 1953). My experiments use 16 MT
frequencies: 320, 160, 80, 40, 20, 10, 6, 3, 1.5, 0.75, 0.375, 0.1875, 0.09375, 0.04688, 0.02344, 0.01172
Hz. The data, for the convenience of visualization, are the apparent resistivity in Ωm and phase
indegreecalculatedfromtheimpedanceonthesurface.
The objective function minimized in the inversion is similar to the one used in most of regu-
larizedinversions
where Φ is the data misfit and Φ is the model norm, and γ balances the relative importance
of Φ and Φ . The misfit Φ contains one term for the apparent resistivity and another for
the phase. Because of the different dynamic ranges in the resistivity and phase, the apparent
resistivity is re-parameterized by the common logarithm (log10) and then normalized by the
observedapparentresistivitydata. BothtermsarebasedonL-2norm. Thedatamisfitisthen
(cid:13) (cid:13)2
(cid:13)log(ρobs)−log(ρpre)(cid:13) (cid:13) (cid:13)2
d ρ φ (cid:13)
log(ρobs) (cid:13)
(cid:13) (cid:13)
where the superscript obs and pre denote the observed and predicted data respectively. The
formulationofthemodelnormwillbediscussedlater.
The minimization of equation 1 requires the evaluation of its gradient, which involves the
derivativeofΦ andΦ withrespecttothemodelparameters(particlelocations). Unfortunately,
Φ that measures the distribution of the particles may not necessarily be differentiable. As a
result, I use the brute-force (perturbation) method to compute the gradient. Because of the new
way of model parameterization, the model space is reduced to a few locations of the particles
andthebrute-forcemethodisnottootime-consuming.
IV. Non-regularized Inversions
The first suite of experiments sets γ in equation 1 to zero, so essentially the inversion clusters
the particles using only the information from the data without any additional constraint. Two
units are placed in the true model: a 1000 Ωm uniform background and a conductive layer of
10 Ωm. For 1D model, a building block particle is in fact a thin layer with fixed thickness. In
my experiments, the size of a particle (thickness of a layer) is 100 m. The particles layers are
allowed to overlap when moving, which makes the inversion more robust if too many particles
aredeployedatthebeginning.
Experiment 1: Perfect a priori information
In this experiment, the target layer is at depth between 1000 and 2000 m. A synthetic data set
is generated from the true model for the use in the inversion. I assume the exact resistivities of
the background and the target are well known and the total number of layers is just enough to
represent the true model. The experiment is shown in Figure 2. Initially, the layers are placed
with equal spacing from the surface to 3000 m deep to pretend no specific information about
the target location is known. In this perfect scenario, the inversion is able to reasonably cluster
the scattered layers to the correct location of the true target and reproduce the observed data
very well. However, there is a small gap in the recovered conductive layer and a single layer
left isolated at depth of 2500 m. Although the first-order structure is successfully reconstructed,
thoseirregularitiescouldmaketheinversionmodellessgeologicallyplausible.
Experiment 2: Not enough particles
Inpractice,itisdifficulttoalwayshaveperfectinformationabouttheresistivityandtotalvolume
toinitiatetheparticleclustering. Inthisexperiment,IstillusethesametruemodelinExperiment
1, but assume not enough particles are deployed; the target resistivity is still correct. The true
model needs 10 layers of 100 m thick, but only 8 layers are placed into the background. The
experimentisshowninFigure3. Therecoveredmodelshowsthattheparticlelayersareclustered
at almost the correct location, although the small gaps between the layers are evident. I note the
datafit, thebestIcanpossiblyget, isnotasgoodasinExperiment1. Thismaybeanindication
thattheaprioriinformationusedtostarttheinversioncouldbeincorrect.
Figure2: Experiment1: perfectaprioriinformation. Top-left: observed(blue)andpredicted(red)apparentresistivity
dataatallfrequencies. Bottom-left: observed(blue)andpredicted(red)phasedataatallfrequencies. Top-
right: thetrueresistivitymodelasafunctionofdepth. Middle-right: theinitialdistributionoftheparticles
(layers). Bottom-right: the model recovered by the particle clustering. The figures in other experiments
followthesamelayout.
Experiment 3: Too many particles
Anotherpossiblescenarioofmakingincorrectinputishavingtoomanyparticleswhiletheresis-
tivities are still correct. This experiment is similar to Experiment 2, except 12 particle layers are
placedintothebackground. TheexperimentisshowninFigure4. Therecoveredmodelpredicts
the observed data much better than in Experiment 2, showing that there are enough particles in
terms of the total volume to reconstruct the true model. The top half of the target layer is very
wellrecovered;however,thebottomofthetargetlayerisrenderedassomescatteredlayers. This
indicates that the data set itself may not have the resolution for the target layer’s bottom, which
can also be inferred from Experiment 1. I also note there are 10.5 layers visible in the recovered
model; the particles can effectively disappear by overlapping if some of the building materials
aredeemedunnecessary.
Experiment 4: Over-estimated resistivity
NowItestthescenariowhentheresistivityofthetargetisincorrectlyguessed. Inthisexperiment,
Iassumetheresistivityofthetargetlayerisover-estimatedto32Ωmfromthetruevalue10Ωm.
The number of particle layers is 10, which is just geometrically enough to build the target. The
experiment is shown in Figure 5. Because of the lack of enough building materials (vertical
conductance), the inversion ends up with a very poor data fit. Similar to Experiment 2, the bad
misfit can indicate incorrect a priori information. The recovered model, certainly not perfect,
doeshoweverprovidesomeroughestimateofthetargetlayer’slocation.
Figure3: Experiment2: notenoughparticles.
Figure4: Experiment3: toomanyparticles.
Figure5: Experiment4: over-estimatedresistivity.
Figure6: Experiment5: under-estimatedresistivity.
Experiment 5: Under-estimated resistivity
This experiment tests the scenario when the resistivity of the target layer is under-estimated to
5 Ωm but the number of particles is correct. The experiment is shown in Figure 6. Under-
estimated resistivity means there are excessive building materials. The inversion model shows
that 5 of the 10 particle layers disappeared by overlapping; the remaining layers all together,
distributed exactly within the depth range of the true target, have the same conductance as the
original target layer. This experiment again shows the particle clustering is robust if the number
ofparticlesand/ortheconductivityofthetargetareover-estimatedatthebeginning.
Figure7: Experiment6: multipletargets.
Experiment 6: Multiple targets
In reality, knowing the actual number of targets underground can be sometimes difficult. This
experiment uses two conductive layers (depth from 500 to 1000 m and from 1500 to 2000 m)
in the true model, while still assuming a uniform distribution of the particles at the beginning.
The experiment is shown in Figure 7. The observed data have been fit very well. The top of
theshallowtargetiswellrecoveredbytheclustering; however, itsbottomandtheboundariesof
the deep target are not resolved, although the recovered model shows some hints for the lower
boundaryofthedeeptarget.
ThepreliminaryresultsobtainedfromExperiment1-6hasshownus:
• Clustering some particles that have been assigned pre-determined properties is a viable
wayofconstructinganinversionmodel.
• Perfect a priori information about the resistivity and the total volume of the target are
crucial. Ifexcessiveconductivematerialsaredeployedintothebackground,theinversionis
ableto“hide”thematerialsbyoverlappingtheparticles. Ifnotenoughconductivematerials
areavailable,theinversionmaystruggletofittheobserveddata.
• The particle clustering, even with reduced model space, still has the non-uniqueness prob-
lem. Inthe1DMTproblem,thedatadonothaveverygoodresolutiontothelocationsofthe
particles at depth. Therefore, regularization is required to constrain the particle locations
formoreplausiblemodels.
V. Regularization on the Particle Distribution
In the non-regularized inversion experiments, the clustering is very likely to generate widely
spreading particles at the depth where the data lose control. This can be improved by applying
Figure8: Experiment7: perfectaprioriinformationandusingthevarianceconstraint.
additional constraints that require concentrated distribution of the particles. I incorporate the
measure of particle distribution into Φ in equation 1 so that the objective function is heavily
penalized if the particles have wide distribution. The measure of distribution, referred to as the
distributionnormord-norm,canbeanyreasonablefunctionthatreflectstheconcentrationofthe
particles. Giventhelocationsofagroupofparticles, Iconsidertwotypesofd-norm. Thefirstis
thevariance,calculatedas
wherenisthenumberofparticles,z isthedepthoftheithparticlelayerin1Dproblemandzˆ is
themeanvalueof z (i =1,...,n). Thesecondistherange,calculatedas
Φ = max(z )−min(z ),i =1,...,n. (4)
The following experiments will show the effect of using additional constraints of d-norm. The
trade-offparameterγinequation1issettoafixedvalue(0.01)sothatΦ andΦ arenumerically
comparable.
Experiment 7: Perfect a priori information and using the variance constraint
ThisexperimentrepeatsthesamescenarioinExperiment1,buttheparticles’locationsareregu-
larizedbythed-normfunctioninequation3withthevarianceofthelayerdepths. Comparedto
Experiment 1, the target is recovered as a more compact layer while fitting the observed equally
well(Figure8). Thedeepestparticleisdetachedfromthemaincluster,butthegapbetweenthem
isnotsignificantenoughtocausemuchdifficultyintheinterpretation.
Experiment 8: Over-estimated resistivity and using the variance constraint
I again test the imperfect a priori information with the use of variance d-norm constraint. To
make the initial guess even worse, the target’s resistivity (100 Ωm) is assumed to be ten times
Figure9: Experiment8: over-estimatedresistivityandusingthevarianceconstraint.
Figure10: Experiment9: under-estimatedresistivityandusingvariancetheconstraint.
greater than the true value (10 Ωm). Unsurprisingly, the inversion cannot fit the data with
inadequate conductive materials (Figure 9). However, the recovered target is nicely compact,
makingthemodelstillsomewhatuseful. Inthestruggleoffittingthedata,thetargetisrecovered
ataslightlylargerdepth.
Experiment 9: Under-estimated resistivity and using the variance constraint
Then I assume the target’s resistivity is under-estimated to 5 Ωm and examine the effect of the
variance constraint on the layers’ depths. With adequate conductive materials, the observed
data can be fit perfectly. The excessive building materials in 5 particle layers are concealed by
overlapping(Figure10). Thelayers’distributionconcentratestothedepthbetween1000and1700
m,arangenarrowerthantheonerecoveredinExperiment5.
Figure11: Experiment10: multipletargetsandusingthevarianceconstraint.
Figure12: Experiment11: perfectaprioriinformationandusingtherangeconstraint.
Experiment 10: Multiple targets and using the variance constraint
Formultipletargetsandperfectaprioriinformationabouttheresistivityandtotalvolumeofthe
target, the additional variance constraint does a very good job confining the particle layers to a
narrow band that coincides nicely with the true location of the target. The model recovered in
Figure 11 almost perfectly reconstructs the true model as the four boundaries of the two target
layersarealldelineatedwithhighaccuracy.
Experiment 11: Perfect a priori information and using the range constraint
In this experiment, I test the perfect a priori information again but with the range constraint on
the particle locations. As shown in Figure 12, the particle layers cluster to the correct location of
thetargetwithoutsignificantdetachmentofanysinglelayer.
Figure13: Experiment12: over-estimatedresistivityandusingtherangeconstraint.
Experiment 12: Over-estimated resistivity and using the range constraint
While still using the range constraint, I test one of the imperfect scenarios where the target’s
resistivityisover-estimatedto100Ωm. Althoughthedatamisfitisreallylarge,makingitdifficult
totrusttheinversionmodel,therecoveredgeometryofthetargetisnotcompletelyunreasonable
(Figure 13). The similarity between Experiment 8 and Experiment 12 suggests the variance and
rangeconstraintshavesimilareffectonbondingtheparticlestogether.
Experiment 13: Multiple targets and using the range constraint
Finally I run a test with two targets and using the range constraint. The particle layers are
clustered to the depth between 500 and 2000 m, a range corresponds well with the true model
(Figure14). TherecoveredtargetsarenotasaccurateasinExperiment10withthevariancecon-
straintasthestructurebetweenthetwotargetsissomewhatambiguous. Thiscanbeexplainedby
theinsensitivityoftherangenorminequation4totheparticlelocationsbetweentheextremities.
Nevertheless,therecoveredmodelstillindicatestwoseparatetargetlayersatdifferentdepths.
VI. Discussion
Imperfect a priori information
As a tool to enforce strong a priori information about the known rock units, the particle cluster-
ing approach requires reasonably good initial guesses of the resistivity and the total volume of
thetarget. Inthe1DMTinversionexamplespresentedabove,therearetwopossiblescenariosof
imperfect information. The first is over-estimated total conductance, resulted from either under-
estimatedresistivityortoomanyparticles,orboth. Thisdoesnotseemtocauseseriousproblems
sincetheunusedparticlescanbeeffectivelyignorediftheparticlesareallowedtooverlap(with-
outsuperposition). Thesecondscenario,inwhichnotenoughconductivematerialsareprovided,
Figure14: Experiment13: multipletargetsandusingtherangeconstraint.
Figure15: Particleclusteringwithimperfectaprioirinformationaboutthetarget.
hasnochancetofitthedata,buttherecoveredmodelmaynotbeabadrepresentationofthetrue
model. Figure 15 explains why the inversion can be robust against the imperfect information.
Assuming geometrically there is enough particles to resemble the target, a good recovery needs
both of the resistivity and positions of the particles to be correct (at the star). If the information
about the resistivity is correct (ρ ), the true solution can be sought by adjusting the position; if
theresistivityofthetargetissettoρ ,themodelsearchcanneverreachthetruesolution,butthe
final result may be a point on the way approaching the true solution. Such a point, indicated by
adotinFigure15,canbeamodelgeometricallysimilartothetruesolution.
Some adaptive algorithms can be developed to remedy the imperfect information. In the
first scenario, unnecessary particles can be removed from the optimization resulting in reduced
degree of freedom, if overlapping is detected. The second scenario can be possibly rescued by
increasing the conductivity and/or adding more particles to the background. Allowing the a
prioriinformationtochangewouldbetheimportantsteptomakethealgorithmpractical.
Multiple clustering centers
The two-layer examples have shown that the particle clustering is effective for more than one
target, as the scattered particles successfully converged to the locations of the two target layers
without any a priori information about the number of targets. However, the distribution con-
straint used in the multiple target example was identical to the one used in the single target
examplethatencouragedalltheparticlestostayascloseaspossible. Andcomputingthed-norm
with the particles all together can be inappropriate and potentially problematic if many targets
arefarapart. Thiscanbeimprovedbyeitherspecifyingthenumberoftargetswewanttorecover
beforehand or letting the inversion to decide whether the full set of particles should be divided
intosub-groupsifmultipleclusteringcentersareappearing.
Particle splitting in 2D/3D inverions
The particle clustering behaved nicely for 1D layered earth because the location has only one
variable,thedepth. Theinversioncouldbecomeunstablein2D/3Dwhenthelocationisspecified
bytwoorthreevariables,inwhichcasetherelationshipbetweentheparticlesmovementandthe
forward responses can be highly non-linear, and the inversion has the risk of being trapped in
localminimum. Therobustnessoftheparticleclusteringcanbefurthercompromisediftoomany
particlesaredeployedleadingtoalargenumberofunknownsandsevereill-posedness.
Here I propose a solution to this problem using adaptive particle size. Initially, there can be
only one particle (e.g. a cubic prism) with its size as large as the target. The first few iterations
find the optimal location of the single large particle that gives the best data fit. Once the data
misfit cannot be reduced any more, the large particle is subdivided into four (in 2D) or eight (in
3D)equally-sizedsmallerparticles,eachofthemarefreetomoveindependentlyfromtheoriginal
location of the large particle. The subdivision will repeat if the data misfit cannot be improved
again. This process, using the same concept in the multi-level or multi-resolution approach,
graduallyincreasesthenumberofparticlesandexpandsthemodelspace. Therestrictiononthe
modelspaceattheinitialstagemakestheinversionmorerobustthanstartingwithalargedegree
offreedom,andcanbeseenasanothertypeofdistributionconstraint.
VII. Conclusions
Thispaperpresentsthepreliminarystudiesonanewapproachofparameterizingageophysical
inversionmodel. Myapproachconsidersthemodelassomebuildingblocks(particles)floatingin
a pre-determined background. The physical property of the particles is the a priori information
oneneedstoassignbeforetheinversion. Thentheinversionsearchesthelocationsoftheparticles
as the model parameters. The final model should have the particles clustered in a certain way
thatresemblesthedesiredtarget.
As the first pass, I tested the idea using 1D MT inversion as example. Numerical experi-
ments,assumingbothperfectandimperfectinformationaboutthetargetresistivityandnumber
of particles, are carried out to demonstrate that the particle clustering approach is effective. I
have found that the particle clustering is robust against incorrect a priori resistivity and number
ofparticleseventhoughthedataarenotacceptablyfit,astherecoveredmodelsarestillgeomet-
rically reasonable representation of the true models. A more complicated model containing two
targetswasalsopositivelytested.
Like other geophysical inversions, the incomplete information in the data necessitates the
regularization on the particles’ locations. Because usually a compact body is more geologically
plausible, I propose a measurement, called distribution norm or d-norm, to encourage the par-
ticles to stick together while still fitting the data. By computing the variance or range of the
locations, the d-norm penalizes the objective function heavily if the particles are widely spread.
Theuseofthedistributionconstraintsgreatlytightenedtheparticleclustering,yieldingimproved
compactnesstotherecoveredmodel.
I also identify some practical problems in the particle clustering approach and the potential
solutions, for example, how to correct the imperfect a priori information, clustering towards
multiple centers to deal with multiple targets and stabilizing the optimization search in 2D/3D
using adaptive particle splitting. Those are the necessary considerations that make the new
approachpracticalandwillbeinvestigatedinthefuture.