Persistent Robotic Tasks:
Monitoring and Sweeping in Changing Environments
Stephen L. Smith Mac Schwager Daniela Rus
Abstract—We present controllers that enable mobile robots
to persistently monitor or sweep a changing environment. The
changing environment is modeled as a field which grows in
locations that are not within range of a robot, and decreases
inlocationsthatarewithinrangeofarobot.Weassumethatthe
robotstravelongivenclosedpaths.Thespeedofeachrobotalong
itspathiscontrolledtopreventthefieldfromgrowingunbounded
at any location. We consider the space of speed controllers that
can be parametrized by a finite set of basis functions. For a
single robot, we develop a linear program that is guaranteed
to compute a speed controller in this space to keep the field
bounded, if such a controller exists. Another linear program is
thenderivedwhosesolutionisthespeedcontrollerthatminimizes
the maximum field value over the environment. We extend our
linear program formulation to develop a multi-robot controller
that keeps the field bounded. The multi-robot controller has the
unique feature that it does not require communication among
the robots. Simulation studies demonstrate the robustness of
the controllers to modeling errors, and to stochasticity in the Fig. 1: A persistent monitoring task using three robots with heterogeneous,
limitedrangesensors.Thesurfaceshowstheaccumulationfunction,indicating
environment.
the quantity of material to be removed in a cleaning application, or the
uncertaintyateachpointinasensingapplication.Theaccumulationfunction
growswhenarobot’sfootprintisnotoverit,anddecreaseswhenthefootprint
I. INTRODUCTION isoverit.Eachrobotcontrolsitsspeedalongitsprescribedpathsoastokeep
thesurfaceaslowaspossibleeverywhere.
In this paper we treat the problem of controlling robots
to perpetually act in a changing environment, for example to
clean an environment where material is constantly collecting,
ortomonitoranenvironmentwhereuncertaintyiscontinually a constant rate, as if the point were collecting dust. When a
growing. Each robot has only a small footprint over which to robot’s footprint is over the point, the accumulation function
act (e.g. to sweep or to sense). The difficulty is in controlling decreasesataconstantrate,asifthedustwerebeingvacuumed
therobotstomovesothattheirfootprintsvisitallpointsinthe bytherobot.Theratesofgrowthanddecreasecanbedifferent
environment regularly, spending more time in those locations at different points in the environment.
where the environment changes quickly, without neglecting This model is applicable to situations in which the task
the locations where it changes more slowly. This scenario is of the robot is to remove material that is collecting in
distinct from most other sweeping and monitoring scenarios the environment, for example cleaning up oil in the ocean
in the literature because the task cannot be “completed.” around a leaking well [1], vacuuming dirt from the floor
That is to say, the robots must continually move to satisfy of a building [2], or tending to produce in an agricultural
the objective. We consider the situation in which robots are field[3].Itisalsoapplicabletomonitoringscenariosinwhich
constrained to move on fixed paths, along which we must the state of the environment changes at each point, and we
control their speed. We consider both the single robot and want to maintain up-to-date knowledge of this changing state.
multi-robot cases. Figure 1 shows three robots monitoring an Some examples include monitoring temperature, salinity, or
environment using controllers designed with our method. chlorophyll in the ocean [4], maintaining estimates of coral
We model the changing environment with a scalar valued reefhealth[5],ormonitoringtrafficcongestionoveracity[6].
function defined, which we call the accumulation function. These applications all share the property that they can never
The function behaves analogously to dust accumulating over be completed, because the environment is always changing. If
a floor. When a robot’s footprint is not over a point in the the robot were to stop moving, the oil would collect beyond
environment, the accumulation function grows at that point at acceptable levels, or the knowledge of the ocean temperature
would become unacceptably outdated. For this reason we call
ThismaterialisbaseduponworksupportedinpartbyONR-MURIAward
these applications persistent tasks. In this paper, we assume
N00014-09-1-1051
The authors are with the Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence that the model is known either from the physics of the
Laboratory, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge MA 02139 environment, from a human expert, or from an initial survey
(slsmith@mit.edu, schwager@mit.edu, rus@csail.mit.edu). M. Schwager is
of the environment. However we show analytically and in
also affiliated with the GRASP Laboratory, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia,PA19104. simulation that our controllers are robust to model errors.
1v3060.2011:viXra
We focus on the situation in which the robots are given control [12], and machine learning [13]. Our LP formulations
fixed, closed paths on which to travel, and we have to carry also incorporate both maximum and minimum limits on the
out the persistent task only by regulating their speed. This is robot’sspeed,whichcanbedifferentatdifferentpointsonthe
relevantinmanyreal-worldscenarios.Forexample,inthecase path. This is important because we may want a robot not to
that the robots are autonomous cars, they may be constrained exceedacertainspeedaroundasharpturn,forexample,while
to move on a particular circuit of roads in a city to avoid it can go much faster on a long straightaway.
traffic congestion, or in the case of autonomous aircraft, they
may be constrained to fly along a particular path to stay away
B. Related Work
from commercial air traffic, or to avoid being detected by
an adversary. Even in the case of vacuuming the floor of a Our work is related to the large body of existing research
building,therobotsmayberequiredtostayalongaprescribed on environmental monitoring, sensor sweep coverage, lawn
pathsoasnottointerferewithfoottraffic.Furthermore,ifwe mowing and milling, and patrolling. In the environmental
have the freedom to plan the robot’s path, we can employ an monitoring literature (also called objective analysis in mete-
off-line planner to generate paths that are optimal according orological research [14] and Kriging in geological research
to some metric (using the planner in [7] for example), then [15]), authors often use a probabilistic model of the environ-
apply the procedure in this paper to control the speed along ment, and estimate the state of that model using a Kalman-
thepath.Decouplingthepathplanningfromthespeedcontrol like filter. Then robots are controlled so as to maximize a
in this way is a well-established technique for dealing with metric on the quality of the state estimate. For example, the
complex trajectory planning problems [8]. work in [16] controls robots to move in the direction of the
gradient of mutual information. More recently, the authors of
[17]and[18]controlvehiclestodecreasethevarianceoftheir
A. Contributions
estimate ofthe state ofthe environment. Thisis accomplished
Ourapproachtotheproblemistorepresentthespaceofall
in a distributed way by using average consensus estimators
possible speed controllers with a finite set of basis functions,
to propagate information among the robots. Similarly, [19]
whereeachpossiblespeedcontrollerisalinearcombinationof
proposes a gradient based controller to decrease the variance
those basis functions. A rich class of controllers can be repre-
of the estimate error in a time changing environment. In [20]
sentedinthisway.Usingthisrepresentationasourfoundation,
sensing robots are coordinated to move in a formation along
the main contributions of this paper are the following.
levelcurvesoftheenvironmentalfield.In[21]theauthorsfind
(i) We formally introduce the idea of persistent tasks for optimal trajectories over a finite horizon if the environmental
robotsinchangingenvironments,andproposeatractable model satisfies a certain spatial separation property. Also, in
model for designing robot controllers. [22] the authors solve a dynamic program (DP) over a finite
(ii) Considering the space of speed controllers parametrized horizon to find the trajectory of a robot to minimize the
by a finite set of basis functions, we formulate a linear variance of the estimate of the environment, and a similar
program(LP)whosesolutionisaspeedcontrollerwhich DP approach was employed in [23] over short time horizons.
guarantees that the accumulation function eventually Many other works exist in this vein.
falls below, and remains below, a known bound every- Although these works are well-motivated by the uncon-
where. If the LP is infeasible, then no controller in the tested successes of Kalman filtering and Kriging in real-
spacethatwillkeeptheaccumulationfunctionbounded. world estimation applications, they suffer from the fact that
(iii) WeformulateanLPwhosesolutionistheoptimalspeed planning optimal trajectories under these models requires the
controller—that which eventually minimizes the maxi- solution of an intractable dynamic program, even for a static
mum of the accumulation function over all locations. environment. One must resort to myopic methods, such as
(iv) We generalize to the multi-robot case. We find an LP gradient descent (as in [16], [17], [18], [20], [19]), or solve
whose solution is a controller which guarantees that the DP approximately over a finite time horizon (as in [21],
the accumulation function falls below, and stays below, [22], [23]). Although these methods have great appeal from
a known bound. The multi-robot controller does not an estimation point of view, little can be proved about the
require communication between robots. comparativeperformanceofthecontrolstrategiesemployedin
Wedonotfindtheoptimalcontrollerforthemulti-robotcase, these works. The approach we take in this paper circumvents
however, as it appears that this controller cannot be found as the question of estimation by formulating a new model of
the solution to an LP. We demonstrate the performance of the growing uncertainty in the environment. Under this model,
controllers in numerical simulations, and show that they are we can solve the speed planning problem over infinite time,
robusttostochasticanddeterministicerrorsintheenvironment while maintaining guaranteed levels of uncertainty in a time-
model, and to unmodeled robot vehicle dynamics. changingenvironment.Thuswehaveusedalesssophisticated
It is desirable to cast our speed control problem as an environment model in order to obtain stronger results on the
LP since LPs can be solved efficiently with off-the-shelf control strategy. Because our model is based on the analogy
solvers [9]. This is enabled by our basis function represen- of dust collecting in an environment, we also solve infinite
tation. The use of basis functions is a common, and powerful horizon sweeping problems with the same method.
method for function approximation [10], and is frequently Ourprobleminthispaperisalsorelatedtosweepcoverage,
used in areas such as compressive sampling [11], adaptive or lawn mowing and milling problems, in which robots with
finitesensorfootprintsmoveoveranenvironmentsothatevery curve γ : [0,1] R2, where γ(0) = γ(1). (See Figure 2
point in the environment is visited at least once by a robot. for an illustration.) The curve is parametrized by θ [0,1],
Lawn mowing and milling has been treated in [24] and other and we assume without loss of generality that θ is the arc-
works. Sweep coverage has recently been studied in [25], lengthparametrization.Theenvironmentalsocontainsasingle
and in [26] efficient sweep coverage algorithms are proposed robot (we will generalize to multiple robots in Section IV)
for ant robots. A survey of sweep coverage is given in [27]. whose motion is constrained along the path γ. The robot’s
Our problem is significantly different from these because our position at a time t can be described by θ(t), its position
environmentisdynamic,therebyrequiringcontinualre-milling along the curve γ. The robot is equipped with a sensor with
or re-sweeping. A different notion of persistent surveillance finite footprint (θ) (For example, the footprint could
has been considered in [28] and [29], where a persistent task be a disk of radius r centered at the robot’s position).1 Our
isdefinedasonewhosecompletiontakesmuchlongerthanthe objectiveistocontrolthespeedv oftherobotalongthecurve.
lifeofarobot.Whiletheterminologyissimilar,ourproblemis We assume that for each point θ on the curve, the maximum
more concerned with the task (sweeping or monitoring) itself possiblerobotspeedisv (θ)andtheminimumrobotspeed
than with power requirements of individual robots. is v (θ) > 0. This allows us to express constraints on the
A problem more closely related to ours is that of pa- robot speed at different points on the curve. For example, for
trolling [30], [31], where an environment must be continually safetyconsiderations,therobotmayberequiredtomovemore
surveyed by a group of robots such that each point is visited slowly in certain areas of the environment, or on high curved
with equal frequency. Similarly, in [32] vehicles must repeat- sections of the path. To summarize, the robot is described by
edly visit the cells of a gridded environment. Also, continual the triple :=( ,v ,v ).
perimeter patrolling is addressed in [33]. In another related A time- R varying B field Z : Q R R , which we call
work, a region is persistently covered in [34] by controlling the accumulation function, is defined on the points of interest
robots to move at constant speed along predefined paths. Our Q. This field may describe a physical quantity, such as the
work is different from these, however, in that we treat the sit- amountofoilonthesurfaceofabodyofwater.Alternatively,
uationinwhichdifferentpartsoftheenvironmentmayrequire the field may describe the robot’s uncertainty about the state
differentlevelsofattention.Thisisasignificantdifferenceasit ofeachpointofinterest.Weassumethatateachpointq Q,
induces a difficult resource trade-off problem as one typically the field Z increases (or is produced) at a constant rate p(q).
finds in queuing theory [35], or dynamic vehicle routing [36], When the robot footprint is covering q, it consumes Z at a
[37]. In [38], the authors consider unequal frequency of visits constant rate c(q), so that when a point q is covered, the net
in a gridded environment, but they control the robots using a rate of decrease is p(q) c(q). Thus, Z evolves according
greedy method that does not have performance guarantees. to the following differential equation (with initial conditions
Indeed, our problem can be seen as a dynamic vehicle Z(q,0) and θ(0)):
routingproblemwithsomeuniquefeatures.Mostimportantly,
 (cid:0) (cid:1)
and Z(q,t)>0,
planningapathforvehiclesthatmoveatconstantspeed.Also, 0, − if q ∈B(cid:0) θ(t) (cid:1) and Z(q,t)=0,
inourcaseallthepointsunderarobot’sfootprintareserviced ∈B (1)
simultaneously,whereastypicallyrobotsserviceonepointata where for each q Q, we have c(q) > p(q) > 0. In this
timeindynamicvehiclerouting.Finally,inourcaseservicing paper, we assume ∈ that we know the model parameters p(q)
apointtakesanamountoftimeproportionaltothesizeofthe and c(q). It is reasonable to assume knowledge of c(q) since
accumulation function at that point, whereas the service time it pertains to the performance of the robot. For example, in
of points in dynamic vehicle routing is typically independent an oil cleanup application, the consumption rate of oil of the
of that points wait-time. robot can be measured in a laboratory environment or in field
The paper is organized as follows. In Section II we set up trials prior to control design. As for the production rate, p(q),
the problem and define some basic notions. In Section III two this must be estimated from the physics of the environment,
LPsareformulated,oneofwhichgivesastabilizingcontroller, from a human expert (e.g. an oil mining engineer in the case
and the other one an optimal controller. Multiple robots are of an oil well leak), or it can be measured in a preliminary
addressed in Section IV. The performance and robustness of surveyoftheenvironment.However,theaccuracyofthemodel
the controllers are illustrated in simulations in Section V. is not crucial, as we show analytically and in simulations
Finally, Section VI gives conclusions and extensions. that our method has strong robustness with respect to errors
in p(q). The production function can also be estimated and
II. PROBLEMFORMULATIONANDSTABILITYNOTIONS
incorporated into the controller on-line, though we save the
In this section we formalize persistent tasks, introduce the development of an on-line strategy for future work.
notionofafieldstabilizingcontroller,andprovideanecessary With this notation, we can now formally define a persistent
and sufficient conditions for field stability. task.
A. Persistent Tasks 1Foragroundrobotorsurfacevessel,thefootprintmaybetherobot’sfield
Consideracompactenvironment R2,andafinitesetof of view, or its cleaning surface. For a UAV flying at constant altitude over
E ⊂ a 2D environment, the footprint could give the portion of the environment
points of interest Q . The environment contains a closed viewablebytherobot.
(θ) in the sense that the speed at a point θ is the same on each
γ cycle of the path. The controller can be written as
v :[0,1] R ,
F(q) q whereeachθ [0,1]ismappedtoaspeedv(θ)satisfyingthe
boundsv (θ) v(θ) v (θ).Thesecontrollershavethe
advantage that they do not require information on the current
state of the field Z, only its model parameters p(q) and c(q).
While it may seem restrictive to limit our controllers to this
special form, the following result shows that it is not.
Proposition II.4 (Periodic Position-Feedback Controllers). If
Fig.2:Anillustrationofacurveγfollowedbytherobot.Therobotislocated
atθandhasfootprintB(θ).ThesetF(q)ofrobotpositionsθforwhichthe a persistent task can be stabilized by a general controller
footprintcoversq areshownasthickgreysegmentsofthecurve. v(θ,Z,IC,t), then it can be stabilized by a periodic position-
feedback controller v(θ).
The proof of Proposition II.4 is given in Appendix A, and
Definition II.1 (Persistent Tasks). A persistent task is a tuple
relies on the statement and proof of the upcoming result in
( ,γ,Q,p,c), where is the robot model, γ is the curve
R R Lemma II.5. Therefore, we encourage the reader to postpone
followed by the robot, Q is the set of points of interest, and p
reading the proof until after Lemma II.5.
and c are the production and consumption rates of the field,
We will now investigate conditions for a controller to be
respectively.
field stabilizing and for a persistent task to be feasible. Let us
In general, for a given persistent task, the commanded define a function which maps each point q Q, to the curve
speed v could depend on the current position θ, the field positions θ for which q is covered by the ro ∈ bot footprint. To
Z, the initial conditions θ(0) and Z(q,0), and time t. Thus, this end, we define
definingthesetofinitialconditionsasIC:=(θ(0),Z(q,0)),a
general controller has the form v(θ,Z,IC,t). For the reader’s F(q):= θ [0,1] q (θ) .
{ ∈ | ∈B }
convenience, the notation used in this paper is summarized in
An illustration of the curve, the robot footprint, and the set
Table I.
F(q)isshowninFigure2.(InSectionVwediscusshowthis
set can be computed in practice.)
B. Field Stability and Feasibility Given a controller θ v(θ), we define two quantities: 1)
the cycle time, or period, T, and 2) the coverage time per
In this section we formalize the problem of stabilizing the
cycle τ(q). Since v(θ)>0 for all θ, the robot completes one
field in a persistent task. As a first consideration, a suitable
full cycle of the closed curve in time
controller should keep the field bounded everywhere, inde-
pendent of the initial conditions. This motivates the following (cid:90) 1 1
definition of stability. v(θ)
Definition II.2 (Field Stabilizing Controller). A speed con- During each cycle, the robot’s footprint is covering the point
troller field stabilizes a persistent task if the field is always q only when θ(t) F(q). Thus the point q is covered for
eventually bounded, independent of initial conditions. That is, (cid:90)
if there exists a Z < + such that for every q Q and τ(q):= dθ, (3)
initial condition Z
d θ(0), we have
time units during each complete cycle.
limsupZ(q,t) Z max . Withthesedefinitionswecangiveanecessaryandsufficient
condition for a controller to stabilize a persistent task. In
Note that in this definition of stability, for every initial Section III, we develop a method for testing if this condition
condition, the field eventually enters the interval [0,Z ]. can be satisfied by a speed controller.
There are some persistent tasks for which no controller is
Lemma II.5 (Stability condition). Given a persistent task, a
field stabilizing. This motivates the notion of feasibility.
controller v(θ) is field stabilizing if and only if
Definition II.3 (Feasible Persistent Task). A persistent task is (cid:90) 1 (cid:90) 1 1
feasible if there exists a field stabilizing speed controller. c(q) dθ >p(q) dθ (4)
Asstatedabove,foragivenpersistenttask,ageneralspeed
for every q Q. Applying the definitions in (2) and (3), the
controller can be written as v(θ,Z,IC,t). However, in the ∈ (cid:0) (cid:1)
condition can be expressed as τ(q)> p(q)/c(q) T.
remainder of the paper we will focus on a small subset of
speed controllers which we call periodic position-feedback The lemma has a simple intuition. For stability, the field
controllers.Inthesecontrollers,thespeedonlydependsonthe consumption per cycle must exceed the field production per
robot’scurrentpositionθ [0,1].Thecontrollersareperiodic cycle, for each point q Q. We now prove the result.
Proof: Consider a point q Q, and the set of curve III. SINGLEROBOTSPEEDCONTROLLERS:
positions F(q) for which q is covered by the robot footprint. STABILITYANDOPTIMALITY
Given the speed controller v, we can compute the cycle time
In this paper we focus on a finite set of points of interest
T in (2). Then, let us consider the change in the field from
Q = q ,...,q . These m locations could be specific
Z(q,t) to Z(q,t+T), where t 0. { 1 m }
≥ regions of interest, or they could be a discrete approximation
Define an indicator function I : [0,1] Q 0,1 as
× → { } of the continuous space obtained by, for example, laying a
I(θ,q)=1 for θ F(q) and 0 otherwise. Then, from (1) we
∈ grid down on theenvironment. In the Section Vwe will show
examples of both scenarios. Our twomain results are given in
Z˙(q,t) p(q) c(q)I(θ(t),q), Theorems III.1 and III.8, which show that a field stabilizing
≥ − controller, and a controller minimizing (v), can each be
for all values of Z(q,t), with equality if Z(q,t) > 0. found by solving an appropriate linear pro H gram.
Integrating the above expression over [t,t+T] we see that Tobegin,itwillbemoreconvenienttoconsidertherecipro-
(cid:90) t+T cal speed controller v−1(θ):=1/v(θ), with its corresponding
whereτ(q)isdefinedin(3),andtheequalityfollowsfromthe
Now,ourapproachistoconsiderafinitesetofbasisfunctions
fact that I(θ(t),q) is simply an indicator function on whether
β (θ),...,β (θ) . Example basis functions include (a finite
or not the footprint is covering q at a given time. From (5) 1 n
subset of) the Fourier basis or Gaussian basis [10]. In what
we see that for the field to be eventually bounded by some
follows we will use rectangular functions as the basis:
Z forallinitialconditionsZ(q,0),werequirethatτ(q)>
p(q)/c(q)T for all q Q. (cid:40)
To see that the condition is also sufficient, suppose that β (θ)= ∈ − (6)
0, otherwise,
τ(q) > p(q)/c(q)T. Then there exists (cid:15) > 0 such that
(cid:0) (cid:1)
− − − for each j 1,...,n . This basis, which provides a piece-
the field at the point q Q is strictly positive over the entire ∈ { }
∈ wiseconstantapproximationtoacurve,hastheadvantagethat
interval [t,t+T], implying that
we will easily be able to incorporate the speed constraints
Z(q,t+T)=Z(q,t) (cid:15). v min (θ) and v max (θ) into the controller.
− Thenletusconsiderreciprocalspeedcontrollersoftheform
Thus, from every initial condition, Z(q,t) moves below
(cid:0) c(q) p(q) (cid:1) T.Additionally,notethatforeacht¯intheinter- (cid:88) n
Thus, we have that there exists a finite time ≤ t¯such that for all j=1
t t¯, where α ,...,α R are free parameters that we will use
to optimize the speed controller. A rich class of functions
(cid:0) (cid:1)
≤ − can be represented as a finite linear combination of basis
functions, though not all functions can be represented this
Since Q is finite, there exists a single (cid:15) > 0 such that for
way. Limiting our speed controller to a linear parametrization
every point q Q we have τ(q) p(q)/c(q)T > (cid:15). Hence,
∈ − allows us to find an optimal controller within that class, while
letting Z =max c(q)T, we see that Z is stable for all
preserving enough generality to give complex solutions that
q, completing the proof.
wouldbedifficulttofindinanadhocmanner.Inthefollowing
In the following sections we will address two problems,
subsectionwewillconsidertheproblemofsynthesizingafield
determining a field stabilizing controller, and determining a
stabilizing controller.
minimizing controller, defined as follows:
Problem II.6 (Persistent Task Metrics). Given a persis-
tent task, determine a periodic position-feedback controller A. Synthesis of a Field Stabilizing Controller
v : [0,1] R >0 that satisfies the speed constraints (i.e., In this section we will show that a field stabilizing speed
(cid:2) → (cid:3)
v(θ) v min (θ),v max (θ) for all θ [0,1]), and controlleroftheform(7)canbefoundthroughthesolutionof
(i) is field stabilizing; or a linear program. This result is summarized in Theorem III.1.
(ii) minimizes the maximum steady-state field (v): We remind the reader that A summary of the mathematical
(cid:18) (cid:19) symbols and their definitions is shown in Table I.
(v):=max limsupZ(q,t) . To begin, let us consider reciprocal speed controllers in
H q∈Q t→+∞ the form of (7). Then for q Q, the stability condition in
In Section III we will show that by writing the speed Lemma II.5 becomes
controller in terms of a set of basis functions, problems (i)
and (ii) can be solved using linear programs. In Section IV (cid:88) n α (cid:90) β (θ)dθ > p(q i )(cid:88) n α (cid:90) 1 β (θ)dθ
we will solve problem (i) for multiple robots. j=1 F(qi) c(q i ) j=1 0
TABLEI:TableofSymbols
Symbol Definition
E the environment.
Q a set of points of interest in the environment E.
q a point of interest in Q.
γ a curve followed by the robot, and parametrized by θ.
v(θ) the speed of the robot along the curve γ.
R the robot model, consisting of minimum and maximum speeds v (θ) and v (θ), and a robot footprint B(θ).
B(θ) The set of points in the environment covered by the robot’s footprint when positioned at θ.
F(q) the values of θ∈[0,1] along the curve γ for which the point q is covered by the footprint.
Z(q,t) the field (or accumulation function) at point q∈Q at time t.
p(q) the rate of production of the field Z at point q.
c(q) the rate of consumption of the field Z when q is covered by the robot footprint.
β(θ) a basis function.
α a basis function coefficient, or parameter.
T the time to complete one full cycle of the curve.
τ(q) the amount of time the point q∈Q is covered per cycle.
H(v) cost function (10) giving the steady-state maximum value of Z(q,t)
Rearranging, we get thousands of variables and constraints [9]. Thus, the problem
of computing a field stabilizing controller can be solved
α K(q ,β )>0, for finely discretized environments with thousands of basis
functions.Notethatintheabovelemma,weareonlychecking
feasibility, and thus the cost function in the optimization is
where we have defined
arbitrary. For simplicity we write the cost as 0.
(cid:90) p(q ) (cid:90) 1
K(q ,β ):= β (θ)dθ i β (θ)dθ. (8) In Theorem III.1 the cost is set to 0 to highlight the
F(qi) − c(q i ) 0 feasibility constraints. However, in practice, an important
Finally, to satisfy the speed constraints we have that consideration is robustness of the controller to uncertainty
and error in the model of the field evolution, and in the
1 (cid:88) 1 motion of the robot. Robustness of this type can be achieved
v (θ) ≤ ≤ v (θ) by slightly altering the above optimization to maximize the
stability margin. This is outlined in the following result.
For the rectangular basis in (6), the speed constraints become
Corollary III.2 (Robustness via Maximum Stability Margin).
α , The optimization
where maximize B
v (j)= inf v (θ), and (cid:88)
max max α K(q ,β ) B i 1,...,m
min min 1 1
Thus, we obtain the following result. max min
whereα ,...,α andB aretheoptimizationvariables,yields
Theorem III.1 (Existence of a Field Stabilizing Controller). 1 n
a speed controller which maximizes the stability margin,
A persistent task is stabilizable by a speed controller of the
α K(q ,β ). The controller
form(7)ifandonlyifthefollowinglinearprogramisfeasible: qi∈Q j=1 j i j
(i) has the largest decrease in Z(q ,t) per cycle, and thus
minimize 0 i
achieves steady-state in the minimum number of cycles.
(cid:88) (ii) isrobusttoerrorsinestimatingthefieldproductionrate.
subject to α K(q ,β )>0 i 1,...,m
j i j ∀ ∈{ } If the robot’s estimate of the production rate at a field
point q Q is p¯(q ), and the true value is p(q )
1 1 i ∈ i i ≤
α , j 1,...,n , p¯(q )+(cid:15), then the field is stable provided that for each
max min q Q
where K(q ,β ) is defined in (8), and α ,...,α are the
i j 1 n  −1
optimization variables. (cid:88) n (cid:90) 1
(cid:15)<B c(q
(θ)dθ .
Hence, we can solve for a field stabilizing controller using ·
asimplelinearprogram.Theprogramhasnvariables(onefor
each basis function coefficient), and 2n+m constraints (two Proof: The first property follows directly from the fact
for each basis function coefficient, and one for each point that
α K(q ,β ) is the amount of decrease of the field
of interest in Q). One can easily solve linear programs with at point q in one cycle.
Toseethesecondproperty,supposethattheoptimizationis (i) foreverysetofinitialconditionsθ(0)andZ(q,0),there
basedonaproductionratep¯(q )foreachq Q,butthetrue exists a time t∗ 0 such that
production rate is given by p(q i ) := p¯(q i )+(cid:15), where (cid:15) > 0. Z(q,t)=Z¯(cid:0)
In solving the optimization above, we obtain a controller with
a stability margin of B >0. For the true system to be stable for all t t∗.
we require that for each q i Q, (ii) thereexis ≥ tsatleastoneθ [0,1]suchthatZ¯(q,θ)=0.
(cid:88) n (cid:90) p¯(q i )+(cid:15)(cid:88) n (cid:90) 1 From the above result we see that from every initial condi-
j j c(q ) j j tion,thefieldconvergesinfinitetimetoasteady-stateZ¯(q,θ).
j=1 F(qi) i j=1 0
Insteady-state,thefieldZ(q,t)attimetdependsonlyonθ(t)
This can be rewritten as
(andisindependentofZ(q,0)).Eachtimetherobotislocated
(cid:88) n (cid:15) (cid:88) n (cid:90) 1 atθ,thefieldisgivenbyZ¯(q,θ).Moreover,theresulttellsus
j i j j j that in steady-state there is always a robot position at which
j=1 i j=1 0 thefieldisreducedtozero.InordertoprovePropositionIII.4
from which we see that the true field is stable provided that webeginwiththefollowinglemma.Recallthatthecycle-time
(cid:0)(cid:80)n
for each q Q. for a speed controller v is T :=
1/v(θ)dθ.
i j=1 j 0 j i ∈ 0
Remark III.3 (Alternative Basis Functions). Given an ar- Lemma III.5 (Field Reduced to Zero). Consider a feasible
bitrary set of basis functions, the inequalities in (9) yield persistent task and a field stabilizing speed controller. For
an infinite (and uncountable) number of constraints, one for every q Q and every set of initial conditions Z(q,0) and
each θ [0,1]. This means that for some basis functions the θ(0), there exists a time t∗ >T such that
linear program in Theorem III.1 can not be solved exactly.
However, in practice, an effective method is to simply en-
force the constraints in (9) for a finite number of θ values, for all non-negative integers a.
θ ,...,θ .Eachθ generatestwoconstraintsintheoptimiza-
Proof: Consider any q Q, and initial conditions
tion. Then, we can tighten each constraint by ξ >0, yielding
(cid:80) Z(q,0) and θ(0), and suppose by way of contradiction that
max i ≤ j j j i ≤ min i − the speed controller is stable but Z(q,t) > 0 for all t >
i 1,...,w . Choosing the number of θ values w as large
∈{ } T. From Lemma II.5, if the persistent task is stable, then
as possible given the available computational resources, we
c(q)τ(q) > p(q)T for all q. Thus, there exists (cid:15) > 0 such
can then increase ξ until the controller satisfies the original
speed constraints. (cid:3) that c(q)τ(q) p(q)T >(cid:15) for all q Q. From the proof of
Lemma II.5, we have that
B. Synthesis of an Optimal Controller Z(q,t+T) Z(q,t)=p(q)T c(q)τ(q)= (cid:15).
In this section we look at Problem II.6 (ii), which is to Therefore, given Z(q,0), we have that Z(q,t∗)=0 for some
minimize the maximum value attained by the field over the finite t∗ >T, a contradiction.
finite region of interest Q. That is, for a given persistent task, Next we will verify that if Z(q,t∗) = 0 for some t∗ > T,
our goal is to minimize the following cost function, then Z(q,t∗+T) = 0. To see this, note that the differential
(cid:18) (cid:19) equation (1) is piecewise constant. Given a speed controller
(v)=max limsupZ(q,t) (10)
v(θ), the differential equation is time-invariant, and admits
H q∈Q t→+∞
unique solutions.
overallpossiblespeedcontrollersv.Attimeswewillreferto
Based on this, consider two initial conditions for (1),
the maximum steady-state value for a point q using a speed
(q,v):=limsupZ(q,t) and
Our main result of this section, Theorem III.8, is that (v)
H Since (1) is time-invariant, we have that Z (q,T) =
canbeminimizedthroughalinearprogram.However,wemust 1
Z(q,t∗) = 0, and Z (q,T) = Z(q,t∗ + T). In addition,
first establish intermediate results. First we show that if v is 2
by uniqueness of solutions, we also know that Z (q,0)
a field stabilizing controller, then for every initial condition 1 ≥
there exists a finite time t∗ such that Z(q,t) (v) for all Z 2 (q,0) implies that Z 1 (q,T) ≥ Z 2 (q,T). Thus, we have
t t∗.
≤ H that Z(q,t∗)=0
Z(q,t∗+T), proving the desired result.
Proposition III.4 (Steady-State Field). Consider a feasible Thepreviouslemmashowsthatfromeveryinitialcondition
persistent task and a field stabilizing speed controller. Then, there exists a finite time t∗, after which the field at a point
there is a steady-state field q is reduced to zero in each cycle. With this lemma we can
prove Proposition III.4.
Z¯ :Q [0,1] R ,
× → ≥0 Proof of Proposition III.4: In Lemma III.5 we have
satisfying the following statements for each q Q: shown that for every set of initial conditions Z(q,0), θ(0),
there exists at time t∗ > T such that Z(q,t∗+aT) = 0 for From differential equation (1) we can write
all non-negative integers a. Since T is the cycle-time for the (cid:90) xk dθ
robot,wealsoknowthatθ(t∗+aT)=θ(t∗)foralla.Since(1) Z¯(q,x
yields unique solutions, (11) uniquely defines Z(q,t) for all yk−1
t ≥ t∗, with Z¯(q,y k )= (cid:18) Z¯(q,x k )+ (cid:0) p(q) c(q) (cid:1) (cid:90) yk dθ (cid:19)+ ,
Z(q,t+T)=Z(q,t) for all t t∗. (14)
where for z R, we define (z)+ := max z,0 . Combining
Hence, we can define the steady-state profile Z¯(q,θ) as
equations (13
) and (14) we see that
Z¯(cid:0) q,θ(t) (cid:1) :=Z(q,t) for all t [t∗,t∗+T). (cid:32) (cid:90) yk dθ
Finally, we need to verify that Z¯(q,θ) is independent of (cid:90) yk dθ (cid:19)+
initialconditions.Toproceed,supposebywayofcontradiction c(q) . (15)
that there are two sets of initial conditions θ
and θ 2 (0), Z 2 (q,0) which yield different steady-state fields For each b 1,...,(cid:96) , let us define3
Z¯ (q,θ) and Z¯ (q,θ). That is, there exists θ˜ such that ∈{ }
Z¯ 1 (q,θ˜) = Z¯ (q 2 ,θ˜). Without loss of generality, assume that (cid:90) yk dθ (cid:88) b−1(cid:90) yk−w dθ
Z¯ 1 (q,θ˜) (cid:54) > Z 2 ¯ (q,θ˜). To obtain a contradiction, we begin N k−b,k (q):=p(q) v(θ)− c(q) v(θ) . (16)
1 2 yk−b w=0 xk−w
by showing that this implies Z¯ (q,θ) Z¯ (q,θ) for all
θ. Note that Z and Z reach th 1 eir stead ≥ y-sta 2 te profiles Z¯ Note that we can write
a w n h d ic Z h ¯ 2 θ in (t fi ) ni = te θ tim (t e. ) T = hus θ˜ , , t a h n e d re Z ex ( i q st ,t tim ) e = s t Z¯ 1 ,t ( 2 q, ≥ θ˜), 0 a f n o d r Z¯(q,y k )= (cid:0) Z¯(q,y k−1 )+N k−1,k (q) (cid:1)+ .
1 1 2 2 1 1 1
Z (q,t )= Z¯ (q,θ˜). Since Z (q,t ) >Z (q,t ), and since and, from (15) we have
2 2 2 1 1 2 2
Z is a continuous function of time, either i) Z 1 (q,t 1 +t) > Z¯(q,y k ) Z¯(q,y k−b )+N k−b,k (q). (17)
Z (q,t +t) for all t 0, or ii) there exists a time t¯>0 for ≥
which Z (q,t +t¯)= ≥ Z (q,t +t¯), which by uniqueness of Moreover,
solutions implies Z (q,t +t) = Z (q,t +t) for all t t¯.
Thus, Z (q,t +t) 1 Z 1 (q,t +t) 2 for 2 all t 0, imply ≥ ing Z¯(q,y k )=Z¯(q,y k−b )+N k−b,k (q),
(q ≥ ,θ) for all θ. ≥ if Z(q,y k−j )>0 for all j
From Lemma III.5, there exists a θ¯ for which Z¯ 1 (q,θ¯) = Thus, we see that the quantity N k−b,k (q) gives the maximum
Z 0 ¯ . 2 ( S q in , c θ¯ e ) , = Z¯ 0 1 ( . q H , o θ w ) e ≥ ver Z , ¯ 2 th (q e , v θ a ) lu f e or of a Z ll 1 θ a , n w d e Z m 2 u at st θ¯ h u a n v i e qu t e h l a y t r e e x d a u m c p ti l o e n fo i r n b t = he 1 fi i e s l s d ho b w et n w i e n en Fig θ ur = e3 y c k . − W b it a h n t d he θ se = defi y n k i . tio A n n ,
definesZ¯ 1 andZ¯ 2 forallθ,implyingthatZ¯ 1 (q,θ)=Z¯ 2 (q,θ), we can characterize the steady-state field at the points y k .
a contradiction.
Lemma III.6 (Steady-State Field at Points y ). Given a
From Proposition III.4 we have shown the existence of k
feasiblepersistenttaskandafieldstabilizingspeedcontroller,
a steady-state field Z¯(q,θ) that is independent of initial
consider a point q Q and the set F(q) = (cid:96) [x ,y ].
conditions Z(q,0) and θ(0). ∈ ∪k=1 k k
Then, for each k 1,...,(cid:96) we have
Now, consider a point q Q and a field stabilizing speed ∈{ }
controller v(θ), and let us ∈ solve for its steady-state field Z¯(q,y
Z¯(q,θ). To begin, let us write F(q) (the set of θ values for b∈{0,...,(cid:96)−1}
which the point q is covered by the footprint) as a union of where N k−b,k (q) is defined in (16) and N k,k (q):=0.
disjoint intervals
Proof:Letusfixk 1,...,(cid:96) .Givenafieldstabilizing
controller, Proposition III.4 tells us that there exists θ such
F(q)=[x 1 ,y 1 ] [x 2 ,y 2 ] [x (cid:96) ,y (cid:96) ], (12) that Z¯(q,θ) = 0. It is clear that this must occur for some
θ F(q). Therefore,
where (cid:96) is a positive integer, and y > x > y for each ∈
k ∈{ 1,...,(cid:96) } .2 Thus, on the interva k ls [x k k ,y k ] th k− e 1 point q is Z¯(q,y j )=0 for some j ∈{ 1,...,(cid:96) } .
coveredbytherobotfootprint,andontheintervals[y ,x ],
k k+1 Let b be the smallest non-negative integer such that
the point q in uncovered. As an example, in Figure 2, the set Z¯(q,y )=0. By (18) we have
F(q) consists of two intervals, and thus (cid:96) = 2. An example
of a speed controller and an example of a set F(q) are shown Z¯(q,y k )=N k−b,k (q) 0.
in Figures 3a and 3b.
If b = 0, then the previous equation simply states that
Z(q,y ) = 0. Now, if N (q) N (q) for all
k k−d,k k−b,k
2Note that the number of intervals (cid:96), and the points x1,...,x (cid:96) and
y1,...,y (cid:96) areafunctionofq.However,forsimplicityofnotation,wewill 3In this definition, and in what follows, addition and subtraction in the
omitwritingtheexplicitdependence. indicesisperformedmodulo(cid:96).Therefore,ifk=1,thenN k−1,k =N (cid:96),1.
0 0 N3,1 N2,3
0 0.5 1 0 x1 y1 x2 y2 x3 y3 1 0 x1 y1 x2 y2 x3 y3 1
(a)Asamplereciprocalspeedcontrollerv(θ) (b) The steady-state field Z¯(q,θ). The set F(q) (c) The calculation of quantities N1,2, N2,3 and
consistsofthreeintervalswhichareshadedonthe N3,1.Thevaluesrepresentthemaximumreduction
θ-axis.Thesteady-stateprofileisincreasingoutside from y k−1 to y k. Thus, N1,2,N3,1 < 0 while
ofF(q)anddecreasinginsideF(q). N2,3>0.
Fig.3:Thesteady-statefieldforapointq∈Q.Thesetofθ valuesforwhichqiscoveredisgivenbyF(q)=[x1,y1]∪[x2,y2]∪[x3,y3].Thefieldis
producedataratep(q)=3,andisconsumedbythefootprintataratec(q)=8.5.
d 0,...,(cid:96) , then Z¯(q,y ) = max N (q), where β ,...,β are basis functions (e.g., the rectangular
k b∈{0,...,(cid:96)−1} k−b,k 1 n
and we have completed the proof. basis). For a finite field Q = q ,...,q , the terms
Suppose by way of contradiction that there is d N (q ) can be written as
0,...,(cid:96) 1 for which N (q)>N (q). From (17)
w { e have − } k−d,k k−b,k (cid:88) n
k,b i j k,b i j
k k−d k−d,k k−d,k
where the second inequality comes from the fact that
Z¯(q,y ) 0. However Z¯(q,y ) = N (q), implying
that N k−d ( ≥ q) N (q), a co k ntradicti k o − n b . ,k X k,b (q i ,β j ):=
k−d,k k−b,k
Theabovelem ≤ magivesthevalueofthefieldinsteady-state (cid:90) yk (cid:88) b−1(cid:90) yk−w
a th t e e s a e ch ar e e nd th p e oi θ nt v y a k lu . e T s h o e v fi e e r ld w d h e ic c h rea th se e s p fr o o in m t x q k i t s o c y o k v ( e s r i e n d c ) e , yk−b j − w=0 xk−w j
and then increases from y to x . Therefore, the maximum With these definitions we can define a linear program for
steady-state value is attained at an end point x for some k. minimizing the maximum of the steady-state field. We will
For example, in Figure 3b, the maximum is attained at the write (cid:96)(q) to denote the number of disjoint intervals on the
point x . However, the value at x can be easily computed curve γ over which the point q is covered, as defined in (12).
from the value at y using (13):
k−1 Theorem III.8 (Minimizing the Steady-State Field). Given a
(cid:90) xk+1 dθ feasible persistent task, the solution to the following linear
k+1 b∈{0,...,(cid:96)−1} k−b,k yk v(θ) program yields a speed controller v of the form (7) that
minimizes the maximum value of the steady-state field (v).
From this we obtain the following result. H
minimize B
Lemma III.7 (Steady-State Upper Bound). Given a field
stabilizing speed controller v, the maximum steady-state field (cid:88) n
subject to α X (q ,β ) B i 1,...,m ,
at q Q (defined in (10)) satisfies j k,b i j ≤ ∀ ∈{ }
(q,v)= max X (q), k 1,...,(cid:96)(q ) ,
H k∈{1,...,(cid:96)} k,b ∈{ i }
b∈{0,...,(cid:96)−1} b 0,...,(cid:96)(q i ) 1
where (cid:88) n
α K(q ,β )>0 i 1,...,m
(cid:90) xk+1 dθ (cid:88) b−1(cid:90) yk−w dθ j i j ∀ ∈{ }
yk−b w=0 xk−w α , j 1,...,n .
and F(q)= (cid:96) [x ,y ] with y >x >y for each k. max min
∪k=1 k k k k k−1
The optimization variables are α and B and the quantities
Theabovelemmaprovidesaclosedformexpression(albeit
X (q ,β ) and K(q ,β ) are defined in (19) and (8).
k,b i j i j
quite complex) for the largest steady-state value of the field.
Thus, consider speed controllers of the form From the above theorem, we can minimize the maximum
valueofthefieldusingalinearprogram.Thisoptimizationhas
v−1(θ)= α β (θ), n+1 variables (n basis function coefficients, and one upper
j j boundB).Thenumberofconstraintsism (cid:80)m (cid:96)(q )2+m+
2n. In practice, (cid:96)(q ) is small compared to n and m, and is all the robots. Let T = (cid:82)1 v−1(θ)dθ be the period of robot
independent of n an i d m. Thus, for most instances, the linear r, and let τ (q)= (cid:82) r v 0 −1( r θ)dθ be the time in that period
program has O(2n+m) constraints. that q is in robot r’s footprint. The existence of a common
period rests on the following technical assumption.
IV. MULTI-ROBOTSPEEDCONTROLLER Assumption IV.1 (Rational Periods). We assume that the
In this section we turn to the multi-robot case. We find periods T r are rational numbers, so that there exist integers
that a field stabilizing controller can again be formulated as num r and den r such that T r =num r /den r .
the solution of a linear program. Surprisingly, the resulting
AnimmediateconsequenceofAssumptionIV.1isthatthere
multi-robot controller does not rely on direct communication exists a common period T such that T/T N for all r. That
between the robots. We also show that the optimal controller ∈
is, each controller executes a whole number of cycles over
(the one that minimizes the steady state field) for multiple the time interval T. Specifically, letting T =ΠN num , we
.
t have T/T r = den r ΠN r(cid:48)=1,r(cid:48)(cid:54)=r num r(cid:48) . Now, we r= ca 1 n stat r e the
necessaryandsufficientconditionsforafieldstabilizingmulti-
ongoing work.
robot controller.
The multiple robots travel on fixed paths, but those paths
my be different (or they may be the same) and they may Lemma IV.2 (Multi-Robot Stability Condition). Given a
intersect arbitrarily with one another. The robots may have multi-robot persistent task, the set of controllers θ r v r (θ r ),
different consumption rates, footprints, and speed limits. We r 1,...,N is field stabilizing if and only if
donotexplicitlydealwithcollisionsinthissection,thoughthe
controllerweproposecanbeaugmentedwithexistingcollision
avoidance strategies. This is the subject of on going work. r
Wemustfirstmodifyournotationtoaccommodatemultiple for every q Q, where T = (cid:82)1 v−1(θ)dθ and τ (q) =
robots. Consider N robots with closed paths γ r :[0,1] → R2, (cid:82) v−1(θ) ∈ dθ. r 0 r r
r 1,...,N where γ r and γ r(cid:48) may intersect with each Fr(q) r
other arbitrarily (e.g., they may be the same path, share The lemma states an intuitive extension of Lemma II.5,
some segments, or be disjoint). We again assume that the which is that the total consumption per cycle must exceed
parametrization of each curve is an arc-length parametriza- the total production per cycle at each point q Q.
tion, normalized to unity. Robot r, which traverses path Proof:TheproofcloselyfollowstheproofofLemmaII.5.
γ at position θ (t), has a consumption rate c (q) over a Consider the change of Z(q,t) at a point q over any time
(cid:0) (cid:1)
footprint θ (t) , and has a speed controller v (θ ) with interval T, where T is a common period of all the rational
maximum B and minimum speed constraints v (θ ) and periods T , so that T/T N for all r. By integrating (20)
r,min r r r
v (θ ), respectively. Let = ( ,v ,v ) be we have that
r,max r r r r,min r,max
the tuple containing the parameters for robot r and redefine (cid:88) N (cid:90) T
R :=( R 1 ,..., R N ) to be the tuple containing all the robots’ Z(q,t+T) − Z(q,t) ≥ Tp(q) − I r (τ,q)c r (q)dτ
tuples of parameters. Also, the set of points θ r from which r=1 t
q is in robot r’s footprint is denoted F r (q). Furthermore, we (cid:88) T (cid:88) /Tr(cid:90) t+kTr
let γ := (γ ,...,γ ) and c := (c ,...,c ) be the tuple =Tp(q) I (τ,q)c (q)dτ
1 N 1 N r r
of all robot’s paths and all robots’ consumption functions, r=Nq k=1 t+(k−1)Tr
r ( esp , e γ c , t Q iv , e p ly , . c T ) h a e sb p e e f r o si r s e t , e a n n t d ta w sk e w se i e th k N spe r e o d bo c t o s n i t s ro n ll o e w rs w v ri ( t θ ten ) =T (cid:16) p(q) (cid:88) N c (q) τ r (q)(cid:17) ,
R r r − r T
to keep Z(q,t) bounded everywhere, as in Definition II.2. r=1 r
We make the assumption that when multiple robots’ foot-
where I (t,q) takes the value 1 when q is in the footprint of
prints are over the same point q, their consumption rates are
robotr and0otherwise.Tosimplifynotation,defineC(q):=
additive. Specifically, let q (t) be the set of robots whose (cid:80)N c (q) and C¯(q):= (cid:80)N c (q)τ (q)/T .
N r=1 r r=1 r r r
footprints are over the point q at time t, First we prove necessity. In order to reach a contradiction,
(cid:0) (cid:1) assume that the condition in Lemma IV.2 is false, but the
N q (t):= { r | q ∈B r θ r (t) } . persistent task is stable. Then T (cid:0) p(q) C¯(q) (cid:1) 0 for some
Then the rate of change of the function Z(q,t) is given by q, implying Z(q,t+T) Z(q,t) for some q and for all t,
 (cid:88) whichcontradictsstability.Inparticular,foraninitialcondition
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
(cid:0) (cid:1)
(20) T C(q) p(q) (if no such time and point exists, the
We can reformulate a stability condition analogous to Lemma persistent task is stable). Then for all times in the interval
II.5 to suit the multi-robot setting, but we must first establish τ [t,t+T], Z(q,t+τ) > 0, and by (20) we have that
the notion of a common period for the speed controllers of Z( ∈ q,t+T) Z(q,t) = T (cid:0) p(q) C¯(q) (cid:1) = (cid:15). Therefore,
after finitely many periods T, Z(q,t) will become less than for all r 1,...,N and q Q. Thus, defining
T C(q) p(q) . Now for a time t and a point q such that (cid:90)
− (cid:0) (cid:1)
Z(q,t) < T C(q) p(q) , for all times τ [t,t+T] we K (q ,β ):=c (q ) β (θ)dθ, (23)
r i j r i rj
havethatZ(q,t+τ) Z(q,t)+p(q)T <TC(q).Therefore, Fr(qi)
≤ (cid:0) (cid:1)
once Z(q,t) falls below T C(q) p(q) (which will occur the stability constraints become
in finite time), it will never again exceed TC(q). Therefore
the persistent task is stable with Z =max TC(q). (cid:88)
rj r i j i
Remark IV.3 (Justification of Rational Periods). Assumption r=1j=1
IV.1isrequiredonlyforthesakeofsimplifyingtheexposition.
To satisfy the speed constraints, we also require that
The rational numbers are a dense subset of the real numbers, v−1 (θ ) v−1(θ ) v−1 (θ ), which from (22) leads
so for any (cid:15) > 0 we can find num r and den r such that to r,max r ≤ r r ≤ r,min r
n th u r m ou r g / h d t e h n e r a ≤ nal T y r si ≤ s t n o u p m ro r v / e d o e u n r r r + es (cid:15) u . lt O s n i e n c g o e u n l e d ra c l a . rry the (cid:3) (cid:15) f r (cid:88) n α rj β rj (θ r ) f r ,
r,max r r,min r
A. Synthesis of Field Stabilizing Multi-Robot Controllers for all θ [0,1]. For the rectangular basis functions in (6),
this specializes to f /v (j) α f /v (j) for all
A field stabilizing controller for the multi-robot case can r r,min rj r r,min
r and j, where
again be formulated as the solution of a linear program,
provided that we parametrize the controller using a finite
r,max r,max r
number of parameters. Our parametrization will be somewhat θ∈[(j−1)/nr,j/nr)
different than for the single robot case, however. Because and
there are multiple robots, each with its own period, we must
r,min r,min r
normalize the speed controllers by their periods. We then θ∈[(j−1)/nr,j/nr)
represent the periods (actually, the inverse of the periods) as
Thisgivesalinearsetofconstraintsforstability,whichallows
separate parameters to be optimized. In this way we maintain
us to state the following theorem.
the independent periods of the robots while still writing the
optimization over multiple controllers as a single set of linear Theorem IV.4 (Field Stabilizing Multi-Robot Controller). A
constraints. persistent task is stabilizable by a set of multi-robot speed
Define a normalized speed controller v¯ (θ ) := T v (θ ), controllers v (θ ), r 1,...,N , of the form (22) if and
r r r r r r r ∈ { }
and the associated normalized coverage time τ¯ (q ) := only if the following linear program is feasible:
(cid:82) v¯−1(θ)dθ =τ (q )/T . We parametrize v¯−1 as
Fr(qi) r r i r i minimize 0
α rj β rj (θ r ), subject to (cid:88)
α rj K r (q i ,β j )>p(q i ),
where n r is the number of basis functions for the rth robot, i 1,...,m
R and β rj : [0,1]
R ≥0 are robot r’s jth
parameter and basis function, respectively. It is useful to α =1 r 1,...,N
allow robots to have a different number of basis functions,
since they may have paths of different lengths with different f >0 r 1,...,N
speedlimits.Assumingthebasisfunctionsarenormalizedwith ∀ ∈{ }
(cid:82) 0 1 β rj (θ)dθ =1 for all r and j, then we can enforce that v¯ r v r (j) ≤ α rj ≤ v r (j) ∀ j ∈{ 1,...,n r } ,
is a normalized speed controller by requiring r,min r,min
r 1,...,N ,
α rj =1 ∀ r ∈{ 1,...,N } . where each α rj and f r is an optimization variable, and
j=1 K (q ,β ) is defined in (23).
Asbefore,wecoulduseanynumberofdifferentbasisfunc-
The above linear program has
n +N variables (one
tions, but here we specifically consider rectangular functions r=1 r
for each basis function coefficient α , and one for each
of the form (6). We also define the frequency for robot r as
frequency f ), and m +
1) constraints. Thus,
f :=1/T , and allow it to be a free parameter, so that r r=1 r
r r if we use n basis functions for each of the N robot speed
v r (θ r )=f r v¯ r (θ r )= (cid:80)nr
.
j=1 rj rj r
the linear program grows linearly with the number of robots.
From (21), for the set of controllers to be field stabilizing, we
require Remark IV.5 (Maximizing Stability Margin). As summa-
rized in Corollary III.2, rather than using the trivial cost
nr (cid:90)
c (q ) α β (θ)dθ >p(q ) function of 0 in the LP in Theorem IV.4, one may wish
r i rj rj i
r=1 j=1 Fr(qi) to optimize for a meaningful criterion. For example, the
controller that gives the minimum number of common periods
to steady-state can be obtained by maximizing B subject to
(cid:80)N (cid:80)nr
α K (q ,β ) p(q ) B i 1,...,m ,
.4.
RemarkIV.6(MinimizingtheSteadyStateField). Thereader
will note that we do not find the speed controller that mini-
mizes the steady state field for the multi-robot case, as was
Fig. 4: An example with a field consisting of 10 points. The field Z(q,t)
doneforthesinglerobotcase.Thereasonisthatthequantities at each point is indicated by the area of the disk centered at the point. The
called N in the single robot case would depend on the vehiclefootprintisadisk.Thetimesequenceofthethreesnapshotsgoesfrom
lefttoright.Thevehicleismovingcounter-clockwisearoundthetophalfof
relative positions of the robots in the multiple robot case.
thefigureeightandclockwisearoundthebottomhalf.Thetimeevolutionof
Thesequantitieswouldhavetobeenumeratedforallpossible theredfieldpointisshowninFigure5.
relative positions between the multiple robots and there are
infinite such relative positions. Thus the problem cannot be
posed as an LP in the same way as the single robot case. We 1
are currently investigating alternative methods for finding the 0.9
optimal multi-robot controller, such as convex optimization.(cid:3) 0.8
V. SIMULATIONS 0.5
In this section we present simulation results for the single 0.4
robot and multi-robot controllers. The purpose of this section 0.3
is threefold: (i) to discuss details needed to implement the 0.2
speed control optimizations, (ii) to demonstrate how con- 0.1
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
trollers can be computed for both discrete and continuous theta
fields, and (iii) to explore robustness to modeling errors,
parameter uncertainty, robot tracking errors, and stochastic
field evolution.
The optimization framework was implemented in
MATLAB(cid:13)R, and the linear programs were solved using
the freely available SeDuMi (Self-Dual-Minimization)
toolbox. To give the readers some feel for the efficiency of
the approach, we report the time to solve each optimization
on a laptop computer with a 2.66 GHz dual core processor
and 4 GB of RAM. The simulations are performed by
discretizing time, and thus converting the field evolution into
a discrete-time evolution. To perform the optimization, we
needaroutineforcomputingthesetF(q)foreachfieldpoint
q Q. This is done as follows. We initialize a set F(q) for
each point q, and discretize the robot path into a finite set
θ ,...,θ . For the rectangular basis, this disretization is
naturally given by the set of basis functions. We iteratively
place the robot footprint at each point θ , oriented with the
desired robot heading at that point on the curve, and then add
θ to each set F(q) for which q is covered by the footprint.
By approximating the robot footprint with a polygon, we can
determine if a point lies in the footprint efficiently (this is a
standard problem in computational geometry).
Figure 4 shows a simulation for one ground robot perform-
ing a persistent monitoring task of 10 points (i.e., Q =10).
Theenvironmentisa70mby70msquare,andtheclosedpath
has a length of 300 m. For all points we set the consumption
rate c(q) = 1 (in units of (field height)/s). For each yellow
point q we set p(q) = 0.15, and for the single red point we
set p(q) = 0.35. The robot has a circular footprint with a
radius of 12 m, and for all θ the robot has a minimum speed
of v =0.2 m/s and a maximum speed of v =2 m/s.
If the robot were to simply move at constant speed along the
path,then8ofthe10fieldpointswouldbeunstable.Thespeed
0 500 1000 1500
(a)Theoptimalspeedcontroller.
(b)ThefieldZ(q,t)atthered(dark)
point.
Fig. 5: The optimal speed controller corresponding to the curve and field
shown in Figure 4. The minimum speed is vmin = 0.22 m/s and the
maximum speed is vmax =2 m/s. The field Z(q,t) is shown for the red
(dark)pointinFigure4.Itconvergesinfinitetimetoasteadystate.
controller resulting from the optimization in Section III-B is
showninFigure5a.Atotalof150rectangularbasisfunctions
were used. The optimization was solved in less than 1/10
of a second. Using the speed controller, the cycle time was
T =420 s.
The field Z(q,t) for the red (shaded) point in Figure 4, is
shownasafunctionoftimeinFigure5b.Onecanseethatthe
field converges in finite time to a periodic cycle. In addition,
the field goes to zero during each cycle. The periodic cycle is
the steady-state as characterized in Section III-B.
InFigure6,asimulationisshownforthecasewhentheen-
tire continuous environment must be monitored by two aerial
robots. For multiple robots we synthesized a field stabilizing
controller by maximizing the stability margin, as discussed in
RemarkIV.5.Thecontinuousfieldisdefinedovera690mby
690 m square, and was approximated using a 32 32 grid.
For all points q Q we set the consumption rate c(q) = 1,
and the production function is shown in Figure 7. Robot 1
followed a figure-eight path which has a length of 2630 m,
whilerobot2followedafour-leafcloverpathwithalengthof
2250 m. The footprint for robot 1, the higher (yellow) robot
had a radius of 100 m, and the speed constraints were given
by v = 1.5 m/s and v = 15 m/s. The footprint
min,1 max,1
for robot 2, the lower (red) robot, had a radius of 133 m,
and the speed constraints were given by v =2 m/s and
v =20m/s.Thecycletimeforrobot1wasT =519s,
and the cycle time for robot 2 was T =443 s. A total of 150
Fig. 6: An example of using a discretized approximation of a continuous field for two robots. The grid is 32×32, and the field Z(q,t) at each point is
shownasthesurface.Thefootprintofthehigherrobot(yellow)is4/3theradiusofthefootprintofthelower(red)robot.Thesnapshotsequencegoesfrom
lefttorightwiththeleftsnapshotshowingtheinitialconditionoftherobotsandfield.
The robot had a circular footprint with a radius of 133 m, a
minimum speed of v =1.5 m/s and a maximum speed of
v = 15 m/s. The path had a cycle length of 4200 m. If
the robot followed the path at constant speed, then 80 of the
points would be unstable.
For the speed controller, we used 280 rectangular basis
functions, and solved the optimization as described in Corol-
lary III.2, resulting in a stability margin of B = 97.8. The
optimization was solved in approximately 10 seconds. The
timefortherobottocompleteonecycleofthepathusingthis
controller was T =439 s.
Fig.7:Theproductionfunctionp(q)forthesimulationsinFigures8and6.
Stochasticfieldevolution:Now,supposethatweaddzero-
mean noise to the production function. Thus, the robot based
rectangular basis functions were used for each robot’s speed its speed controller on the “nominal” production function
controller. The optimization was solved in approximately 10 p¯(q) (shown in Figure 7), but the actual production function
seconds. A snapshot for a simulation with three robots is is p(q,t) = p¯(q) + n(t,q), where n(t,q) is noise. For
shown in Figure 1. In this case, the green robot flying at a the simulation, at each time instant t, and for each point
higher altitude has a square footprint which is oriented with q Q, we independently draw n(t,q) uniformly from the
the robot’s current heading. set [ n ,n ], where n >0 is the maximum value of
max max max
the noise.
A. A Case Study in Robustness The simulations were carried out as follows. We varied the
In this subsection we demonstrate how we can compute magnitudeofthenoisen max ,andstudiedthemaximumvalue
a speed controller that exhibits robustness to motion errors, reachedbythefield.Foreachvaluen max ,weperformed20tri-
modelinguncertainty,orstochasticfluctuations.Thisisimpor- als,andineachtrialwerecordedthemaximumvaluereached
tant since the speed controller is computed offline. It should by the field on a time horizon of 2500 s. In Figure 9, we
be noted, however, that in practice the controller can be display statistics from the 20 independent trials at each noise
recomputed periodically during the robot’s execution, taking level, namely the mean, minimum, and maximum, as well as
into account new information about the field evolution. thestandarddeviation.Withzeroaddednoise,onecanseethat
As shown in Corollary III.2 we can maximize stability the mean, minimum, and maximum all coincide. As noise is
margin of a speed controller. The corollary showed that in added to the evolution, the difference between the minimum
maximizingthismetricweobtainsomerobustnesstoerror.To and maximum value grows. However, it is interesting to note
explore the robustness properties of this controller, consider that while the performance degrades (i.e., the mean increases
the single robot example in Figure 8. In this example, the with increasing noise), the system remains stable. Thus, the
square 665 m by 665 m environment must be monitored by simulation demonstrates some of the robustness properties of
an aerial robot. We approximated the continuous field using the proposed controller.
a 32 32 grid. The consumption rate was set to c(q) = 5, Parameter errors: We can also consider robustness to
for each field point q Q. The production rate of the field parameter errors. In particular, consider the case where the
was given by the function shown in Figure 7. The maximum robot bases its optimization on a production rate of p¯(q)
productionrateofthefieldwas0.74andtheaveragewas0.21. (shown in Figure 7), but the actual production rate is given
Fig.8:Anexampleofusingadiscretizedapproximationofacontinuousfield.ThefieldZ(q,t)ateachpointisshownasthesurface.Thefootprintofthe
vehicleisadisk,andtherobot’strajectoryisgivenbythe“sixleaf”clover.Thetimesequenceofthethreesnapshotsgoesfromlefttoright.Intherightmost
snapshotthevehiclehasjustfinishedreducingthelargepeakthatformsintheleftandcentersnapshots.
0 1 2 3 4 5
Magnitude of noise added to production rate
mean over trials 20
max over trials
min over trials
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
Fig.9:Therobustnessofthespeedcontrollertonoiseintheproductionrate.
Foreachvalueofnoisenmax,theplotshowsstatisticsonthemaximumvalue
reachedbythefieldover20independenttrials.
by p(q) = p¯(q) + (cid:15), where (cid:15) > 0 (note that the field
is trivially stable for any (cid:15) 0). By maximizing the sta-
≤ bility margin, we obtain some level of robustness against
this type of parameter uncertainty. The amount of error that
we can tolerate is directly related to the stability margin
B =97.8,asshowninCorollaryIII.2.Inparticular,weobtain
(cid:0)(cid:80)n
= 0.074. We performed
i j=1 j 0 j
simulations of monitoring task for successively larger values
of (cid:15). From this data, we verified that the field remains stable
for any (cid:15) 0.07. For this example, the average value of p(q)
over all points q is 0.21, and so we can handle uncertainty in
the magnitude of the production rate on the order of 30%.
Tracking error: After running the speed optimization, a
robot has a desired trajectory, consisting of the pre-specified
path and the optimized speed along the path. In practice, this
trajectorywillbetheinputtoatrackingcontroller,whichtakes
into account the robot dynamics. Since there are inevitably
trackingerrors,thestabilitymarginofthecontrollerisneeded
to ensure field stability. As an example, we considered a
unicycle model for an aerial robot. In this model, the robot’s
configurationisgivenbyaheadingφandaposition(x,y).The
control inputs are the linear and angular speeds: x˙ =vcosφ,
y˙ = vsinφ, and φ˙ = ω. The linear speed had bounds of
v = 1.5 m/s and v = 15 m/s, and the angular speed
(cid:239)100
(cid:239)200
(cid:239)300
(cid:239)400
(cid:239)400 (cid:239)200 0 200 400
Fig. 10: The robustness of the speed controller to tracking errors. The left
figure shows the absolute tracking error in meters. In the right figure, the
solidlineisthedesiredpath,andthedashedlineisthepathexecutedbythe
unicyclerobot.
was upper bounded by 0.5 rad/s. We used the same speed
controller as in the previous two examples (maximizing the
stability margin). For trajectory tracking, we used a dynamic
feedback linearization controller [39]. We chose conservative
controller gains of 0.5 for the proportional and derivative
control in order to accentuate the tracking error. The results
areshowninFigure10.Duetothestabilitymarginof97.8,the
fieldremainsstable,eveninthepresenceofthistrackingerror.
However, in simulation, the maximum field height increased
by about 13% from 268 (as shown for the zero noise case in
Figure 9) to 305.
VI. CONCLUSIONS,EXTENSIONS,ANDOPENPROBLEMS
In this paper we proposed a model for persistent sweeping
and monitoring tasks and derived controllers for robots to
accomplish those tasks. We specifically considered the case
in which robots are confined to pre-specified, closed paths,
along which their speed must be controlled. We formulated
an LP whose solution gives speed controllers that keep the
accumulation bounded everywhere in the environment for
single robots and multiple robots. For single robots, we also
formulated a different LP to give the optimal controller—the
one that keeps the accumulation function as low as possible
everywhere.Weseethisasasolutiontoonekindofpersistent Consider a general speed controller (Z,IC,t)
task for robots, but many open problems remain. v(θ,Z,IC,t) where IC:=(Z(q,0),θ(0)) is the set of initial
conditions. Since v (θ) > 0 for all θ [0,1], the value
A. Extensions and Open Problems of θ strictly monotonically increases from ∈ 0 to 1 for every
We are interested in the general problem of solving per- valid controller (once it reaches 1 it then wraps around to
sistent tasks, which we broadly define as tasks that require 0). In addition, the evolution of Z is deterministic and is
perpetual attention by a robotic agent. The main objective uniquely determined by the initial conditions and the speed
of a persistent task is to maintain the accumulation of some controller, as given in (1). Because of this, every controller of
undesirable quantity at as low a value as possible over an en- theformv(θ,Z,IC,t)canbewrittenasaninfinitesequenceof
vironment using one or multiple robotic agents. The difficulty controllersv (θ,IC),v (θ,IC),...,wherecontrollerv (θ,IC)
of this problem depends on what is known by the robots, and is the controller used during the kth period (or cycle).
precisely what the robots’ capabilities are. Let us enumerate With the above discussion in place, we are now ready to
several possible dimensions for extension on this problem. prove Proposition II.4
• Trajectory vs. Path vs. Speed One might consider Proof of Proposition II.4: To begin, consider a feasible
controlling only the speed over a prescribed path, as we persistent monitoring task and a field stabilizing controller of
have done in this paper, only the path with a prescribed the form v(θ,Z,IC,t), where IC:=(Z(q,0),θ(0)). Without
speed, or complete trajectory planning. loss of generality, we can assume that θ(0) := 0. From
• Single vs. Multiple Robots There may be only one the discussion above, we can write the general controller
robot, or there may be a team of robots, potentially with as a sequence of controllers v 1 (θ,IC),v 2 (θ,IC),..., where
heterogeneous capabilities and constraints. controller v k (θ,IC), k N is used on the kth period (or
• Known vs. Unknown Production Rate The robot may cycle).
know (or be able to sense) the production rate, or it may Since the controller is stable, there exists a Z max
have to learn it over time from measurements. such that for every set of initial conditions IC, we have
• Constant vs. Time-Varying Production Rate The pro- limsup t→+∞ Z(q,t) ≤ Z max . Let us fix (cid:15) > 0 and fix the
duction rate may be constant in time, or it may change initial conditions to a set of values IC such that Z(q,0) >
indicating a change in the environment’s dynamics. Z max +(cid:15) for all q Q. Now, we will prove the result by
• Finite vs. Continuum Points of Interest The points of constructing a periodic position-feedback controller.
interest in the environment may be viewed as a finite set Let t 1 =0 and define
ofdiscretepointsoverwhichtocontroltheaccumulation, (cid:90) 1 1
or as an infinite continuum in which we would like to t k =t k−1 + dθ,
control the accumulation at every point. 0 k
In this paper we specifically considered speed control over a for each integer k 2. Thus, controller v k is used during the
prescribed path of both single and multiple robots in a finite timeinterval[t k ,t k+1 ].Followingthesameargumentasinthe
environment with a known, constant production rate. proof of Lemma II.5, we have that for each q Q,
One interesting direction in which to expand this work
is to consider planning full trajectories for robots to carry (cid:88) k (cid:90) 1 1
out persistent tasks. The high dimensionality of the space of − ≥ (cid:96)=1 0 v (cid:96) (θ,IC)
possible trajectories makes this a difficult problem. However,
k (cid:90)
(cid:88) 1
if the robot’s path is limited by some inherent constraints, c(q) dθ.
then this problem may admit solutions with guarantees. For − (cid:96)=1 F(q) v (cid:96) (θ,IC)
example,underwaterglidersarecommonlyconstrainedtotake
Now, Z(q,t ) > Z + (cid:15) is the initial condition, and
piecewise linear paths, which can be parametrized with a low
limsup Z(q,t) Z . Thus, for every fixed δ
number of parameters. Another direction of extension is to t→+∞ ≤ max ∈
(0,(cid:15)), there exists a finite k such that Z(q,t ) Z +δ.
havearobotsolvetheLPforitscontrolleron-line.Thiswould ≤
Since this must hold for every q Q, we see that there exists
be useful if, for example the production rate is not known ∈
an integer k such that
beforehand,butcanbesensedoverthesensorfootprintofthe
robot.Likewiseiftheproductionratechangesintime,itwould (cid:88) k (cid:90) 1 1 (cid:88) k (cid:90) 1
be useful for a robot to be able to adjust its controller on-line v (θ,IC) − v (θ,IC)
toaccommodatethesechanges.Apromisingapproachforthis (cid:96)=1 0 (cid:96) (cid:96)=1 F(q) (cid:96)
istorepeatedlysolvefortheLPinarecedinghorizonfashion, foreveryq Q.Rearrangingthepreviousequationweobtain
using newly acquired information to update the model of the (cid:90) (cid:88) k 1 (cid:90) 1(cid:88) k 1
field evolution. We continue to study problems of persistent c(q) dθ >p(q) dθ.
tasks for robots in these and other directions. F(q)(cid:96)=1 (cid:96) 0 (cid:96)=1 (cid:96)
APPENDIX Therefore, let us define the periodic controller
PERIODICPOSITION-FEEDBACKCONTROLLERS
(cid:32) (cid:33)−1
In this appendix we will prove Proposition II.4 on periodic (cid:88) 1
position-feedback controllers. (cid:96)=1 v (cid:96) (θ,IC)
foreachθ [0,1].Notethatifv min (θ) v (cid:96) (θ,IC) v max (θ) [22] J.L.NyandG.J.Pappas,“Ontrajectoryoptimizationforactivesensing
for all θ ∈ [0,1] and all (cid:96) N, then ≤ ≤ in gaussian process models,” in IEEE Conf. on Decision and Control
∈ ∈ andChineseControlConference,Shanghai,China,December2009,pp.
6282–6292.
min ≤ ≤ max [23] F. Bourgault, A. A. Makarenko, S. B. Williams, B. Grocholsky, and
H.F.Durrant-Whyte,“Informationbasedadaptiveroboticexploration,”
But, combining the definition of v(θ) with (24), we im-
inIEEE/RSJInt.Conf.onIntelligentRobots&Systems,2002,pp.540–
mediately see that v(θ) satisfies the stability condition in 545.
Lemma II.5, and thus v(θ) is a field stabilizing position- [24] E. M. Arkin, S. P. Fekete, and J. S. B. Mitchell, “Approximation
algorithms for lawn mowing and milling,” Computational Geometry:
feedback controller.
TheoryandApplications,vol.17,no.1-2,pp.25–50,2000.
[25] I.Rekleitis,V.Lee-Shue,A.P.New,andH.Choset,“Limitedcommuni-
cationmulti-robotteambasedcoverage,”inIEEEInt.Conf.onRobotics
REFERENCES andAutomation,NewOrleans,LA,Apr.2004,pp.3462–3468.
[26] S. Koenig, B. Szymanski, and Y. Liu, “Efficient and inefficient ant
[1] N.M.P.KakalisandY.Ventikos,“Roboticswarmconceptforefficient coverage methods,” Annals of Mathematics and Artificial Intelligence,
oil spill confrontation,” Journal of Hazardous Materials, vol. 154, pp. vol.31,pp.41–76,2001.
880–887,2008. [27] H.Choset,“Coverageforrobotics–Asurveyofrecentresults,”Annals
[2] D. MacKenzie and T. Balch, “Making a clean sweep: Behavior-based ofMathematicsandArtificialIntelligence,vol.31,no.1-4,pp.113–126,
vacuuming,”inProceedingsoftheAAAIFallSymposium:Instantiating 2001.
Real-worldAgents,Raleigh,NC,March1993. [28] B.Bethke,J.P.How,andJ.Vian,“GrouphealthmanagementofUAV
[3] N.Correll,N.Arechiga,A.Bolger,M.Bollini,B.Charrow,A.Clayton, teamswithapplicationstopersistentsurveillance,”inAmericanControl
F.Dominguez,K.Donahue,S.Dyar,L.Johnson,H.Liu,A.Patrikalakis, Conference,Seattle,WA,Jun.2008,pp.3145–3150.
T. Robertson, J. Smith, D. Soltero, M. Tanner, L. White, and D. Rus, [29] B. Bethke, J. Redding, J. P. How, M. A. Vavrina, and J. Vian, “Agent
“Buildingadistributedrobotgarden,”inIEEE/RSJInt.Conf.onIntel- capability in persistent mission planning using approximate dynamic
ligentRobots&Systems,St.Louis,MO,2009,pp.1509–1516. programming,” in American Control Conference, Baltimore, MD, Jun.
[4] R. N. Smith, M. Schwager, S. L. Smith, B. H. Jones, D. Rus, and 2010,pp.1623–1628.
G. S. Sukhatme, “Persistent ocean monitoring with underwater glid- [30] Y.Chevaleyre,“Theoreticalanalysisofthemulti-agentpatrollingprob-
ers: Adapting spatiotemporal sampling resolution,” Journal of Field lem,” in IEEE/WIC/ACM Int. Conf. Intelligent Agent Technology, Bei-
Robotics,2010,Submitted. jing,China,Sep.2004,pp.302–308.
[5] M. Dunbabin, J. Roberts, K. Usher, and P. Corke, “A new robot for [31] Y.Elmaliach,N.Agmon,andG.A.Kaminka,“Multi-robotareapatrol
environmental monitoring on the Great Barrier Reef,” in Australasian under frequency constraints,” in IEEE Int. Conf. on Robotics and
ConferenceonRoboticsandAutomation,AustralianNationalUniversity, Automation,Roma,Italy,Apr.2007,pp.385–390.
Canberra,December2004. [32] N.NigramandI.Kroo,“Persistentsurveillanceusingmultipleunman-
[6] S.Srinivasan,H.Latchman,J.Shea,T.Wong,andJ.McNair,“Airborne ndedairvehicles,”inIEEEAerospaceConf.,BigSky,MT,May2008,
traffic surveillance systems: video surveillance of highway traffic,” in pp.1–14.
InternationalworkshoponVideoSurveillance&SensorNetworks,New [33] D.B.Kingston,R.W.Beard,andR.S.Holt,“Decentralizedperimeter
York,NY,USA,October2004,pp.131–135. surveillance using a team of UAVs,” IEEE Transactions on Robotics,
[7] S. L. Smith and D. Rus, “Multi-robot monitoring in dynamic environ- vol.24,no.6,pp.1394–1404,2008.
ments with guaranteed currency of observations,” in IEEE Conf. on [34] P.F.Hokayem,D.Stipanovic´,andM.W.Spong,“Onpersistentcoverage
DecisionandControl,Atlanta,GA,Dec.2010,pp.514–521. control,”inIEEEConf.onDecisionandControl,NewOrleans,LA,Dec.
[8] K. Kant and S. W. Zucker, “Toward efficient trajectory planning: 2007,pp.6130–6135.
The path-velocity decomposition,” International Journal of Robotics [35] L.Kleinrock,QueueingSystems.VolumeI:Theory. JohnWiley,1975.
Research,vol.5,no.3,pp.72–89,1986. [36] D. J. Bertsimas and G. J. van Ryzin, “Stochastic and dynamic vehicle
[9] D. G. Luenberger, Linear and Nonlinear Programming, 2nd ed. routing in the Euclidean plane with multiple capacitated vehicles,”
Addison-Wesley,1984. OperationsResearch,vol.41,no.1,pp.60–76,1993.
[10] E. W. Cheney, Introduction to Approximation Theory, 2nd ed. AMS [37] S. L. Smith, M. Pavone, F. Bullo, and E. Frazzoli, “Dynamic vehicle
ChelseaPublishing,2000. routing with priority classes of stochastic demands,” SIAM Journal on
[11] E. J. Candes and M. B. Wakin, “An introduction to compressive ControlandOptimization,vol.48,no.5,pp.3224–3245,2010.
sampling,”IEEESignalProcessingMagazine,pp.21–30,Mar.2008. [38] M. Ahmadi and P. Stone, “A multi-robot system for continuous area
[12] R.SannerandJ.Slotine,“Gaussiannetworksfordirectadaptivecontrol,” sweeping tasks,” in IEEE Int. Conf. on Robotics and Automation,
IEEETransactionsonNeuralNetworks,vol.3,no.6,pp.837–863,1992. Orlando,FL,May2006,pp.1724–1729.
[13] T. Poggio and S. Smale, “The mathematics of learning: Dealing with [39] G.Oriolo,A.D.Luca,andM.Vendittelli,“WMRcontrolviadynamic
data,”NoticesoftheAmericanMathematicalSociety,vol.50,no.5,pp. feedbacklinearization:design,implementation,andexperimentalvalida-
537–544,2003. tion,”IEEETransactionsonControlSystemsTechnology,vol.10,no.6,
[14] L.S.Gandin,ObjectiveAnalysisofMeteorologicalFields. Jerusalem: pp.835–852,2002.
Israeli Program for Scientific Translations, 1966, (originally published
inRussianin1963,Gidrometeor,Leningrad).
[15] N. Cressie, “The origins of kriging,” Mathematical Geology, vol. 22,
no.3,pp.239–252,1990.
[16] B. Grocholsky, “Information-theoretic control of multiple sensor plat-
forms,”Ph.D.dissertation,UniversityofSydney,2002.
[17] K.M.Lynch,I.B.Schwartz,P.Yang,andR.A.Freeman,“Decentralized
environmentalmodelingbymobilesensornetworks,”IEEETransactions
onRobotics,vol.24,no.3,pp.710–724,June2008.
[18] P.Yang,R.A.Freeman,andK.M.Lynch,“Mulit-agentcoordinationby
decentralizedestimationandcontrol,”IEEETransactionsonAutomatic
Control,vol.53,no.11,pp.248–2496,December2008.
[19] J.Corte´s,“DistributedKrigedKalmanfilterforspatialestimation,”IEEE
Transactions on Automatic Control, vol. 54, no. 12, pp. 2816–2827,
2009.
[20] F.ZhangandN.E.Leonard,“Cooperativefiltersandcontrolforcoop-
erativeexploration,”IEEETransactionsonAutomaticControl,vol.55,
no.3,pp.650–663,2010.
[21] R. Graham and J. Corte´s, “Adaptive information collection by robotic
sensornetworksforspatialestimation,”IEEETransactionsonAutomatic
Control,2010,Submitted.