]hp-cos.scisyhp[
1v6251.3080:viXra
Plagiarism: Words and ideas
Mathieu Bouville
Institute of Materials Research and Engineering, Singapore 117602 and
Institute of High Performance Computing, Singapore 117528
Plagiarismisacrimeagainstacademy. Itdeceivesreaders,hurtsplagiarizedauthors,andgetsthe
plagiarist undeserved benefits. However, even though these arguments do show that copying other
people’s intellectual contribution is wrong, they do not apply to the copying of words. Copying
a few sentences that contain no original idea (e.g. in the introduction) is of marginal importance
comparedtostealingtheideasofothers. Thetwomustbeclearlydistinguished,andthe‘plagiarism’
label should not be used for deedswhich are very different in natureand importance.
Keywords: academicdishonesty;academicintegrity;academicmisconduct;cheating;copyrightinfringement;
ethics;intellectual property;researchmisconduct
INTRODUCTION
Plagiarism is “the worst of bad behaviour” [1], “a sin” [2], “academic high treason” [3], etc. In fact,
Park [4] amused himself gathering a lot of such “rhetoric of plagiarism,” which he finds “nothing if not
colourful.” Naturally,callingplagiarismahatefulblasphemyisnotthesameasshowingthatitiswrong.
The unbearable vagueness of plagiarism
The word ‘plagiarism’ is applied to vastly different situations, for crimes as well as misdemeanors
and even for deeds of unclear wrongness: “from sloppy documentation and proof-reading to outright,
premeditated fraud. Few other terms that we commonly use in our classes have such widely differing
meanings”[5]. Onemaycallallinstances‘plagiarism’anddistinguishbetweenminorandmajorones—as
onecallsbothkillinginself-defenseandgenocide‘killing’withouttreatingthemasequallyblameworthy.
Alternatively, one may choose to use the word ‘plagiarism’ only for cases where the author obtained
unwarrantedbenefits —maybe calling other instances “poor academic practice” [6]—, just like one uses
theword‘murder’forcertainkindsofmanslaughteronly;forexample,toYilmaz[7]“borrowingsentences
inthepartofapaperthatsimplyhelpstobetterintroducetheproblemshouldnotbeseenasplagiarism.”
In any case, it is important to be consistent. Unfortunately few authors are thus cautious; for instance
Maddox [1] aims to show that “plagiarism is worse than mere theft” (his title) but focuses on articles
that merely used “backgroundmaterial” from others.
Giles [8] writes that “the search [of Sorokina] turned up 677 examples of possible plagiarism.” More
precisely,Sorokinaetal.[9]found“677pairsofdocumentswithatleastfoursentencessharinguncommon
7-grams” (i.e. sentences with at least seven consecutive words in common). One should note that 80%
of these have six or fewer sentences in common: then only a paragraphwas taken from another’s work.
Out of the twenty pairs of articles Sorokina et al. [9] inspected by hand four were false positives. They
also mention that “many of the isolated copied sentences are of ‘background’nature, containing neither
particularly unique information content nor stylistic virtue.” Moreover, 677 is not a number of articles
but of pairs of similar articles: an article using multiple sources would be counted as many times. In
otherwords,thisnumberdoesnotmeananything. (Ontopofusinganumberthatisplainlymisleading,
Giles [8] mentions Sorokina’s name without providing a reference to her article [9].)
Plagiarism: words or ideas?
Plagiarism(if explicitly defined at all) is generally taken to mean the appropriation of the words and
ideas of others. However, the specific status of words and ideas is not always made clear. After talking
about“the theftofotherpeople’screativityandoftheirconceptionofwhatthe worldislike”andabout
winning “credit for notions that are not original,” Maddox [1] writes that plagiarism“can be dealt with
by the simple question, ‘Have the words been copied, or have they not?’” — this seems to indicate that
ideas arewhat plagiarismis about andwordsare howplagiarismis detected. However,he then assumes
that copying words that include no original idea (e.g. “background material”) is plagiarism.
Even though in canonical cases of plagiarism the dichotomy between words and ideas is moot (if I
copy a whole article I copy both words and ideas, so that which of the two ‘thefts’ creates the offense
is unclear), it is possible to copy a part of an article that contains no original idea (e.g. the background
section) or to take ideas but not words, by paraphrasing. The status of words and ideas must be
clarified to precisely define plagiarism, which is important for both conceptual and practical reasons.
An important difference between copying words and copying ideas is the kind of argument that applies
to them (a given argument is unlikely to show both to be wrong). This is generally overlooked and
argumentsareproposedagainstplagiarismthatareinfactrelevantonlytothe copyingoforiginalideas.
Pseudo-plagiarism
Certainpracticesarelabeled plagiarism,eventhoughtheyaredifferent concepts,e.g.“using‘blanket’
references,‘second-generation’references,andduplicateorrepetitivepublicationofone’sownpreviously
published work”[10]. That these are not plagiarismdoes not meanthat they arenot wrong,but simply
that they require separate arguments against them.
Vague definition. In some cases, the issue is the vagueness of the definition of ‘plagiarism.’ For
example, dealing with a quotation with a citation (but no page number) but without quotation marks,
Hexham[3]claims: “this is anexample ofplagiarism[...]because appropriatequotationmarks arenot
used nor are we given a page reference to the source” — even though the absence of a page number has
nothing to do with plagiarism.
Self-plagiarism. The publication of the same (or a very similar) article in multiple journals is often
labeled ‘self-plagiarism’ and held as very wrong. (Benos et al. [11] even dedicate more space to this
practice than to plagiarism, falsification, and fabrication combined.) Giles [12] writes that plagiarism
means“attemptingtopassoffsomeoneelse’sworkasyourown. Duplicatepublication,orself-plagiarism,
occurs when an author reuses substantial parts of their own published work without providing the
appropriatereferences.” Obviously,thisisnotplagiarismbasedonhisowndefinition—andadefinition
thatisintheprevioussentence! (EventhoughHexham[3]isrightthat“toavoidconfusionhereperhaps
it is better to drop the term ‘self-plagiarism’,” one should understand that the reason why people call
this ‘self-plagiarism’is preciselyto createconfusion: noargumentis necessarywhensomethinghas been
labeled ‘plagiarism,’ the label suffices.)
“Plagiarism of secondary sources.” Martin [13] claims that “a more subtle plagiarism occurs when a
person gives references to original sources, and perhaps quotes them, but never looks them up, having
obtainedbothfromasecondarysource—whichisnotcited(Bensman[14,456–457]). Thiscanbecalled
plagiarismofsecondarysources.” IfIreadin[101]aquotationfrom[100]andre-usethequotation(with
quotationmarksand citing [100]),I do notplagiarize[100]because I cite it and I do notplagiarize[101]
because I do not use its words or its ideas. If no work has been plagiarized then there is obviously no
plagiarism.
a Allargumentsaboutcitingaworkonedidnotreadseemtoassumethattheworkwasnotreadoutoflazinessorsome
other character flaw of the citingauthor. ButifIlearnabout anarticlethat is highlyrelevant to myworkbutcannot
readit (e.g. mylibrarydoes not have it and cannot get it) I can either not cite it (but one can then accuse me of not
citinga workthat I knew to berelevant) or cite itwithout reading it. Neither is satisfactory of course, but there may
not be a third choice. Such deadlock situations are common and it is also common to blame people for not making
therightdecision, evenwhen nooutcome seems acceptable [15,16]. Oneshouldalsonote that itispossibletoknow a
workwithoutreadingthebook—thatIneverreadNewton’sPrincipiaMathematica doesnotmeanthatIdonotknow
Newtonianmechanics.
Notes on scope
In the remainder of this article, I will deal only with real plagiarism, i.e. plagiarism of others. I will
focus onacademicwork,suchasbooks andjournalarticles(I willnot considerthe issue ofplagiarismin
the contexts of fiction, music, etc.). Unless otherwise noted, I will be concerned with the plagiarism of
researchersrather than with that of students. I will look at plagiarismfrom anethical rather than legal
viewpoint, i.e. I will ask what is wrong rather than what is illegal (unlike Standler [17] for instance).
COPYING WORDS WITHOUT COPYING IDEAS
The relative importance of words and ideas
Facts and theories, not words, are the core of science. Scholarship means creating new knowledge.
Words areonly a meansto communicate this knowledge,the knowledgeitselfis made offacts,concepts,
etc. A scientist whose ideas are weak is certainly not a good scientist; a scientist whose English is weak
canbe agoodscientist. Anexperimentalresultthatisdescribedusingdifferentwordsis notadifferent
result and its scientific importance is not affected by the wording. This can be contrasted with poetry
forinstance: wordsarewhatpoetryis allabout,“thewordingisthe essenceofthenovelty”[18]. Apoet
who does not have a way with words is a poor poet. A poem that is paraphrased is a different poem,
the two may have vastly different merits.
Since the core of science are facts and theories, not words, new experimental results and new models
arethebasisofnewscientificknowledge. Yilmaz[7]isrightwhenhewrites: “ourresultsare[original]—
and these are the most important part of any scientific paper.” As notes McCutchen [19], “the thing of
value that is stolen is intellectual product.”
Sacrificing words rather than ideas. Williams [20]mentionsauthorswhodonot“haveEnglishastheir
mother tongue,and struggleto representthe backgroundto their workingoodEnglish[...] manysuch
authors succumb to the temptation to use eloquent phrases, sentences or even whole paragraphs found
in recently published papers in order to improve their own work.” According to one such author this
is not plagiarism, “just borrowing better English” [7]. These authors might in fact be praised, who are
“disinclinedtosacrificequalityandaccuracyforwantoflinguisticexpertise”[18]. Sciencewouldbemore
hurtbyanincomprehensiblearticlethanbycopiedwords: ifthearticleissounclearthattheintellectual
contribution is lost then arguing against this practice requires to hold words as more important than
ideas — better lose ideas than copy words. No one would seriously thus argue.
On paraphrasing. One may argue that, in any case, the author should paraphrase the work of others
ratherthancopyitverbatim. Butthisrequiresthatwordsbeunimportant: ifwordswerereallyimportant
thenparaphrasingwouldbeimpossible(thisisthecasewithliterature—apoemcannotbeparaphrased
because a paraphrasedpoem would be a whole new poem, or perhaps no poem at all). Someone saying
that authors must paraphrase thereby says that words are unimportant.
Negative consequences of plagiarism
A number of arguments have been used against plagiarism. However, they do not always apply to
what authors wish to prove wrong. I will present these arguments and ask whether they are relevant to
cases where only words are copied, not an original intellectual contribution.
b Ifthewritingisespeciallybeautiful,witty,entertainingthenbyusingsomeoneelse’swordsIwouldstealsomeoftheart
oroftheflairoftheoriginalauthor. Butinmanydisciplines,beauty,wit,andentertainmentarerareandnotvalued(if
notbanned)sothatthiscounter-argumentislimitedtofieldsthatvaluewritingandtoauthorswhoactuallywritewell.
c Onecanremarkthatthisoffensecanbecommittedonlybynon-nativespeakers(qua non-nativespeakers). Arguments
against plagiarism are based on desert (the plagiarist does not deserve, the plagiarized would have deserved), but do
nativespeakers deservetheadvantage herebyenforced? Also,itiseasytosetconstraints thatwillnotapplytooneself
andtoconsiderthatproblemsotherpeoplemayfacecannotbeserious.
Hurts the plagiarized author. Acommonargumentagainstplagiarismis thatplagiarizedauthors may
losecitationsandrecognition,whichinturnmaylosethempromotionsorawards—ifnooneknowsthat
they are the authors of important work,they cannotget credit for it. They may also lose marketshares
and royalties in the case of a book. In other words, the plagiarized authors do not receive what they
would have deservedto receive. One should nonetheless note that this applies to the cases of plagiarists
using someone else’s ideas, not words — in most disciplines one does not get recognizedfor one’s words
but for one’s ideas (there are exceptions, such as literature). Fame and promotion are not based on
the quality of the English in one’s background sections — I have never heard of an endowed chair of
backgroundsection. Moreover,hadtheplagiaristsparaphrasedtheparagraphtheycopiedverbatim they
would not have cited the originalpaper (and wouldhave had no reasonto): the originalauthors cannot
lose something (e.g. citations) that they would not have received anyway.
Undeserved benefits for the plagiarist. To scientists, plagiarism is akin to “the commercial crime
of ‘passing off’, by which a manufacturer may seek to claim a distinguished brand-name for inferior
goods” [1]. Concretely, “the thieving author win[s] credit for notions that are not original” [1] and
receives awards and promotion for the work of others. This is related to the previous argument in that
theplagiariststealscitations,fame,royalties,etc.fromtheplagiarized—whatonegainstheotherloses.
Onceagain,thisappliesonlytointellectualcontribution,notmerewords: aplagiaristwillnotgainmuch
by copying verbatim a paragraphthat contains no original idea.
Negative consequences for the reader. Two negative consequences of plagiarism are that “readers are
unable to reconstruct the route by which [ideas] have come to see the light of day” [1] and that “when
citations are left out of documents, the reader is deprived of one of the most fruitful ways of seeking
additional resources related to the paper topic” [21]. Obviously, these arguments apply to the copying
of ideas, not of mere words.
Breaks Trust. Hinman [22] remarks that “scholarship and research are strongly dependent on trust,”
which plagiarism may jeopardize. However, some hold that plagiarism “is not a significant threat to
confidence in science” [23]. In any case, the risk of plagiarism is not the only reason why I may not
trust the work of others: for instance articles may contain errors because the authors were careless. If I
were to choose between the two, I would rather have the authors never be careless rather than not try
to passoffastheirsthe workofothers: the firstissue isjustfar morecommon(plagiarismconcernsonly
0.02% [24], 0.04% [25], or 0.2% [9] of all articles).
Some may not trust authors who copied background material: who knows if they did not also copy
somethingelse. Oneshouldnotethatifcopyingbackgroundwerewidelyacceptedwhileotherplagiarisms
werenotthenonewouldnoteventhinkofsuchapossiblecorrelation. Afterall,wedonotsay‘hesaidhe
killedhiminself-defense buthowcanweknowthathe wouldnotkillsomeoneelseincoldblood?’. This
is because we believe that killing in self-defense really is different from murder. Copying background
material may be harmful (through loss of trust) only if people believe that it is: this is self-fulfilling.
One may arguethat, eveninthe absence ofa clear lossonthe side of the readersor ofthe plagiarized
authors, plagiarism is still a “deliberate attempt to deceive the reader” [3]. However, it is noteworthy
thatreaderscannotbe deceivedtout court: deceptionmeansthatreadersaremadetobelievesomething
that is false, and one must specify what this thing is. In basic plagiarism,they are made to believe that
the names listed on the article are those of the actual authors, and in the case of fabrication, that the
experiments were actually done. If authors copied a paragraph in their introduction the readers will
wrongly believe that every single word in the article was from the authors. But no reader would feel
d Onemaynotethat,whileinthecaseofresearcherswhodonotcitesourcesonemaymistakenlybelievethattheauthors
obtained the data themselves, such confusion is unlikely with undergraduate work. Picture an anthropology student
writing an essay on some remote people in which citations are missing. Someone claiming that this student tried to
deceive the teacher would thereby claim that the teacher may thus be deceived, i.e. made to believe that the student
gatheredthedatahimself.
betrayed upon learning that the introduction has been improved by a copy-editor, i.e. someone who is
notlistedasauthor. Ifthealterationresultingfromtheliftingofafewsentencesfromtheworkofothers
is not greater than the alteration from copy-editing, one cannot claim that the readers are deceived by
one but not by the other. (Of course copy-editors agree to this state of affairs whereas a plagiarized
author does not, but this is not a matter of deception of the readers.)
If one were to ask why copying a few sentences of background material is wrong, the reply would
be that it is a form of plagiarism. And if one follows up asking why plagiarism is wrong, one would
receive an answer (deception of the readers, unfair advantage of the plagiarist, or disadvantage of the
plagiarized) that would not apply in this case. The only thing that may make the copying of a few
sentences that contain no originalintellectual contribution deeply wrong is the ‘plagiarism’label: if one
tried to show this to be very wrong without referring explicitly to plagiarism, one would fail. Even
though these arguments can show that copying someone else’s intellectual contribution is wrong, they
are irrelevant to the copying of words that do not contain original intellectual contribution. “Copying
[words] creates a witness to crime, but is not necessarily crime itself” [19].
Evil or trivial? A criterion
Plainly, there is a great difference between an article that must be withdrawn because it is copied
verbatim and an article that needs a two line erratum to clarify that a given sentence was a direct
quotationfromthesourcementioned. Infact,Clarke[26]workedoutanextensivesetofcriteriatojudge
theimportanceofagiveninstanceofplagiarism. Hedistinguishesbetween“extremeformsofplagiarism
[such as] ‘plagiarism of authorship’ or ‘appropriation of entire works’” and the “many instances of
plagiarism [that] are misjudgments or errors that are appropriately addressed in simple ways.” To
Burkill and Abbey [6], “there is a fine line between plagiarismand poor academic practice.” (They add
that “it is sometimes difficult to be sure that you are on the right side of that line,” without specifying
which of plagiarism and “poor academic practice” is right.)
Some will say that authors must follow the guidelines of the style manuals, and plagiarists obviously
do not follow those on proper citation. But such manuals only state was is correct and was is not, they
are not (and have no business being) concerned with establishing the relative wrongness of different
faults — ‘plagiarism is wrong because it is incompatible with stylistic rules’ is on a par with ‘using too
many commas is wrong because it is incompatible with stylistic rules.’ For this reason, one cannot rely
on style manuals to argue that failure to cite properly is incommensurably worse than bad punctuation
or other trifles.
In any case of plagiarism, one should ask what would have happened had the author cited properly.
If the work has been copied verbatim from another’s book or article, a proper citation would have been
along the lines of ‘the whole thing was written by someone else, I did nothing.’ But if the author only
uses small parts from a given work and if these do not contain any original idea, the result of proper
citationwouldhavebeenaworkofverysimilarmerit. Iproposethisasacriteriontojudgehowwronga
certaininstance ofplagiarismis: if including propercitations wouldhavebeen afatalblow this instance
is clearly plagiarism and clearly wrong; otherwise, that a work is (akin to) plagiarism does not mean
that it should be withdrawn and the author fired. If proper citation would have had little impact on
the paper, lack thereof should also have little impact. (If it is possible to rewrite an article —without
changingitssubstance—tomakesomecitationunnecessarythenonlywordshadbeborrowed;otherwise,
one must be using an idea from this work and a citation is required.)
PLAGIARISM HUNTING
String-based criteria for plagiarism
Plagiarism has been equated with strings of two–three [27], four [3], or seven [9] consecutive words
that are found in two different articles. In his definition of plagiarism, Hexham [3] writes: “Academic
plagiarismoccurswhenawriterrepeatedlyusesmorethanfourwordsfromaprintedsourcewithoutthe
use ofquotationmarksanda precisereferencetothe originalsource.” No rationaleis givenforchoosing
this particular number (or why plagiarism can be defined as strings of words of a certain length in the
first place). One reasonwhy people pay so much attention to copied words is that this is easy to detect
(a computer can do it). One simply asks “‘Have the words been copied, or have they not?’ Thatmeans
that when a plagiaristis unmasked, the case appears open and shut. So it is no wonder that plagiarism
is often the most easily punished of academic misdemeanours” [1]. Establishing plagiarism of ideas is
less straightforward[28].
Relying on strings of words and on software raises a number of issues.
Nature of the definition of plagiarism. Sorokina et al. [9] chose strings of seven words because they
found that strings of six words included too many false positives and strings of eight words missed
some actual cases of plagiarism. What their work thus shows is that identical strings of seven words
tend to correlate with plagiarism. But a risk is that ‘identical strings of seven words are a hint that
plagiarism may have occurred’ may become ‘plagiarism occurs when there are identical strings of seven
words.’ In other words, plagiarism would become defined in terms of strings of words (Hexham [3] for
example is guilty of such a drift), even though Sorokina et al. [9] had texts inspected by humans to
decide what qualifiedas plagiarism,basedonan independent definition ofplagiarism. Such a procedure
simply cannot generate a definition of plagiarism. And in fact it makes no sense to define plagiarism in
terms of strings of words — in particular, showing that plagiarismis wrong would then require to show
that copying seven consecutive words is wrong, but copying six consecutive words is not.
Lack of effect on plagiarism. According to Bechhoefer [29], “everypaper submitted to arXiv could be
examined by a search engine that looks for overlap or correlation with all previous arXiv submissions.
[...] Andalthoughplagiaristsmightopttocopyandtranslatefromforeign-languagejournals,orsimply
alterwordingenoughtopassmuster,makingitmoredifficultwillatleastdiscouragethelazieroffenders.”
Copyingandpasting anarticle takesfives minutes. Paraphrasinga whole articleto avoiddetection may
take five hours. This is still far shorter than the five months it would take to do the research. The
driving force for plagiarism would still be huge. The main result of the systematic use of such software
will be to make plagiarists hide better, it will have little effect on the amount of academic plagiarism.
Presumption of guilt. Hinman [22] complains: “The automatic submission of papers to an anti-
plagiarism site strikes me as akin to mandatory urine testing for athletes, a sign precisely of lack of
trust.” Townley and Parsell [30] likewise point out that this would “set up a distrustful relationship.”
Theyaddthat“alongsidetherequirementtochecktheproliferationofplagiarism,however,wemustalso
considerthe collateraleffects of the strategieswe employ.” While treating everyoneas potentially guilty
isneversatisfyingitmaybeanecessaryevilincaseofanepidemic(e.g.dopinginprofessionalsport). An
important difference between athletes and scholars (but not students) is that world-class athletes have
usedforbiddenproductsinspiteofthecontrols,whereasplagiarismconcernsveryfewscholarsinspiteof
the absence of systematic control(serious plagiarismis found in one article out of thousands [9, 24, 25],
and there is “an even smaller percentage of authors [concerned], since many [instances of plagiarism]
come from repeat offenders” [9]). Moreover, unlike athletes with doping, “prominent (highly cited)
authors [...] do not appear to reuse text from others” [9].
Plagiarism, no plagiarism, and that is all. Another issue is that plagiarism may become even more
a binary issue than it already is — there are two cases, plagiarism and no plagiarism, with no degree.
Sorokina et al. [9] describe precisely the method they use, mentioning that they are looking for “(µ, L;
t, m)-similardocuments” usingvalues forcertainparametersthatareratherarbitrary(andwhoseeffect
is unknown), and using heuristics with known imperfections. All they can say is that certain articles
are more likely to be plagiarism than others: saying that some may be plagiarism and some may not
requires to introduce an arbitrary cut-off. In spite of all this, the conclusion made public is that “the
search turned up 677 examples of possible plagiarism” [8].
Trifle and punishment
When there exist only two categories, labeling becomes crucial. Anything labeled plagiarism will
be treated in a similar fashion. In the case of the plagiarized background section, Loui [2] reports
that “the funding agency insisted that the university conduct an investigation and issue a finding of
plagiarism; the respondent was barred from receiving funding for one year.” He disagreed with this
sanction: “the debarment from funding was excessive. The copying of a background section, without
expropriationofothers’originalideas,isavenialsinwhencomparedwithdeliberatedeceptionandtheft
of ideas.” (Ginsparg, cited in Ref. 33, agrees that “although such practices are ethically questionable,
it is inappropriate to be overly draconian.”) It was important that the finding be of ‘plagiarism:’ had
it been labeled “poor academic practice” [6] for instance, the debarment from funding would have been
perceived as disproportionate. But with the ‘plagiarism’ label, this becomes acceptable. Bear in mind
that arbitrarilyarrestingpeople anddetaining them without anyknownchargesis not outrageouswhen
they are labeled terrorists — in both cases the justifications for the punishment is the wrongness of a
label rather than the wrongness of anything actual. Nevertheless, “referencing practices should not be
based on the fear of being labeled a plagiarist” [34].
But acknowledgingdifferences ofwrongnessis notthe same asendorsingplagiarism: one cansay that
certain forms of copying from the works of others are venial without implying that genuine plagiarism
is acceptable (likewise, the concept of self-defense is an not endorsement of murder). The blanket term
‘plagiarism’is asuseless (andpotentially dangerous)as‘killing’whendiscussing punishment: it bundles
deeds very different in nature and importance into a single label and treats them similarly because they
have the same label rather than because they are similarly wrong.
Students write to avoid plagiarism
As Hunt [35] points out, “scholars —writers generally— use citations for many things [...]. They
do not use them to defend themselves against potential allegations of plagiarism. [...] Typically, the
scholars are achieving something positive; the students are avoiding something negative.” In fact this
is what is expected of them —students are taught “writing to avoid plagiarism” (a section heading in
Ref. 6)— even though avoiding plagiarism plainly cannot be a proper goal. When one walks, one does
notwalktoavoidfalling: onewalkstogosomewhere. Andonedoesnotspendone’stimethinkingabout
not falling. Teaching students ‘writing to avoid plagiarism’ is like teaching ‘walking to avoid falling’: it
misses the purpose of writing.
When avoiding plagiarism is the goal, anything that can contribute to it is a valuable skill. Students
arethustaught‘proper’paraphrasing. Hunt[35]commentsanexampleofparaphrase: “Whatisclearest
aboutthisisthatthewriterofthesecondparagraphhasnomotiveforrephrasingthepassageotherthan
to put it into different words.” As McCutchen[19] notes, “itis a strangecrime that canbe exorcisedby
the spell of replacing one set of words by another set that means the same thing.” When the goalis the
creation of new knowledge, on the other hand, paraphrasing is about worthless, as it is concerned with
repeating old stuff.
The focus of Burkill and Abbey [6] on “regulations” and on “penalties” for “ignoring academic
conventions” indicates that to them the main reasons for students to avoid plagiarism are obedience
and avoidance of penalties. These may be suitable driving forces in the training of dogs, but not for
students(nottomentionscholars). Kohn[36]notesthatevenwhenstudents“are‘successfully’reinforced
or consequenced into compliance, they will likely feel no commitment to what they are doing, no deep
understanding of the act and its rationale,no sense of themselves as the kind of people who would want
to act this way in the future.” As Nietzsche [37, § 97] pointed out, “submission to morality can be
slavish[...] or resigned [...] or an act of desperation, like submission to a prince: in itself it is nothing
moral” — dread and honesty can both be driving forces for not plagiarizing. Turning the most trivial
deed into plagiarism and focusing on penalties can foster only the former. Burkill and Abbey [6] also
write that “it may sound rather harsh, but the sooner you [the student] get to grips with all of this, the
more confident you will feel as a member of the institution you have joined”: at no point is it claimed
that such rules are justified, it is just that the faster the students obey the less they will get hurt.
Students are not expected to accomplish anything positive, only to avoid punishment. Kohn rejected
this Pavlovianview of education in the case of elementary school children; perhaps we could also reject
it in high schools and universities.
∗ Electronic address: m-bouville@imre.a-star.edu.sg
[1] Maddox, J. (1995), Plagiarism is worse than mere theft, Nature 376, 721.
[2] Loui,M.C. (2002), Sevenwaystoplagiarize: Handlingrealallegations of research misconduct,Science and
Engineering Ethics 8, 529–539.
[3] Hexham, I. (1992), On plagiarism and integrity in scholarly activity, Humanist: Humanities Computing 5,
[4] Park, C. (2003), In other (people’s) words: Plagiarism by university students — literature and lessons,
Assessment and Evaluation in Higher Education 28, 471–488.
[5] Wilhoit, S. (1994), Helping studentsavoid plagiarism, College Teaching 42, 161–165.
[6] Burkill, S., and Abbey, C. (2004), Avoiding plagiarism, Journal of Geography in Higher Education 28,
439–446.
[7] Yilmaz, I. (2007), Plagiarism? No, we’re just borrowing betterEnglish, Nature 449, 658.
[8] Giles, J. (2006), Preprint analysis quantifiesscientific plagiarism, Nature 444, 524–525.
[9] Sorokina, D., Gehrke, J., Warner, S., and Ginsparg, P. (2006) Plagiarism detection in
arXiv, Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Data Mining 1070–1075, available at
[10] Skandalakis, J. E., and Mirilas, P. (2004), Plagiarism, Archives of Surgery 139, 1022–1024.
[11] Benos, D. J., Fabres, J., Farmer, J., Gutierrez, J. P., Hennessy, K., Kosek, D., Lee, J. H., Olteanu, D.,
Russell, T., Shaikh, F., and Wang, K. (2005), Ethics and scientific publication, Advances in Physiology
Education 29, 59–74.
[12] Giles, J. (2005), Taking on the cheats, Nature 435, 258–259.
[13] Martin, B. (1994), Plagiarism: A misplaced emphasis, Journal of Information Ethics 3, 36–47, available at
[14] Bensman, J. (1988), The aesthetics and politics of footnoting, International Journal of Politics, Culture,
and Society 1, 443–470.
[18] Vessal, K., and Habibzadeh, F. (2007), Rules of the game of scientific writing: Fair play and plagiarism,
Lancet 369, 641.
[19] McCutchen, C. W. (1994), Plagiarism: A tale of telltale words, Journal of Information Ethics 3, 48–50.
[20] Williams, D.(2007), Plagiarism and redundancy, Biomaterials 28, 2535.
[21] Snapper,J.W.(1999),OntheWeb,plagiarismmattersmorethancopyrightpiracy,Ethics andInformation
Technology 1, 127–136.
[22] Hinman L. M. (2002), The impact of the Internet on our moral lives in academia, Ethics and Information
Technology 4, 31–35.
[23] StenfloL. (2004), Intelligent plagiarists are themost dangerous, Nature 427, 777.
[24] Claxton, L. D. (2005), Scientific authorship — Part 1. A window into scientific fraud?, Mutation Research
589, 17–30.
[25] Errami, M. and Garner, H.(2008), A tale of two citations, Nature 451, 397–399.
[26] Clarke, R. (2006), Plagiarism by academics: More complex than it seems, Journal of the Association for
Information Systems 7, 91–121.
[27] Rathus,S.A. (1993), Thinking and Writing about Psychology (NewYork: Holt, Rinehart & Winston).
[28] Weyland,K. (2007), How to assess plagiarism of ideas?, PS: Political Science and Politics 40, 375–376.
[29] Bechhoefer, I.(2007), Plagiarism: Text-matchingprogram offers an answer, Nature 449, 658.
[30] Townley,C.andParsellM.(2004),Technologyandacademicvirtue:Studentplagiarismthroughthelooking
glass, Ethics and Information Technology 6, 271–277.
[31] Gordon I.G. (1989), Plagiarism, Nature 341, 682.
[32] Anonymous(2004), Complacency about misconduct, Nature 427, 1.
[33] Brumfiel G. (2007), Turkish physicists face accusations of plagiarism, Nature 449, 8.
[34] Haramati,N.,andAmis,E.S.(1994),Plagiarism —anodiousaccusation—worstiffalse,AmericanJournal
of Roentgenology 163, 725–726.
[35] Hunt,R.(2002),FourreasonstobehappyaboutInternetplagiarism,TeachingPerspectives 5,1–5,available
[36] Kohn, A. (1996), Beyond discipline, Education Week 20 November 1996, available at
[37] Nietzsche, F. (1881), The Dawn.