CCoonnsseennssuuss
Issue 1 History of the Lutheran Theological Article 16
Seminary in Saskatoon
PPllaanneettaarryy LLoovveess:: SSppiivvaakk,, PPoossttccoolloonniiaalliittyy,, aanndd TThheeoollooggyy
Alan Ka Lun Lai
RReeccoommmmeennddeedd CCiittaattiioonn
Lai, Alan Ka Lun (2015) "Planetary Loves: Spivak, Postcoloniality, and Theology," Consensus: Vol. 36: Iss.
1, Article 16.
This Book Reviews is brought to you for free and open access by Scholars Commons @ Laurier. It has been
accepted for inclusion in Consensus by an authorized editor of Scholars Commons @ Laurier. For more
information, please contact scholarscommons@wlu.ca.
Lai: Planetary Loves
Book Review
Planetary Loves: Spivak, Postcoloniality, and Theology
by Stephen D. Moore and Mayra Rivera, eds.
New York: Fordham University, 2011
his book is the result of a conversation between Gayatri
Chakravorty Spivak and several postcolonial theologians such
as Catherine Keller, Stephen Moore, and Kwok Pui-lan, held at
Drew Theological School in 2007. The uniqueness of this book lies
within the quality of the exchange of ideas between a non-
theologian and theologians and the potential challenge those ideas
give to the articulation of contemporary theologies that seek to take
cosmopolis, gender, and empire critique seriously.
Gayartri Chakravorty Spivak of Columbia University, is arguably one of the
most respected and prolific literary and cultural critics of our time. Her works are
situated in the field of postcolonial and literary studies. But these terms do not fully
capture Spivak’s work, since critiquing post-colonialism is also her academic
contribution as shown in one of her work, A Critique of Postcolonial Reason.
Although Spivak declares herself not a religious person in the conventional sense of
the word and hasn’t used the works of any theologian, she has a respect for the
sacred and the people who have religions. In Catherine Keller’s opinion, Spivak’s
unique style of theorizing and reading “are potentially invaluable models for
theologians struggling to hold together the deconstructive imperative to engage in
the critique of theology and self-critique, on the one hand, and the ethical imperative
to engage contemporary sociopolitical contexts, on the other hand.” Spivak’s works
in postcolonial studies has inspired many theologians who share Spivak’s zeal to
critique empire, colonialism, and gender bias. Spivak’s In Other Worlds and Can the
Subaltern Speak have been widely read by postcolonial theologians.
The bulk of this volume centers around Spivak’s usage of the term
“planetary.” Spivak challenges us to see ourselves as planetary subjects rather than
global agents. Kwok Pui-lan says, “Planetarity signifies an alterity that does not
derive from us, a system that is beyond us and yet we inhabit in it.” To think in
planetarity term is to situate oneself who offers prudent care of the alterity that is
above and beyond our reach, an inexhaustible taxonomy; nevertheless offer us the
chance to imagine the best possible scenarios for the flourishing for all.
As a professor who teaches global citizenship, I welcome Spivak’s idea of
planetarity as a healthy alternative in terms of terminology and direction for
thoughts. Spivak suggests “planetarity” thinking as opposed to globalization or
citizenship, terms that have been so frequently and loosely used these days that they
keep suffering from the ongoing impression of imposing the same value system
everywhere. The term “planetary loves” should not be mistaken as the equivalent of
ecological justice, although Spivak welcomes it. Instead, as Kwok Pui-lan, one of the
participants in this conversation says, “Spivak offers a love that is tough, non-
sentimental, that embodies justice and speaks from a subject position that
Published by Scholars Commons @ Laurier, 2015 1
Consensus, Vol. 36, Iss. 1 [2015], Art. 16
remembers the blight of colonialism and is mindful of the intersectionality of
gender, race, class, sexuality, and so forth.” Planetarity invites us to address a more
complex topology and taxonomy without limiting our imagination in the realm of
geographical-legal border, local or global. It is a mind-changing love.
This book has three parts: “Introductions” that seeks to situate Spivak in the
myriad of postcolonial studies. The second part “Conversations” provide the
verbatim Spivak had with several theologians in that gathering in 2007 as well as
Spivak’s responses to papers inspired by Spivak’s works by Susan Abraham, a
practical theologian of Harvard Divinity School, Tat-siong Benny Liew, a biblical
scholar at Pacific School of Religion, and Mayra Rivera, a theologian from Harvard
Divinity School. The final section, “Appropriations,” provides a series of papers by
several theologians such as Namsoon Kang and Sharon Betcher to articulate
theologies that based on Spivaks’ ideas.
This book will be a good introduction to the works of Gayatri Spivak and
postcolonial theology especially for people who have never read their works but
want to be informed and led to think alternatively.