Planning for robotic exploration based on forward simulation
Mikko Lauri, Risto Ritala
Abstract—We address the problem of controlling a mobile describeamethodforefficientlydrawingtherequiredsamples.
robot to explore a partially known environment. The robot’s We provide an empirical evaluation of our proposed approach
objective is the maximization of the amount of information in simulated and real-world exploration experiments1.
collected about the environment. We formulate the problem
This article is organized as follows. Section II provides a
as a partially observable Markov decision process (POMDP)
with an information-theoretic objective function, and solve it surveyofrelatedworkanddiscussestherelationofourcontri-
applying forward simulation algorithms with an open-loop ap- bution to the state-of-the-art. In Section III, we formulate ex-
proximation. We present a new sample-based approximation for plorationasaPOMDP,anddiscusspossiblesolutionmethods.
mutualinformationusefulinmobilerobotics.Theapproximation
SectionIVreviewstwoforwardsimulationbasedmethodsfor
can be seamlessly integrated with forward simulation planning
non-myopic planning in POMDPs. Section V introduces the
algorithms. We investigate the usefulness of POMDP based
planning for exploration, and to alleviate some of its weak- sample-based approximation of mutual information suitable
nesses propose a combination with frontier based exploration. for robotic exploration problems, and describes a method for
Experimental results in simulated and real environments show efficientlydrawingtherequiredsamples.SectionVIdescribes
that, depending on the environment, applying POMDP based
theresultsofsimulationexperiments,andSectionVIIpresents
planning for exploration can improve performance over frontier
the software architecture for implementation of our approach
exploration.
andreportstheresultsofreal-worldexplorationtrials.Finally,
Section VIII provides concluding remarks.
I. INTRODUCTION
Autonomous robotic agents performing tasks such as mon- II. RELATEDWORK
itoring, surveillance or exploration must be able to plan their
Mobilerobotstypicallycollectinformationonboththeirin-
futureinformation-gatheringactions.Real-worldenvironments
ternalstateandthestateoftheenvironmenttheyareinteracting
are typically partially observable and stochastic, and planning
with. In simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM) (see
in them requires reasoning over uncertain outcomes in the
Durrant-Whyte and Bailey [8] for a review) the robot must
presence of sensor noise. The true state of the system is
jointly estimate both its pose (internal state) and the map of
hidden, and knowledge about the state is represented by a
theenvironmentbasedonitsactionsandobservations.Robots’
belief state, a probability density function (pdf) over the true
information-gathering actions consist of actions that affect
state. The utility of actions is measured by an appropriate
their pose, and hence the area covered by their sensors, and
reward function, and the agent’s objective is to maximize the
actions explicitly selecting between sensors or their operating
sum of expected rewards over a specified horizon of time.
modes. In the active SLAM problem [9], the robot’s actions
Such planning problems are instances of partially observable
are selected to obtain best estimates on the pose and the map.
Markov decision processes [1], or POMDPs.
Thus, the active SLAM problem is an exploration or sensor
ThesolutionofaPOMDPisacontrolpolicy,i.e.amapping
selection problem. The goal is to maximize information on
from belief states to actions. To find policies for information-
both the robot pose and the map.
gatheringandexplorationtasks,severalauthorshaveproposed
Techniques to control mobile robot exploration may be
applying quantities such as entropy or mutual information as
categorized e.g. by whether they apply heuristic rules or
reward functions of the POMDP [2, 3, 4, 5, 6]. Although
formal decision theory for selection of exploration targets.
finding optimal policies for POMDPs is computationally hard
Applyingheuristicrulesforguidingexplorationspansfrontier-
(PSPACE-complete; [7]), they remain an attractive modelling
based approaches [10], or some next-best-view approaches
choiceduetotheabilitytosimultaneouslyhandleuncertainties
such as [11]. Julia´ et al. [12] classify exploration methods
in the robot’s action and sensing outcomes.
according to the levels of multi-robot coordination and inte-
In this article, we address the problem of finding con-
gration with SLAM algorithms. They conclude that SLAM-
trol policies for robotic exploration problems formulated as
integrated exploration performs best with regard to quality
POMDPs.Weapplyforwardsimulationalgorithmsforfinding
of map information. Their results also agree with Amigoni
a solution to an open loop approximation of a POMDP. This
[13],AmigoniandCaglioti[14],whofounddecisiontheoretic
approach allows general belief-dependent reward functions
criteria combining both utility of exploration and its cost (e.g.
and with suitable choice of algorithm can avoid discretization
timeordistance)tobepreferableifbothextentoftheexplored
ofthecontinuousplanningspace.Wederiveasampling-based
areaandexplorationtimewereoptimized.Inthefollowing,we
approximation for mutual information that can be applied
reviewinmoredetailsomesingle-robotexplorationtechniques
in conjunction with forward simulation based planning, and
thatemploydecisiontheoreticcriteriatoguidetheexploration
process.
M. Lauri and R. Ritala are with Department of Automation Science and
Engineering, Tampere University of Technology, P.O. Box 692, FI-33101,
2v47420.2051:viXra
Information on the location of the robot and environment a) Contribution: We present a new approximation for
features, or landmarks, may be modelled by a multivari- mutual information that is useful in mobile robotics explo-
ate Gaussian distribution. The SLAM problem can then be ration problems. The approximation can be easily integrated
solved for example by applying the Extended Kalman Filter. with forward simulation planning methods, and avoids com-
Exploration with such feature-based maps was studied by puting full SLAM filter updates during the planning phase. In
Sim and Roy [15] who describe an A-optimal exploration contrast to e.g. [19, 20, 21], we do not assume a Gaussian
method, i.e. they minimize the trace of the state covariance belief state. We propose and empirically evaluate in simu-
matrix. They discretize the location of the robot to a grid and latedandreal-worlddomainsaexplorationmethodcombining
plan an informative trajectory in open loop as a sequence of strengths of decision-theoretic POMDP based exploration and
discretepositionsviaabreadth-firstsearch.Asimilarobjective classical frontier based exploration. In all cases, we concen-
functionwasusedby[16],adoptingamodelpredictivecontrol trate on non-myopic planning instead of the greedy one-step
(MPC) approach for optimization over multiple time steps. maximization of utility.
Discretization of the action space was also applied by [17],
who applied reinforcement learning to learn parameterized III. EXPLORATIONASAPOMDP
robottrajectoriesforexploration.Asomewhatcomplementary
Consider a robot exploring a partially observable environ-
approach was adopted in [18], where a set of candidate
ment. Let s∈S denote the hidden state of the system, com-
explorationtargetswereevaluatedbasedonanutilityfunction
prising the state of the robot and the state of the environment.
designed to balance exploration of unknown areas and seeing
At each decision epoch in the set T = {0,1,...,H − 1},
known landmarks to help maintain good localization informa- H ∈ N ∪ {∞}, where H is the horizon of the problem,
tion. However, an explicit information-theoretic quantification
the robot selects a control action u ∈ U. Consequently, the
of the information gain was avoided.
state at the next decision epoch is determined by a transition
Martinez-Cantin et al. [19] relaxed assumptions made in according to a Markovian state transition model T(s,s,u),
earlier work, such as discretization of the action space and giving the conditional probability of transitioning to s ∈ S
themyopicoptimizationhorizon.TheyappliedaMonteCarlo from s ∈ S when action u ∈ U is executed. After the state
search algorithm in policy space with a Gaussian process ap- transition, the robot obtains information regarding the state
proximationoftheobjectivefunction.Thepoliciestoevaluate in the form of an observation. The observation is modelled
wereselectedbyminimizingtheaveragemeansquareerrorof by a probabilistic model O(z ,s,u) giving the conditional
(cid:48) (cid:48)
the state estimate consisting of robot and landmark locations. probability of perceiving observation z ∈ Z in state s ∈ S
(cid:48) (cid:48)
A belief space planning approach investigated by [20, 21] after action u ∈ U was executed. As the robot’s knowledge
addressedmanyofthelimitationsofearlierstudies.Aplanner of the true system state is incomplete, it is represented by a
architecture consisting of an estimation layer and a decision belief state b ∈ B, a probability density function (pdf) over
layer combined with a model predictive control strategy for the state space S. The set B, containing all pdfs over S, is
non-myopicplanningwasapplied,assumingaGaussianbelief called the belief space.
overrobotandlandmarkposes.Discretizationwasavoidedby As the robot executes control actions and perceives obser-
applying a gradient descent method for computing optimal vations, its belief state is tracked by Bayesian filtering. Given
actions. Possible future measurements were treated as random a belief state b∈B and an action u∈U, the predicted belief
variables, relaxing the assumption of maximum likelihood state bu is computed by
measurements. Exploration was considered in the sense that (cid:90)
the objective function included an A-optimality criterion for (cid:48) (cid:48)
state covariance. s
Another body of work in exploration employs metric map Given an observation z , the posterior belief b is obtained in
(cid:48) (cid:48)
representations such as occupancy grids [22]. Bourgault et al. the update step by applying Bayes’ rule:
[23] combined occupancy grid mapping with feature-based O(z ,s,u)bu(s)
SLAMandusedmutualinformationastherewardfunction.A b (cid:48) (s (cid:48) ):=τ(b,u,z (cid:48) )(s (cid:48) )= (cid:48) (cid:48) (cid:48) , (2)
discretizedactionspacewasappliedwithmyopicoptimization. (cid:48)
where the function τ : B × U × Z → B is referred to
Rao-Blackwellizedparticlefiltering(RBPF)isoftenapplied
as the belief update function. The normalization term in
instate-of-the-artSLAMfiltersforoccupancygridmaps[24].
the denominator is the prior probability of observing z :
Each particle represents a map and a robot trajectory hy- η(z |b,u)= (cid:82) O(z ,s,u)bu(s)ds. (cid:48)
pothesis. Stachniss et al. [2] studied myopic exploration in (cid:48) (cid:48) (cid:48) (cid:48) (cid:48)
RBPF SLAM by discretizing the action space to a set of For each acti∈onS, the robot receives an instantaneous reward
possible waypoints and then evaluating the approximate ex- given by the reward function ρ : B ×U → R. Throughout
pected information gain when traveling to the waypoints by the remainder of the paper, we will assume that the reward
sampling. This work was later expanded upon [25, 9] by function is bounded, i.e., there exist ρ ,ρ ∈ R such that
considering alternative measures of uncertainty of the SLAM ∀b,u : ρ ≤ ρ(b,u) ≤ ρ . The reward at decision epoch
solution. These approaches consider both exploration of new t ∈ T is discounted by a factor γt, typically γ ∈ [0,1) [26].
areas and maintaining the consistency of the particle filter The robot is said to act optimally when the expected sum
approximation. of discounted instantaneous rewards over all decision epochs
in T is maximized. The elements thus defined constitute Traditionally, reward functions in POMDPs are state and
a discounted reward partially observable Markov decision action dependent, and thus linear in the belief state [1]. For
process (POMDP). ρ(b,u) linear in the belief state, the optimal finite-horizon
value function can be represented by a piece-wise linear and
convex (PWLC) function [30]. Several of the most efficient
A. Reward functions for exploration
currently known approximate algorithms for POMDPs lever-
Suitable reward functions for exploration encourage reduc- agethePWLCrepresentationtofindsolutions[31,32,33,34].
ing uncertainty in the belief states. Such reward functions However, a reward function defined as an uncertainty func-
should yield a high reward for beliefs that have the majority tion or information gain (Definition 1) is nonlinear in the be-
of their probability mass concentrated on a small subset of lief. Araya et al. [35] approximated a reward function convex
states. Vice versa, beliefs that correspond to uncertain state in the belief state by a piece-wise linear function and were
information should yield a low reward. Uncertainty functions able to apply standard POMDP algorithms to approximate the
and information gain provide useful characterizations that can optimalpolicy.OnlinePOMDPalgorithms[36]thatrepeatedly
be applied to define such reward functions. find an optimal action only for the current belief state during
task execution and do not rely on an explicit closed form
Definition1(Uncertaintyfunctionandinformationgain[27]).
An uncertainty function is a concave function f : B → R+. representation of the value function are also applicable to
POMDPs with nonlinear rewards. Several online algorithms
The information gain I related to an uncertainty function f
are based on a finite depth tree search over reachable belief
is the expected reduction in the uncertainty function:
states. The number of reachable belief states after k decisions
I (b,u)=f(bu)−E[f(τ(b,u,z ))], (3) is (|U||Z|)k, which quickly makes the search intractable for
f (cid:48)
problems with large action and observation spaces. If either
taking the expectation under η(z (cid:48) |b,u). U or Z are uncountable, the basic tree search method is not
For example, I (b,u) or −f(bu) may then be applied as applicable.
a reward function. A common choice for the uncertainty In mixed-observability problems, a part of the state is
function f is the Shannon entropy, for which the correspond- fully observable and evolves deterministically. In such mixed-
ing information gain is the mutual information [28]. Mutual observabilitydomainswithamutualinformationrewardfunc-
information has been applied as a reward function in several tion, Atanasov et al. [5] showed that if the observation model
worksonroboticinformationgathering,seee.g.[2,3,4,5,6]. is linear-Gaussian w.r.t. the target state, the optimal policy for
maximizing mutual information is open-loop, and if possible
actionsareconstrainedbythefullyobservablepartofthestate,
B. Optimal policies
Lauri and Ritala [6] showed that under certain conditions the
An optimal solution to a finite-horizon POMDP is a se- problem can be relaxed into a multi-armed bandit problem.
quence of policies (π ,π ,...,π ), where π :B →U maps
belief states to control actions, such that acting according to
C. Open-loop solution to a POMDP
π at every decision epoch t maximizes the expected sum
of discounted rewards over the remaining decision epochs2. Instead of resorting to the aforementioned approaches for
An optimal solution is characterized by the value iteration POMDPs with nonlinear rewards, we consider an open loop
procedure for t = 1,2,...,H indicating the number of approximation that ignores the effect of information provided
decision epochs remaining, starting with Q (b,u)≡ρ(b,u): by future observations, instead choosing actions only on the
basis of currently available information. By this approach, we
Q (b,u)=ρ(b,u)+γ η(z |b,u)V (τ(b,u,z ))dz , are able to handle continuous action and observation spaces,
t (cid:48) t∗1 (cid:48) (cid:48)
− although at a loss in optimality of the solution.
∈Z (4) Denote the current belief state by b 0 . Given an action
sequenceu ,thepredictedpdfofthemeasurementsz
V (b)= supQ (b,u), (5) 0:H 1 1:H
t∗ t given the infor−mation in the current belief state is
π t∗ (b)=argsupQ t (b,u). (6) (cid:90)
∈U 1:H 0 0:H 1 0 0
The value function V t∗ (b) gives the expected sum of dis- S |H+1| (7)
counted rewards attainable by acting optimally for t deci- H 1
sion epochs starting at belief state b, and Q t (b,u) gives the
O(z k+1 ,s k+1 ,u k )T(s k+1 ,s k ,u k )ds 0:H .
expected sum of discounted rewards when action u is first k=0
executed and then for the remaining (t−1) decision epochs
The open loop objective function over the corresponding
anoptimalpolicyisfollowed.Foraninfinitehorizonproblem,
decision epochs is
value iteration converges to a unique fixed point V , and the
corresponding optimal policy is stationary [29]. J H (b 0 ,u 0:H 1 )=
− (cid:34) (cid:35)
2Note that by this formulation, at decision epoch 0, π∗ is followed, at ρ(b ,u )+E
H (cid:88)− 1
H 0 0 k 1 k 1 k k
decisionepoch1,π∗ ,andsoon. − −
where the expectation is taken w.r.t. p(z | b ,u ),
1:H 0 0:H 1
and belief states follow the recursion b =τ(b ,u , − z ).
The crucial difference compared to th k e value k −i 1 tera k ti−o 1 n a k nd Selection Expansion Simulation Backpropagation
policies in Eqns. (4)-(6) is that the sequence of actions is
fixed beforehand.Thus,anoptimalopenloopsolutionu
is a sequence of H actions that maximizes the expect−ed
sum of discounted rewards when information provided by
observations during the subsequent decision epochs is not
Treepolicy
exploited to select any of the subsequent actions: Rollout
u = argsup J (b ,u ). (9)
∗0:H 1 H 0 0:H 1
We denote the optimal open loop value as J H∗ (b 0 ) ≡ Figure 1: Overview of POMCP simulation episodes. The tree
J H (b 0 ,u ∗0:H 1 ). policy stage consists of a selection and expansion phase, and
A recedin−g horizon control strategy is adopted as follows. the rollout stage consists of a simulation and backpropagation
First, Eq. (9) is solved, u ∗0 is executed and an observation z 1 phase. (Figure adapted from [41])
is perceived. The belief state is revised to τ(b ,u ,z ), and
the process is repeated. In a sense, feedback is reintroduced
by computing the optimal open loop action sequence again at ispossibletoapplysearchalgorithmstofindthesolution.The
everydecisionepoch,applyingupdatedinformation.Thiscon- search space is U | H | , the space of action sequences with H
trol strategy is also referred to as open-loop feedback control actions.AstheobjectivefunctionJ maynotbedifferentiable
(OLFC), and we denote the expected value of following this with respect to the action sequence, gradient methods are
OLFC policy for H decision epochs as Jˆ (b ). not generally applicable. We review an algorithm for both a
It is interesting to consider how much worse is the value finite(SubsectionIV-A)andanuncountable(SubsectionIV-B)
Jˆ (b ) of the OLFC policy compared to the value V (b ) action space, leading to finite or uncountable search spaces,
of an optimal closed loop policy. If the reward function is respectively.
bounded, then the loss of OLFC compared to an optimal
policy is bounded. To see this, consider that the worst and A. Partially observable Monte Carlo planning
best possible policies attain a reward of ρ and ρ ,
min max The partially observable Monte Carlo planning algorithm
respectively, on every decision epoch. Taking into account
(POMCP) of [40] is a variant of Monte Carlo Tree Search
the discounting of rewards, we have that the difference in
(MCTS) [41] to solve POMDPs with finite action and obser-
value of any two policies over H decision epochs is at
vationspaces.POMCPrunsasequenceofforwardsimulations
most (cid:80)− γk(ρ −ρ ). It should be noted that in practice called episodes on the problem, and collects the rewards
k=0 obtainedinthesimulationandusesthemtoevaluatealternative
an optimal policy rarely obtains the maximum reward on
strategies by constructing a search tree over the possible
every decision epoch, nor does an open loop policy obtain
policies. An exploration parameter e determines the balance
the minimum reward on every decision epoch, such that the
between exploitation and exploration behaviour during the
suboptimality is often less in practice than as indicated by the
search.
bound.
WehaveadaptedPOMCPforsolvingtheopenloopcontrol
The OLFC policy always performs at least as well as
problem of Eq. (9). A search tree over action sequences is
executing an optimal pure open-loop action sequence u ,
∗0:H 1 iteratively constructed, starting from a tree containing just the
as shown by the following theorem. −
root node corresponding to the current belief state b. The
Theorem1(Performanceofopen-loopfeedbackcontrol[37]). overall objective is to estimate the values of possible open
For any b∈B, loop action sequences, in order to be able to select an action
Jˆ (b)≥J (b). (10) to execute in the current belief state that leads to the most
favourable outcome over the next H decisions.
The suboptimality of following the OLFC policy may be
Each node in the search tree corresponds to a particular
further analyzed by noting that in certain special cases an
action sequence, and we will refer to a node by an action
optimalpolicyiseffectivelyanopenlooppolicy,see[38]fora
sequenceu .Therootnodecorrespondstothecurrentbelief
discussionofsuchcases.Furthermore,anapproximationofan
statebwhennoactionshaveyetbeentaken,andisreferredto
upper bound for the optimal closed loop value may be found
by an empty set. For each node u , a value estimate and a
e.g. applying hindsight optimization, see [39].
countaremaintained.Thevalueestimate V(u )isthemean
sum of discounted rewards recorded over all simulations that
IV. FORWARDSIMULATIONFOROPENLOOPCONTROL
continuefromu untilthefinaldecisionepochH.Thecount
Solving the open loop control problem of Eq. (9) corre- N(u )isthenumberoftimesanodehasbeenvisitedduring
sponds to finding an optimal policy to a POMDP with no the search.
observations, which itself is an NP-complete problem [7]. Figure 1 gives an overview of a simulation episode, and
Since the optimal solution is a sequence of actions u , it shows how the search tree is iteratively constructed. Every
episode consists of a tree policy stage and a rollout stage. In Algorithm 1 POMCP [40] for open-loop control
thenexttwoparagraphs,wegiveaninformaloverviewofboth Input: The POMDP model, exploration parameter e, opti-
phases. After that, we describe the algorithm in more detail, mization horizon H, current belief state b
filling in the missing details. 1: function POMCP(b 0 )
During the tree policy stage, the current belief state b 2: while stopping conditions not fulfilled do
is propagated applying the belief update equation τ with 3: SIMULATE(b 0 ,∅,0)
each action u determined by the search tree nodes visited 4: N(∅)←N(∅)+1
and each observation z (cid:48) determined by sampling from the 5: end while
prior distribution η(z (cid:48) | b,u). For example, at the root node 6: return argmax u V(u)
correspondingtob,thevalueestimatesandcountsofthechild 7: end function
nodes are applied to choose one child node corresponding to
an action u. An observation is sampled from η(z (cid:48) | b,u), the 8: function SIMULATE(b,u 0:d ,d)
belief state is updated to b = τ(b,u,z (cid:48) ), and the tree policy 9: if d=H −1 then return 0
continuestoanewnodeu.Similarly,atanynodeu 0:k achild 10: else if ISLEAF(u 0:d ) then
node u 0:k+1 = {u 0:k ,u} is chosen according to the values 11: Add {u 0:d ,u} to tree ∀u∈U
and counts of the child nodes, the belief state is updated, and 12: return ROLLOUT(b,d)
the tree policy stage continues at node u 0:k+1 . An example of 13: end if
a trajectory of nodes traversed during the tree policy stage is 14: u ← argmaxV({u 1:d ,u (cid:48) }) +
indicated by the arrows in the leftmost part of Figure 1. (cid:112) u(cid:48)
Oncealeafnodethatdoesnothaveanychildrenisencoun- 0:d 0:d (cid:48)
tered,thetreepolicycannotbecontinued.Thetreeisexpanded 15: Sample z (cid:48) ∼η(z (cid:48) |b,u)
by adding new child nodes as appropriate, an example of 16: r ←ρ(b,u)+γ· SIMULATE(τ(b,u,z (cid:48) ),{u 0:d ,u},d+
expanding the tree with a single node is shown in the second
from left part of Figure 1, under the “Expansion” indicator. 17: N({u 0:d ,u})←N({u 0:d ,u})+1
Thesearchthenmovestotherolloutstage.Intherolloutstage, 1 1 8 9 : : V re ( t { u u rn 0:d r ,u})←V({u 0:d ,u})+ r − N V ( { ( u { 0 u : 0 d : , d u , } u ) } )
a simulation until decision epoch H is performed, updating
20: end function
beliefandrecordingrewardsalongtheway,seethethirdfrom
left part of Figure 1. In the final backpropagation phase of
21: function ROLLOUT(b,d)
the rollout stage, shown on the rightmost part of Figure 1, the
22: if d=H −1 then return 0
total reward recorded is applied to update the values of each
node visited during the simulation episode. Once a simulation
episode is completed, a new one is again started at the root of 24: Sample u∼π rollout (b)
the search tree, now expanded with new nodes. 25: Sample z (cid:48) ∼η(z (cid:48) |b,u)
Algorithm 1 presents the version of POMCP that we have 26: return ρ(b,u)+γ· ROLLOUT(τ(b,u,z (cid:48) ),d+1)
27: end if
adapted to solve the open loop control problem of Eq. (9).
28: end function
The algorithm takes as parameters the POMDP model, an
exploration parameter e, an optimization horizon H, and the
current belief state b. The while loop (Line 2) is executed
until a specified stopping criterion, e.g. the maximum number are updated with the reward information gained during the
of simulation episodes N , has been reached. Each iteration episode in the backpropagation phase (Lines 17-18).
of the while loop corresponds to one simulation episode. If an action sequence is encountered that is a leaf node of
If the condition on Line 10 is false, the current search thecurrentsearchtree,arolloutstageisentered(Line10).The
tree is applied to guide the action selection in the tree policy search tree is expanded to include possible successor actions
stage. The action to execute is determined by a selection rule (Line 11). By calling the function ROLLOUT, a sample of the
maximizing an upper confidence bound [42, 43] as shown reward until end of the optimization horizon is obtained. This
on Line 143. The first term in the bound is the current isachievedbysimulatingagivenrolloutpolicy(Line24)until
estimate of the expected value of the action, and the second theendoftheoptimizationhorizon.Atypicalchoiceofrollout
term is an exploration bonus dependent on the exploration policyistosampleanactionuniformlyatrandomfromU [40].
parameter e. The parameter e is typically selected such that it Once the while loop of the main function terminates, an
is on a similar scale as typical rewards in the problem. The action recommendation uˆ←argmax V(u) is returned (Line
exploration bonus encourages trying actions that have rarely 6). The value estimates of POMCP converge asymptotically
beentried,promptingexploratorybehavior.Aftersamplingan to the optimal open loop value [40].
observationz ,thetreepolicystageiscontinuedbyarecursive
call to the function SIMULATE (Line 16). Finally, the counts
and values of all action sequences visited during the episode
B. Sequential Monte Carlo planning
3If N({u 0:d ,u(cid:48)}) = 0 for any u(cid:48) ∈ U, the action is instead sampled
uniformlyatrandomfrom{u(cid:48)∈U |N({u
,u(cid:48)})=0}. Kantas et al. [44] present a sequential Monte Carlo (SMC)
method to maximizing functions of the form Algorithm 2 Sequential Monte Carlo optimization, adapted
from [44].
J H (φ)= G(y,φ)p(y |φ)dy, (11) Input: The POMDP model, number of iterations l max , in-
creasing integer sequence {ν }lmax, sampling kernels q ,
Y optimization horizon H, resampling threshold M .
which is seen to be equivalent to Eq. (8) by setting y =z , t
φ={b ,u }, and choosing G as a function that enc 1 o : m H - 1: function SMC(b 0 )
passes 0 the 0 a : p H p−ro 1 priate summations4. 2: for l=1,...,l max do
3: for i=1,...,M do
The key idea of the SMC optimization method of [44] is
t w o he c r o e ns p t ( ru φ c ) t is a a s n eq a u r e b n it c r e ary of p d ri i o s r tri t b h u a t t io is ns no λ n ν ze ∝ ro p at (φ th )J e H m ( a φ x ) i ν - 5 4 : : f u o 0 ( r i : ) H j−= 1,l 1 ∼ ,.. q . l ( , · ν | l u d 0 o :H − 1,l − 1 )
mizers of Eq. (11). This approach is related to the Bayesian 6: z 1 (i :H ) ,j ∼p(z 1:H |b 0 ,u( 0 i : ) H 1,l )
7: end for −
interpretationofsimulatedannealingandmaximumlikelihood
estimation,see[45].Asν →∞,λ (φ)becomesconcentrated l
on the set of maximizers of J . In
practice, a set of particles w(i) (cid:81)
νl (cid:16)
H l 1 0 0,l
is evaluated via the objective function and, based on the − j=1
evaluation result, particles are either discarded or carried + (cid:80)− γkρ(τ(b(i) ,u(i) ,z(i)),u(i))
k 1 k 1,l k,j k,l
forward to the next evaluation round. Eventually the particle k=1 − −
9: end for
set converges to represent an action sequence maximizing
10: for i=1,...,M do
Eq. (11).
The SMC method is presented in Algorithm 2. The al- 11: w(i) ←w(i)/ (cid:80) w(j)
gorithm iterates over l = 1,...,l , where the number j=1
max 12: end for
o ru f n i - t t e im ra e tio r n e s qu l i m re a m x en is ts c . h T o h s e en al a g c o c r o it r h d m ing m t a o in t t h a e ins ac a cu s r e a t cy of a M nd 13: if 1/ (cid:80) M (w l (i))2 <M t then
particles. At iteration l, each particle indexed by i with 14: Resample; w(i) ←1/M ∀i
an associated weight w(i) represents a sequence of actions l
l 15: end if
u 0 (i : ) H 1,l and a set of ν l observation sequences conditional 16: end for
on th − e action sequence, denoted z 1 (i :H ) ,j , j = 1,...,ν l . The 17: end function
integers {ν } must form a strictly increasing sequence.
The algorithm≥has been shown to converge to the optimal
solution for logarithmic sequences, although in practice faster
increasing linear or geometric sequences are used [45, 44].
Thesequence{ν } isanalogoustothetemperaturecooling
schedule in simulat≥ed annealing.
A control sequence is sampled for each particle from a
kernel q (Line 4). For l = 1, the initial control sequences
are sampled from a prior distribution that is nonzero at the
maximizersof(11).Ingeneral,thechoiceofq dependsonthe Figure 2: Convergence of the SMC algorithm in a robotic
problem specifics. The selection of the kernel determines how exploration task. Subfigures 2a through 2c indicate increasing
newcontrolsequencesamplesdependontheearlierones,and iterationslofthealgorithm.Therobotlocationandoutlineare
ithasacentralroleindetermininghowefficientthealgorithm indicatedbyathinblackcircle.Localtrajectoriesshownbythe
is. For further discussion on kernel selection, we direct the blue lines are superimposed on a greyscale image indicating
reader to [46]. current map information. The map shows occupied cells in
Aftercontrolsequenceshavebeensampled,theyareapplied black, free cells in white, and unknown cells in grey. The
to generate ν replicas of possible state-observation sequences local trajectories are sequentially evaluated based on their
whenexecutingthecontrolsequence(Lines5-7).Theweights informativeness, and eventually converge towards the most
of the particles are updated by approximating the objective informative local trajectory.
function applying the state and observation samples contained
ineachparticle(Line8).Inthisstep,thebeliefstatesforgiven
j,l,i follow the recursion b(i) =τ(b ,u(i) ,z(i)).
At the end of each itera k tion, res k a − m 1 plin k g− 1 i , s l p k e , r j formed if rithm2iseasilyparallelized,aseachparticlecanbeprocessed
independently.
the effective sample size [47] falls below the threshold value
M (Line 14). After step l = l , the maximizer estimate Figure 2 shows an example of applying Algorithm 2 to
is extracted as u(im) , where i = argmaxw(i). Algo- a robotic exploration problem. The figure shows for three
iterations of the algorithms how possible trajectories for the
robot corresponding to the particles are evaluated, weighted
4For this method, G must be finite and strictly positive, which can be
andresampled,convergingtowardsthemostinformativelocal
achievedbyaddingafinitepositiveconstantwithoutaffectingtheargument
maximizingtheobjectivefunction. trajectory.
V. MUTUALINFORMATIONINMOBILEROBOTICS The first term of Eq. (15) is the MI of X and Z:
In this section, we present a new approximation for mutual (cid:90) (cid:90) p(x |b,u,z )
I(X;Z |b,u)= p(x,z |b,u)log (cid:48) (cid:48) dxdz .
information (MI) that is especially useful in mobile robotics (cid:48) (cid:48) p(x |b,u) (cid:48) (cid:48)
domains. As the approximation is sample-based, it is straight-
forward to apply it together with forward simulation based
The second term of Eq. (15) is the conditional MI of M and
planning. The approximation is derived in Subsection V-A,
Z, given X. By the definition of conditional MI [28],
and in Subsection V-B we present a method for efficiently
(cid:20) (cid:21)
drawing observation samples in the case occupancy grids are I(M;Z |X,b,u)=E log p(m (cid:48) ,z (cid:48) |x (cid:48) ,b,u) ,
used as a map representation. Z,X,M p(m |x,b,u)p(z |x,b,u)
(cid:48) (cid:48) (cid:48) (cid:48)
where the expectation is taken w.r.t. p(z ,x,m | b,u). By
A. Approximation of mutual information (cid:48) (cid:48) (cid:48)
Assumption 1, p(m |x,b,u)=p(m |b,u), and by the law
(cid:48) (cid:48) (cid:48)
The state s ∈ S in a robotic exploration problem is of conditional probability we have
decomposed into the robot’s internal state x ∈ X and the (cid:90) (cid:90)
environment state or map m ∈ M, i.e. S = X × M. I(M;Z |X,b,u)= p(x,z |b,u)
(cid:48) (cid:48)
The internal state represents the pose of the robot, and the
environmentstaterepresentsallrelevantfeaturesoftheworld.  Z X 
We make the following assumption asserting that the robot is  (cid:90) p(m (cid:48) |x (cid:48) ,z (cid:48) ,b,u)log p(m (cid:48) |x (cid:48) ,z (cid:48) ,b,u) dm (cid:48)dx (cid:48) dz (cid:48)
unable to affect the environment state through its actions. p(m |b,u)
Assumption 1. The robot’s internal state and environment M (18)
state evolve independently, i.e.
We have thus shown that both terms on the right hand side of
T(s,s,u)=T (x,x,u)T (m,m), (12) Eq. (15), namely, Eqns. (16) and (18), are expectations under
(cid:48) x (cid:48) m (cid:48)
the same joint pdf p(x,z | b,u). Drawing N samples from
(cid:48) (cid:48)
whereT x :X×X×U →R+andT m :M×M→R+arethe this pdf and defining I N as above, by the lemma of Monte
robot and environment state transition models, respectively. Carlo integration [48, Ch. 3.2] I converges to I(X,M;Z |
b,u) almost surely.
We remark that this assumption does not imply that the
internal and environment state are independent. To apply the approximation presented in Theorem 2, we
Suppose information gain (Definition 1) with Shannon en- draw samples from p(x,z |b,u) by the following three-step
(cid:48) (cid:48)
tropy as the uncertainty function is applied as the reward in method for i=1,2,...,N:
an exploration POMDP. This leads to I f (b,u) equal to the 1) Sample from the current belief state s(i) =
mutual information, which can be approximated as follows. (x(i),m(i))∼b,
Theorem 2. Denote by b ∈ B the current belief state, by 2) Propagate the sample through the factored state tran-
u ∈ U the current action, and let X, M, and Z denote sition model of Assumption 1, yielding new samples
the random variables depicting the robot state, environment x (cid:48) (i) ∼T x (x (cid:48) ,x(i),u) and m (cid:48) (i) ∼T m (m (cid:48) ,m(i)).
state, and observation at the next decision epoch. Consider 3) Thesamplefromthepreviousstepisdistributedaccord-
the mutual information of the state (X,M) and observation ing to the predictive pdf bu =p(x (cid:48) ,m (cid:48) |b,u). Recalling
Z, defined s (cid:48) =(x (cid:48) ,m (cid:48) ), we have by marginalizing over M
I(X,M;Z |b,u)= p(x,z |b,u)= O(z ,s,u)bu(s)dm, (19)
(cid:48) (cid:48) (cid:48) (cid:48) (cid:48) (cid:48)
(cid:90) (cid:90) p(x,m |b,u)
p(x,m |b,u)log (cid:48) (cid:48) dxdm.
(cid:48) (cid:48) p(x |b,u)p(m |b,u) (cid:48) (cid:48) M
(cid:48) (cid:48) and we may thus sample z(i) ∼O(z ,s(i),u) to obtain
(cid:48) (cid:48) (cid:48)
M X (13) the desired samples.
Theorem 2 is applicable with three restrictions. First, we
IfAssumption1holdsandif{x(i),z(i)}N ∼p(x,z |b,u),
(cid:48) (cid:48) i=1 (cid:48) (cid:48) must be able to draw samples from the state transition and
where N is the number of samples, then the approximation
observationmodelseitherdirectlyore.g.applyingimportance
1 (cid:88) N p(x (cid:48) (i) |b,u,z (cid:48) ) sampling. Secondly, evaluating the first sum term in Eq. (14)
N N p(x(i) |b,u) requiresustobeabletoevaluatethepredictiveprobabilityand
i=1 (cid:48) theposteriorprobabilityofarobotstatex(i) givenanactionu
(cid:35) (cid:48)
+ (cid:90) p(m |b,u,z(i),x(i))log p(m (cid:48) |b,u,z (cid:48) (i),x (cid:48) (i)) dm and a measurement z (cid:48) (i). The predictive pdf can be evaluated
(cid:48) (cid:48) (cid:48) (cid:48)
p(m |b,u) applying the state transition model. It is not generally easy
M (14) to find the posterior p(x (cid:48) (i) | b,u,z (cid:48) (i)), but in some cases it
can be approximated by a unimodal distribution. As argued
converges almost surely to I(X,M;Z |b,u) as N →∞. by [24], such a case arises e.g. for robots equipped with
accuraterangesensorssuchaslaserrangefinders(LRFs).LRF
Proof. By the chain rule for MI [28],
datacanbeleveragedviascanmatchingtoobtainlocalization
I(X,M;Z |b,u)=I(X;Z |b,u)+I(M;Z |X,b,u). (15) estimates that are significantly more precise than estimates
based only on robot’s state transition models. Consequently,
the measurement likelihood is strongly peaked and the pos-
terior pdf of the robot state given the observation may be
approximatedbyaunimodaldistribution,e.g.aGaussianwith
a small covariance. Third and finally, evaluating the integral
term in the sum of Eq. (14) requires us to be able to compute
posterior map pdfs given a pose and an observation. This
correspondstotheproblemofmappingwithknownposes[22].
We must also be able to evaluate the integral expression over
the map state. The difficulty of this depends on the map
representation,butissimplee.g.foroccupancygridmapsdue
Figure 3: Occupancy grids and observed areas. The robot’s
to the independence assumption of the grid cells: the integral
poseismarkedbyablackcircle,andthedashedsectordepicts
term reduces to a sum over cells.
sensor range. The cells with a grey background denote the
The overall effect of the approximation is that we avoid
subset of the occupancy grid that is potentially sensed either
computing the full state posterior pdf and solving the implied
at a single pose (left side) or a trajectory depicted by dashed
SLAM problem when evaluating the expected information
lines between robot poses (right side).
gain of a control action. Note that this does not preclude
executing a SLAM algorithm for the real process indepen-
dently of the task of finding an optimal open loop action
an optimization horizon H and the control actions u , a
sequence. The current belief state b = p(x,m) provided by sequence z(i) of observation samples is constructed. In − the
the SLAM algorithm is applied as initial information for 1:H
case of a laser range finder, raytracing may be applied to
finding the optimal open loop solution. Sometimes the real
draw observation samples. Raytracing simulates a laser beam
process SLAM particle filter may be susceptible to losing
originating from the robot’s pose x, tracking which cells the
consistency [25, 9], and applying the proposed approximation
beam travels through. When the ray intersects a cell c, the
may lead to a failure state as this possibility is not considered
occupancy information p is applied to determine whether the
while planning trajectories. In such cases, either the SLAM c
cellisfreeandthebeampassesthrough,orthecellisoccupied
algorithm must be improved or an alternative approximation
and the beam hits an obstacle in the cell. In the former case,
for MI applied. (c,0)isinsertedtoz(i),andinthelattercase(c,1)isinserted
to z(i) and the raytracing is terminated.
B. Observation sampling in occupancy grid maps As the same cell may be observed at multiple decision
epochs and the observations should be consistent, i.e. they
To apply the forward simulation based planning algorithms
are generated from the same true underlying map, a persistent
presented in Section IV together with the approximation of
mapsamplemp keepingtrackoftheoccupancystatesofcells
MIpresentedabove,efficientmethodsfordrawingobservation
intersected by the simulated laser beams is maintained. The
samples given a sequence of control actions are required. In
persistent map sample is also a collection of pairs (c,o) of
this section, we introduce such a sampling method for occu-
a cell c and its sampled occupancy o ∈ {0,1} in the map.
pancy grid maps [22], a map representation widely applied in
Whenever a cell c is encountered during ray tracing, it is first
mobile robotics.
checked whether mp contains it already.
An occupancy grid map defines a partition of a space into
equally-sizedcellsc.WeassumethatthemapMiscomposed An observation sampling algorithm implementing these
features is presented in Algorithm 3. A sample of the current
of a finite number of such cells. Each cell is in one of two
hiddenstates,eitherfree(0)oroccupied(1).Ascelloccupancy posex( 0 i) isdrawnfromp(x 0 )obtainedbymarginalizingfrom
is often not known exactly, an occupancy probability P(c = the current belief state b 0 = p(x 0 ,m 0 ) (Line 3). For each
1) := p ∈ [0,1] models the information regarding the state decision epoch 0 ≤ t ≤ H − 1, a pose sample x(i) is
of the cell. drawn (Line 5) from the robot’s dynamic model. Raytracing
The occupancy information is revised through sensor ob- with the persistent map sample mp is applied to sample z(i)
servations. Depending on the robot’s sensors and its pose x, (Line6)fromtheobservationmodel.Inthiscase,thesampling
it is possible that only a subset M˜(x) ⊂ M of the map is is implemented in the function RAYTRACE.
sensed by a robot at x. Figure 3 shows an example of such Foreachlaserbeamincidenceangleandeachcellalongthe
a scenario. We note that even several measurements over a beam,theoccupancystateofthecellisfirstdetermined.Ifthe
trajectorytraversedbytherobotmayonlyprovideinformation cellchasalreadybeenencounteredduringthesamplingofany
regarding a subset of the whole map area. As the cells of z(i), k <t, its occupancy state is retained from the persistent
an occupancy grid map are independent, this suggests that an map sample, and otherwise its occupancy state is sampled
efficientmethodforsamplingobservationsmaybeconstructed according to p (Lines 13-18). Finally, the actual observed
byconsideringonlythesubsetofpotentiallysensedmapcells. occupancy j is sampled according to the sensor observation
We represent observations z as collections of pairs of the model (Line 19), and the resulting observation is added to the
form (c,j), where c denotes the cell and j ∈{0,1} is the ob- observation sample. The value j = 1 indicates that the beam
served occupancy for the cell: free (0) or occupied (1). Given hit an obstacle, and the raytrace for this incidence angle is
terminated (Line 22).
Algorithm 3 Observation sampling for a laser range finder
(LRF).
Input: The POMDP model, optimization horizon H.
1: function SAMPLE(b 0 ) 6
2: mp ←∅ ]m
3: Sample x( 0 i) ∼p(x 0 ) [ y 8
4: for t=0,...H −1 do 10
:
:
|x( t i),u t ) 12
7: end for 14
8: return z(i) 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
9: end function x[m]
Figure4:Atestmapforasingledecision.Therobot’sstarting
10: function RAYTRACE(x) locationisindicatedbythecirclemarker,andthreetrajectories
11: for all incidence angles α of the LRF do are labeled by the corresponding actions a , a and a .
12: for all cells c along a beam starting at x in
direction α do
13: if (c,·)∈/ mp then of the proposed POMDP based planning approach in three
14: Sample o∼p c domains:amaze,anoffice,andanoutdoorenvironment,each
15: mp ←mp∪{(c,o)} having different scale and other properties. These simulations
16: else were implemented in MATLAB. Based on the results, we
17: o←{o|(c,o)∈mp} propose a further improvement of the POMDP approach, and
18: end if compare the improved method with frontier-based exploration
19: Sample j ∼p(z (cid:48) |o,x) in Subsection VI-C.
21: if j =1 then
A. An illustrative example
23: end if We first consider the effect of prior information and opti-
24: end for mization horizon for making a single decision in a small toy
25: end for domain as shown in Figure 4. The white and black cells in
26: return z the map are unoccupied and occupied cells, respectively. The
27: end function robot was equipped with a simulated laser range finder with
a maximum range of 2 metres for sensing the environment
As map occupancies are sampled only as required (when a state, and had three possible action choices to select between
simulated LRF ray enters a cell), computational savings are as indicated by the trajectories overlaid in the figure. Each
accrued compared to the naive approach of always sampling action was designed specifically to have a varying effect on
occupancy values for every cell before raytracing. After the the achievable mutual information over a horizon of several
observationsamplesz 1 (i :H ) havebeenobtained,thecorrespond- decisions. Action a 2 , corresponding to moving straight ahead,
ingvaluesofMIcanbecomputedapplyingtheapproximation initiallydoesnotprovidemuchinformationabouttheenviron-
of Theorem 2. For integration with the SMC method (Algo- ment as the view of the range finder is partially blocked by
rithm 2), the sampling algorithm (Algorithm 3) is executed thecorridorleadingtowardsthetopofthefigure.Despitethis,
independentlyforthecontrolactionsequenceofeachparticle. executing a 2 eventually leads the robot to the large open area
For integration with the POMCP method (Algorithm 1), the in the top part of the environment. In contrast, actions a 1 and
action u t on Line 5 of Algorithm 3 is obtained either from a 3 yield greater immediate information gain, but ultimately
the tree policy or from the rollout policy. lead to dead-ends at the left and right bottom parts of the
map. The boundary of the area was assumed to be known to
VI. SIMULATEDEXPLORATIONEXPERIMENTS the robot, i.e., the robot can detect when an action would take
We studied the POMDP based planning in a set of explo- it outside the boundary of the environment.
ration experiments in three simulated domains. In particular, We note that in a real application also intermediate choices
the effect of prior information and the optimization horizon with a curvature between that of a and a , or a and a ,
H were examined. The proposed planning approaches were would be available for the robot. However, for the purpose
compared to myopic (one-step greedy) planning, which is of this example, we did not consider them. In the subsequent
the special case of the proposed approach with H = 1 (see experiments on larger maps, the SMC method considers the
e.g. [2, 15, 17]), and frontier-based exploration [10]. full uncountable action space.
WebeginbyconsideringanillustrativetoyexampleinSub- Aspriorinformation,therobotrecordedasingleobservation
section VI-A. In Subsection VI-B, we study the performance with the laser range finder from the initial location, and
updated the map occupancy probabilities accordingly. The
robot’s initial location was selected so that this observation 0
did not reveal the presence of the occupied cells in the map. 1
Additionally, two cases were considered: one with no addi- 2
tional prior information, and another one with an informative
priorthatindicatedtheoccupiedareasintheenvironment(the
white cells in Figure 4), but leaving occupancy probabilities ]m 4
elsewhere as they were. y5
Table I: Values of actions in the small map as function of
the optimization horizon H and for a non-informative and
informative prior, shown with the true optimal action (bottom 8
row).
0 2 4 6 8 10
Prior Action H=1 H=2 H=3 H=4
a1 102.4 173.6 235.7 212.4
Uniform a2 101.8 167.1 248.8 325.4
a3 106.5 177.3 235.0 223.0 0
a1 81.8 145.9 189.7 200.5
Informative a2 78.9 157.0 231.0 298.5
a3 97.2 129.4 172.5 140.8
Opt.action a3 a2 a2 a2
We applied the POMCP algorithm (Algorithm 1) to plan y
a single decision. Table I shows the value estimate of each
action for either case of prior information as a function of the 50
optimization horizon H. The action with the greatest value is
indicated by a bold font. Also the optimal action, as found 60
by an exhaustive search over all possible action sequences
0 10 20 30 40
while assuming perfect sensing, is shown for reference. As H x[m]
increases, action a is chosen in the case of no additional
(b) Office
prior for H ≥ 3 and in case of the informative prior for
H ≥ 2. In case of no additional prior information, a 2 is 0
eventually preferred as the other actions eventually lead (after
two decision epochs in the planning phase) to a dead-end 50
where the robot cannot progress any further and thus cannot
collect more information. In the case of an informative prior, 100
however, a is preferred already for H = 2: as the occupied
cells are indicated, the robot is able to avoid the dead-ends [150
blocked by the occupied cells near the bottom corners of the
map. We also note that the difference in the values between
the recommended and second-best action tend to be greater
for the informative prior, indicating that the algorithm is able
to more confidently distinguish between the actions.
0 50 100 150 200 250 300
B. Performance of POMDP based planning
(c) Outdoor
We next examine the effect of prior information and the
Figure 5: Environments examined in the simulation experi-
optimization horizon in domains larger than the toy example
ments.
presented above. Subsection VI-B1 outlines the experimental
setup, and Subsection VI-B2 presents the results.
1) Experimental setup: Three environments as illustrated
repository5. The x and y coordinates of the robot’s starting
in Figure 5 were examined: a maze (Figure 5a), office-like
location in each environment were as follows. In the maze
(Figure 5b), and an open outdoor environment (Figure 5c).
environment, (x,y) = (7.9,8.6); in the office environment,
White and black cells are unoccupied and occupied, respec-
(38.5,58.0); and in the outdoor environment, (90.0,106.0).
tively, and gray cells indicate undefined or unobserved cells.
The simulated robot is able to turn in place, and it is
The sizes of the environments varied from approximately 10-
by-10 meters (maze) to 250-by-250 meters (outdoor). The
5RoboticsDataSetRepositoryRadish[49].WeacknowledgeCyrillStach-
office and outdoor maps were obtained from an online data niss(andGiorgioGrisetti)forprovidingtheoffice(outdoor)environmentdata.
controlled by applying a linear and angular velocity. For
the maze and office environments, the robot was assigned
a maximum linear velocity of 1 meter per second, and for
Non-informativeprior Informativeprior
the outdoor environment 3 meters per second. The angular 800
velocitywasconstrainedtobebetween-0.5and0.5radiansper H=1
second.Therobotwasequippedwithalaserrangefinderwith
amaximumrangeof4meters(mazeandofficeenvironments), d H=7
or15meters(outdoorenvironment).Timewasdiscretizedinto
1 second intervals per decision epoch, and robot trajectories r ev400
were simulated applying the velocity motion model from [50, ita
Ch. 5.3]. m300
ForplanningwithPOMCP(Algorithm1),thecontrolspace C
was discretized uniformly to 9 linear velocity and 7 angular
velocity values, resulting in a total of 63 control actions. The
exploration bonus e was set to 50 for the maze and office 0
5 15 25 35 45 55 65 75 5 15 25 35 45 55 65 75
environments and 100 for the outdoor environment. A total of Decisionepoch Decisionepoch
N =3000 simulation episodes were executed when planning
s (a) Maze
each action.
Non-informativeprior Informativeprior
For planning with SMC (Algorithm 2), the control space
does not need to be discretized, but the kernels for sampling H=1
control signals must be specified. It is more likely that the 6000 H=3
robot obtains more information the greater the amount of
unexplored cells covered by its sensors. Thus, to increase ra
the likelihood of observing more unexplored cells, the initial e r4000
imum velocity. Angular velocities were sampled uniformly u C2000
at random. The number of particles was M = 100, and a
threshold value of M = M/4 was set to trigger resampling. 1000
For iterations l > 1, we applied a Gaussian kernel with
varianceproportionalto(1/l2)timesthefullrangeofpossible 5 15 25 35 45 55 65 75 85 95 5 15 25 35 45 55 65 75 85 95
Decisionepoch Decisionepoch
linear and angular velocity values. Control actions violating
the aforementioned maximum and minimum values for the (b) Office
velocities were rejected. A cooling schedule ν =2l+5 was Non-informativeprior Informativeprior
applied, with l =7.
During the simulations, control actions were checked by H=3
examining their corresponding trajectories. If the trajectory H=5
entered cells with occupancy probability greater than 0.2, the d ra20000 H=7
control action was rejected. The robot was also not allowed e
to move outside the map area or enter unknown areas (grey ev15000
cells in Figure 5).
Forpriorinformation,anon-informativeandaninformative u10000
prior were considered. A non-informative prior corresponds
to the case where the map area is initially unknown to 5000
the robot, with the exception of information provided by a
single observation recorded at the robot’s starting location. 5 15 25 35 45 55 65 75 85 95 5 15 25 35 45 55 65 75 85 95
The informative prior was designed such that in the maze Decisionepoch Decisionepoch
environmentitcorrespondstotellingtherobotthelocationsof (c) Outdoor
allthemazewalls(asindicatedbytheblackcellsinFigure5a)
Figure 6: Cumulative reward in the maze, office, and outdoor
by assigning them occupancy probability of 0.99, and in the
environments as a function of optimization horizon H apply-
office and outdoor environments indicating the unknown area
ing POMCP (Algorithm 1). The lines with the markers show
(the gray cells in Figures 5b and 5c) by again assigning them
the means over 5 simulation runs, while the horizontal bars
an occupancy probability of 0.99. For each type of prior and
indicate the 95% confidence intervals. In each subfigure, the
each environment, the experiment was repeated five times.
left panels show results for a non-informative prior and right
2) Results: Figure 6 shows comparisons of the cumulative
panels for an informative prior.
mutual information reward collected as a function of the
decision epoch when the POMCP algorithm was applied, in
eachoftheenvironmentsstudiedandforoptimizationhorizons
POMCP. From the data we determined that for POMCP the
Non-informativeprior Informativeprior
6000 robot decided to move from its initial position at (38.5,58.0)
towards the large open area around coordinates (25,50) (see
H=5 Figure 5b for the map with coordinate axes) in 1 out of 5
d H=7 cases for H = 5, and in all of the five cases for H = 7.
w In contrast, for SMC, the robot instead moves towards the
ev3000 corridor around coordinates (45,50) in 4 out of 5 cases for
H =5,andin3outof5casesforH =7.Movingtotheopen
m u2000 area results in a much greater information gain over a long
sequenceofdecisions,explainingthereasonforthedifference
1000 in favour of POMCP for H =7. We do not believe this to be
an indication of the superiority of the POMCP approach, but
0 rather a byproduct of a statistical evaluation of the algorithms
5 15 25 35 45 55 65 75 85 95 5 15 25 35 45 55 65 75 85 95
Decisionepoch Decisionepoch combinedwiththestochasticnatureofthesolutionalgorithms
themselves.
Figure 7: Cumulative reward in the office environment ap-
Overall, the results of the experiments indicate that non-
plying SMC (Algorithm 2). The lines with the markers show
myopic planning (H > 1) is useful when the available prior
the means over 5 simulation runs, while the horizontal bars
information can be leveraged to find more informative local
indicate the 95% confidence intervals. The left panel shows
trajectories. This is the case in particular for the maze envi-
results for a non-informative prior, and the left panel for an
ronment with an informative prior (Figure 6a), and the office
informative prior.
environment with an informative prior (Figures 6b and 7).
Theinformationtherobothasaboutthemapaffectswhether
increasing the optimization horizon is useful. In the maze
H =1, 3, 5, and 7. The lines indicate the mean values, while
environment with a non-informative prior, the robot typically
the horizontal bars indicate the 95% confidence intervals of
has information about the map only in its immediate vicinity
the mean values. For the non-informative prior, increasing the
as its view is blocked by nearby maze walls. Thus, most local
optimizationhorizondidnotconsistentlyresultinanincreased
trajectories,shortorlong,leadtherobotoutsidethisarea,and
cumulative reward in any of the environments. This is due
increasing the optimization horizon is not useful if the prior
to the fact that in this case the map samples (and hence
information about these areas is not accurate (Figure 6a). The
the corresponding observation samples) are drawn assuming
officeenvironmentismoreopen,allowingtherobottoobserve
a uniform prior on the map cells’ occupancy, which poorly
the map in a larger area around it. The information gained in
reflects the true configuration of the environment.
this way leads to improvements in exploration performance
In contrast, for the informative prior, statistically signifi- when increasing the optimization horizon, even in the case of
cantly greater cumulative rewards were obtained in the maze anotherwisenon-informativeprior.Oncethelocaltrajectories
and office environments when increasing H, as indicated by considered are such that they bring the robot outside the area
Figures 6aand 6b.A similareffect washowever notobserved aboutwhichithasaccurateinformation,performancedoesnot
intheoutdoorenvironment(Figure6c).Inthemazeandoffice improve anymore: for instance, in the left panel of Figure 6b,
environments, there are dead-ends, i.e. locations where the this happens for H > 3. One further case where increasing
robot has to travel through already-explored areas to reach the optimization horizon is not useful if the environment is
new, unexplored areas. Choosing to traverse towards a dead- suchthatalllocaltrajectoriesareroughlyequallyinformative.
end may seem informative in the short term, but yields poor This is the case in the outdoor environment, which consists
information gainlater. Dead-ends maybe avoided ifsufficient primarily of open areas (Figure 6c).
prior information is available and can be exploited, i.e. the
optimization horizon is great enough to indicate the presence
C. Combining POMDP based and frontier based exploration
ofadead-end.Turningacornerinthemazemayseverelylimit
thetrajectory optionsavailable atsubsequent decisionepochs. The proposed POMDP approach is capable of handling
In contrast, the outdoor environment is primarily open, and uncertainty in robot and environment states in a principled
committingtoacertaintrajectoryusuallydoesnotimposesuch manner, allowing quantifiable trade-offs between uncertainty
limitations. The experimental results suggest that the effect of reduction and the cost of control actions. However, the opti-
priorinformationonexplorationperformanceislesserinsuch mizationhorizonhastobeboundedtomaintaincomputational
an open environment. feasibility. Thus only local reward information can be consid-
Similar results were observed for the SMC algorithm, as ered, leading to susceptibility to local minima.
shown for the office environment in Figure 7. Here, the lines A frontier-based exploration method, see e.g. [10], detects
indicate the mean values, while the horizontal bars indicate frontiers between free and unknown areas in the current map.
the 95% confidence intervals of the mean values. Comparing One of the frontiers is selected as the exploration target,
therightpanelofthefiguretotherightpanelofFigure6b,we based on, e.g. the distance from the robot’s current position
note that for the informative prior the effect of increasing the to the frontier, or the size of the frontier. The robot is then
horizon H for SMC does not seem to be as significant as for commandedtomovetowardstheselectedtarget.Thus,frontier
exploration can exploit global knowledge of frontiers towards z t p(x t ,m t )
unexplored areas over the whole map. SLAM Planner
POMDP based exploration can fail when local information
available within the optimization horizon is not sufficient to uˆ t:t+H 1
findanactionwithgoodexplorationperformance,forexample
if no unexplored area is reachable within the optimization Environment Controller
horizon. To reduce the effect of these types of failures, we
implemented an exploration method that combines POMDP Figure 8: A software implementation of the planner. The
based and frontier based exploration. The method applies cloud-shaped block depicts the environment the robot is
POMDP based planning and executes the actions thus found interacting with. The rectangular blocks indicate software
until it reaches a situation where either 1) all local action modules, and arrows indicate propagation of signals between
sequences are below a given informativeness threshold, as the modules, labelled by the mathematical symbol of the
measured by the expected total MI for them, or 2) all valid signal.
localactionsequencescorrespondtotrajectorieswithalength
less than a given threshold value, indicating a possible dead-
end. When either of the conditions triggers, a frontier explo- new area, or move less than 0.5 meters, it would trigger the
ration method is queried once for a frontier to be assigned as frontier exploration method once instead of continuing with
thenexttargetfortherobot.Whenthisfrontierisreached,the POMDP based exploration.
POMDP planning phase is again resumed. A conceptual overview of our software implementation is
We will argue that combining POMDP based and frontier shown in Figure 8. The robot is interacting with the envi-
basedexplorationinthiswaypresentsastrongeralternativeto ronment, shown on the bottom left hand side of the figure.
applying either approach alone. To support this argument, we The outputs from the environment, i.e., observations z , are
executed a series of experiments comparing such an approach processed by the SLAM algorithm to revise the belief state
to only applying frontier exploration. The software used in b =p(x ,m ). Based on the current belief state, the planner
this subsection was implemented in C++, and is available at module shown on the top right of the figure computes an
1) Experimental setup: We chose to conduct the exper-
moduleshownonthebottomrightofthefigur−edecideswhich
iments in the office environment (Figure 5b), as based on control action u to finally apply.
SubsectionVI-B2increasingtheoptimizationhorizonH there The simulation was implemented in the Stage robot simu-
improves performance both in the case of non-informative lator [51], integrated with the Robot Operating System (ROS)
andinformativeprior.Weimplementedthemethodcombining framework [52] where the exploration algorithms were imple-
POMDP based and frontier based exploration applying the mented. The SLAM module we applied (see Figure 8) was
SMCalgorithmandthebasicfrontierexplorationalgorithmas the RBPF SLAM algorithm based on [24]. As the frontier ex-
presented e.g. in [10]. The SMC method was chosen since it ploration method, we applied an open source implementation
without need to manually define a fixed set of primitive We remark that there exist multi-robot frontier-exploration
control actions from which the trajectories are constructed. techniques that make use of prior information, e.g., in the
This method was then compared to only applying the basic form of semantic information about types of areas in the
frontier exploration method. map [53, 54]. Suitable applications for these methods include
Eachoftheexplorationexperimentswasrepeatedfivetimes. for example search and rescue, where semantic information
Each repetition was terminated either at a timeout of 400 about the types of rooms, e.g., office or lobby, can help
seconds, or if a failure happened that either caused the robot guide the robots to promising search areas. However, in the
togetstuck,ortheplannersoftwaretofailtoproducearesult. experimentshere,nosuchsemanticinformationwasavailable.
AsinSubsectionVI-B1,theinitialinformationprovidedtothe 2) Results: Overall, in the 40 exploration runs applying
robotconsistedofasingleobservationrecordedatthestarting the proposed method (5 runs for each of the 4 horizons,
location, in addition to possible prior information. with 2 cases for prior information), we observed 10 failures
For the SMC algorithm, we set the number of particles to with the experiment terminating before the timeout of 400
M = 20, and the resampling threshold to M = M/4. A seconds. There were 8 cases of planner failure, either due to
cooling schedule ν =2l+5 was applied, with l =4. The being unable to detect a frontier after trying POMDP based
simulated robot and the kernels applied for sampling control exploration, or due to inability to find a feasible path towards
actions were as described in Subsection VI-B1. We applied the requested exploration target. There were 2 cases in which
maps with a resolution of 0.05 meters per cell, and set the the robot got stuck in the simulator after a collision. Among
thresholdfortriggeringfrontierexplorationatatotaltrajectory all failure cases, the earliest time of occurrence was at 195
length of 0.5 meters or expected MI of less than 50 bits. The seconds, while the average time of failure occurrence was at
50 bit MI threshold corresponds to 50 completely unknown 273 seconds. In the 5 runs with the pure frontier exploration
cells(occupancyprobability0.5)becomingcompletelyknown method, there was 1 failure at 197 seconds due to inability to
(occupancy probability 0 or 1), so, roughly speaking, if the find any frontiers.
robot expected to explore less than 0.125 square meters of Sincefrontierexplorationdoesnotconsidermutualinforma-
increasesmonotonicallyasafunctionofH,andtheconfidence
Non-informativeprior
200 intervals are smaller than for the non-informative prior.
H =1 We note that with the exception of the myopic case H =1,
H =3 the proposed method does not perform significantly worse
160 H =5 than pure frontier exploration during any time interval. It
2] H =7 is interesting to note that although the area explored at the
m Frontier end of the experiment is not significantly greater for the
d e 120 proposed method than for pure frontier exploration, there are
o lp time intervals where the difference is significant in favour of
x e 80 the proposed method. Such intervals can be seen for example
a e from75secondstoabout200secondsforthenon-informative
A prior, H =5, and from 75 seconds to about 175 seconds for
40 the informative prior, H =7.
When we examined the trajectories the robot chose in
each of these cases more closely, we discovered that this
0 difference is primarily due to a different choice of initial
0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350 400
exploration target. Recall that the robot started at coordinates
(38.5,58.0) (see Figure 5b). The proposed method, especially
(a) Non-informative prior withaninformativeprior,favoursmovingtowardsthecorridor
Informativeprior at coordinates (40,50), as moving instead to the room at
200 coordinates (40,60) is noted to quickly lead to a dead-end
H =1 providing no further information gain. This is however not
H =3 considered by frontier exploration, which favoured moving
160 H =5 first to the frontier in the room, and then returning to explore
2] other areas once the dead-end was discovered.
m Frontier
[ Afurtherexampleoftheusefulnessofpriorinformationcan
e be seen in Figure 2. The prior information indicates the outer
lp edges of the environment, shown in the figure by the black
e 80 lines bordering the unknown area. Initially, the trajectories
e sampledaredistributedevenlyleadingtowardsthecorridoron
the left hand side of Figure 2a and the area on the right hand
40 side of the figure. Availability of prior information however
indicatesthatasmallerunknownareawillbevisiblewhenthe
robotmovestothelefthandsidecorridor,comparedtomoving
to the potentially large open area on the right hand side. As
0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350 400
Time[s] the total MI related to either trajectory choice is evaluated,
the SMC algorithm eventually discards trajectories towards
(b) Informative prior
the corridor and converges on a trajectory bringing the robot
Figure 9: Comparison of POMDP based exploration (with towards the open area instead, as seen in Figure 2c. In cases
optimization horizon H) combined with frontier based explo- with a non-informative prior, both trajectory options result in
rationwithpurefrontierexplorationintheofficeenvironment. roughly equal expected MI.
The lines with the markers show the mean area explored over Since the proposed method combines POMDP based and
5 simulation runs, while the horizontal bars indicate the 95% frontier based exploration, it is illustrative to consider how
confidence intervals. Figure 9a shows the results for a non- often either of the exploration techniques is applied. Table II
informative prior, and Figure 9b for an informative prior. indicates the average number of times the proposed method
applied either POMDP based or frontier based exploration to
select the next target where the robot should move to explore
tioninselectingexplorationtargets,wepresentthecomparison the environment. In the majority of the cases, POMDP based
results in terms of the total area explored as a function of exploration is preferred. As expected, shorter optimization
the time spent exploring. Figure 9 shows the mean area horizons H lead the robot more frequently to situations
explored and its 95% confidence interval over each of the where no informative local trajectories can be found, and
five experiments, for each of the methods applied. The results subsequently frontier exploration is applied more frequently.
shown take into account that not every experiment ran until We also note that applying the informative prior seems to
the timeout of 400 seconds. resultinlesscallstofrontierexploration,indicatingfurtherthe
There seems not to be a significant difference in the area usefulnessofpriorinformationforPOMDPbasedexploration.
explored between the cases of non-informative or informative Overall,thereisaslightlydecreasingtrendinthetotalnumber
prior.However,wecanseethattheconsistencyoftheresultsis of calls to either method as a function of H, since the robot
betterincaseoftheinformativeprior:themeanareaexplored tendstotraversealongertrajectorybeforeconsideringthenext
exploration target for longer optimization horizons.
TableII:Theaveragenumberoffunctioncallsintheproposed
method over five experiments to either the POMDP based or
the frontier based exploration method. Results are shown as
a function of the optimization horizons H, and for both the -10
case of non-informative and informative prior information. H=5
H POMDP Frontier Frontier
1 28.2 10.0
Non-informativeprior
.
.
.
.
7 23.2 3.4
1 25.2 5.0
3 25.2 3.4
Informativeprior 5 19.6 2.4 15
7 18.6 1.8
-20 -10 0 10 20
Basedontheexperimentalresults,ourproposedmethodcan
outperformfrontierbasedexplorationintermsofareaexplored
in the initial part of exploration when the environment is still
largelyunknown.Wenotethisise.g.,duetotheabilityofthe (a)
proposed method to avoid dead-ends. Complete exploration
of an environment is the goal in many applications, meaning
that also dead-ends should eventually be explored. We note
that although the proposed method combining POMDP based
and frontier based exploration will eventually achieve this,
the strategy it applies may not be optimal: considering the
objective of complete exploration, it might be worthwhile to
explore nearby dead-ends immediately rather than returning
to them later after exploring other parts of the environment.
When this strategy can be improved upon depends at least on
theavailabilityofpriorinformation,andremainstobestudied
morecarefully.Inconclusion,webelievetheproposedmethod
is preferable in applications where quickly exploring the local
environment for a high information gain is required, and
completeness of exploration in the short term is not crucial.
VII. REAL-WORLDEXPLORATION
To verify the feasibility of applying our proposed planning
approachinarealapplication,inthissectionwepresentresults
on exploration tasks in a real environment. The experimental
setupisdescribedinSubsectionVII-A,andresultsarereported
in Subsection VII-B.
A. Experimental setup
Figure 10: (a): A partial map of the campus library envi-
The experiments were executed at a university campus ronment. Occupied, free, and unknown areas are indicated
library.Apartialmapoftheenvironmentwiththerobot’sstart- by black, white, and gray cells, respectively. The robot’s
inglocationindicatedisshowninFigure10a.Theenvironment starting location is indicated by a filled black circle marker.
featuresopenareasandnarrowcorridorsbetweenbookshelves. Overlaidonthemapareexamplesoftypicaltrajectoriestaken
In all experiments, the robot started at the location indicated applying the proposed exploration method or frontier based
by the black circle marker in the figure. A view of the exploration. The map shown corresponds to the data collected
environmentshowingtherobotatitsstartinglocationisshown while traversing the trajectory for H =7. The unknown areas
in Figure 10b. The photograph was taken such that it shows throughwhichtheothertrajectoriestravelwereobservedtobe
the environment towards the negative values of the x-axis in freeinthecorrespondingexperiments,butnotshownhere.(b):
the map of Figure 10a. The robot had no prior information A view of the environment from the robot’s starting location.
about the environment beyond a single observation recorded
at the starting location.
Table III: The minimum, average and maximum planning
approach instead of frontier exploration. We observed the
timesfortheSMCalgorithmasafunctionoftheoptimization
proposed approach with H = 7 to result in a significantly
horizon H.
greater total area explored than frontier exploration after 200
seconds.
Planningtime[s]
To understand why this is the case, it is useful to study
Min Avg Max
the trajectories traversed by the robot applying each of the
5 2.60 4.24 6.14
exploration methods. Figure 10a shows typical examples of
7 2.03 5.21 7.61
trajectories for each of the methods. Frontier exploration,
indicatedbytheblackdashedline,consistentlychosetomove
The experiments were carried out with a robot such as towards the negative x axis from the starting location. In this
described in Subsection VI-B1. The robot’s velocities were direction, there was a row of bookshelves aligned as shown
equal to those of the simulated robot of Section VI-B1. The in Figure 10b. As indicated by the curves in the initial part
robotwasequippedwithalaserrangefinderwithamaximum of the trajectory, frontier exploration would find the nearest
range of 4 meters. The robot can also be seen in Figure 10b. frontier behind the corner of the closest bookshelf to the
The software setup and algorithm parameters were as de- robot. The robot would then move to it, and repeat in a
scribed in Subsection VI-C1. The robot’s on-board computer, similar manner until reaching the end of the row of shelves.
equipped with an Intel i7-4500U multicore processor, 4GB Frontierexplorationdoesnotattempttoquantifytheamountof
of RAM and running a Linux operating system, was applied information that may be gained by such a strategy, but rather
to run all of the required software. We applied the proposed deterministically moves the robot towards the closest frontier
exploration method combining POMDP based and frontier found.
basedexploration,withthesoftwareimplementationdescribed In contrast, we observed the proposed method to adopt a
in Subsection VI-C, and a frontier based exploration method. different strategy. Since the narrow corridors between book-
Optimization horizons H = 5 and H = 7 were applied in shelves can often be observed before it is necessary to move
the POMDP based exploration method. With each method, into them, this information may be applied to select more
the experiment was repeated 5 times, and each experiment informative trajectories. The robot would generally prefer to
ran until a timeout of 400 seconds or until a failure caused avoid narrow corridors, as the proximity of the walls made it
termination of the experiment. unlikelythatmovingtherewouldprovideasmuchinformation
as moving towards a potentially open area. Corridors were
B. Results typically only preferred when there was no alternative, such
asshowninthetrajectoryforH =7indicatedbythecyanline
For the proposed method, we observed 4 failures with
in the top right part of Figure 10a. Trajectories with H = 5
H = 5 occurring at 240, 255, 265, and 376 seconds, and
weresimilar,asindicatedbythebluelineinFigure10aandthe
1 failure with H = 7 at 390 seconds. With frontier explo-
results in Figure 11. Based on similar results in the previous
ration, we observed 2 failures at 355 and 380 seconds. The
experiments, we thus believe that increasing the optimization
failures were due to the robot colliding with an undetected
horizon further would not result in better performance in this
obstacle and getting stuck, or the planner failing to find an
environment.
exploration target. Failures to find an exploration target most
oftenhappenedatanarrowcorridor,wheretherobot’ssensors We remark that the results could be different if the robot’s
erroneously indicated that there was no possible path without startingpositionweretobechanged,asthelocationtoexplore
a collision to exit the corridor. firstwouldbedifferent.Fortheproposedmethod,thisisdueto
The minimum, average and maximum planning times re- adifferentsetoffeasiblelocaltrajectoriesconsidered.Forpure
quired for the SMC algorithm are reported as a function of frontierexploration,thefirstlocationtoexploredependsonthe
the optimization horizon H in Table III. Longer trajectories map information obtained from sensor readings at the starting
andlargeropenareastendtoincreasetheamountofmapcells position. If the starting position is changed such that the map
for which an occupancy value must be sampled to obtain an information remains roughly the same, the same exploration
estimateoftheMI,thusincreasingtherequiredplanningtime. location would likely be selected.
Theshortestplanningtimeswereobservedwhentherobotwas Overall, the experiments show that in the environment
near a wall or in a narrow corridor. During the planning time, studied, combining non-myopic POMDP based planning with
the robot remained in place. frontier exploration improves performance over pure frontier
A summary of the experimental results is presented in exploration.Althoughfrontierexplorationcanapplyallglobal
Figure 11, showing the mean area explored and its 95% information to select the next exploration target, it performs
confidence interval as a function of time, for each of the the selection in a heuristic manner, ignoring the expected
explorationmethodsconsidered.Fortheproposedmethodwith information gain. POMDP based methods can evaluate the
H = 5, results are only shown up to around 265 seconds, as information available locally within the optimization horizon
onlytwooftheexperimentsranforalongertime.Inallcases, to select exploration targets that lead to quantifiably greater
theconfidenceintervalsdrawntakeintoaccountthenumberof expected information gain. The weakness of the method,
active experiments remaining. The results suggest that in this susceptibilitytolocalminimaduetothefinitehorizon,canbe
environment,itisbeneficialtoapplytheproposedexploration alleviatedbycombiningitwithtraditionalfrontierexploration.
the consistency of the real process SLAM filter cannot be
Campuslibrary
ignored [25, 9], actions that lead to such a failure state may
320 H =5 be selected.
H =7 Morepriorinformationabouttheenvironmentwasnotedto
280 Frontier improve exploration performance. In future work, a database
2] 240 of typical map features for different types of environments,
for instance, office, outdoor, etc. could be maintained, and
d e 200 map samples drawn from the database instead, see e.g. [55].
a e 120 the assumption of spatial independence between occupancy
A grid cells could be applied, for instance higher order Markov
80 random fields [56].
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350 400 We thank Mr. Joonas Melin and Mr. Eero Heina¨nen for
Time[s] their support in executing the experimental work. This work
was partly supported by the TUT Graduate School and TUT
Figure11:Areaexploredinthecampuslibraryenvironmentas
Strategic funding for robotics and intelligent machines.
afunctionoftime.Resultsareshownfortheproposedmethod
with optimization horizon H = 5 or H = 7, and for frontier
exploration. The lines with the markers show the mean area