Point defects in SiC as a promising basis for single-defect, single-
photon spectroscopy with room temperature controllable quantum
Pavel G. Baranov1, a, Victor A. Soltamov1, Alexandra A.Soltamova1
Georgy V. Astakhov2, Vladimir V. Dyakonov2
1Ioffe Physical-Technical Institute, St. Petersburg, 194021 Russia
2Experimental Physics VI, Julius-Maximilians University of Würzburg, 97074 Würzburg, Germany
a Pavel.Baranov@mail.ioffe.ru, victor_soltamov@mail.ru, astakhov@physik.uni-wuerzburg.de
Keywords: Silicon carbide, silicon vacancy related defects, optically induced inverse population,
room temperature spin alignment, spintronics, quantum information, magnetometry.
Abstract. The unique quantum properties of the nitrogen–vacancy (NV) center in diamond have
motivated efforts to find defects with similar properties in silicon carbide (SiC), which can extend
the functionality of such systems not available to the diamond. Electron paramagnetic resonance
(EPR) and optically detected magnetic resonance (ODMR) investigations presented here suggest
that silicon vacancy (V ) related point defects in SiC possess properties the similar to those of the
NV center in diamond, which in turn make them a promising quantum system for single-defect and
single-photon spectroscopy in the infrared region. Depending on the defect type, temperature, SiC
polytype, and crystalline position, two opposite schemes have been observed for the optical
alignment of the ground state spin sublevels population of the V -related defects upon irradiation
with unpolarized light. Spin ensemble of V -related defects are shown to be prepared in a coherent
superposition of the spin states even at room temperature. Zero-field (ZF) ODMR shows the
possibility to manipulate of the ground state spin population by applying radiofrequency field.
These altogether make V -related defects in SiC very favorable candidate for spintronics, quantum
information processing, and magnetometry.
Introduction
Silicon Carbide (SiC) and diamond are examples of wide band gap semiconductors with
chemical, electrical and optical properties that make them very attractive for applications under
extreme conditions. Until recently, practical applications of semiconductors have been associated
with using of defect ensembles. NV defect in diamond - a nitrogen atom substituted for carbon with
an adjacent lattice vacancy - is the only known solid-state system where manipulation of the spin
states of a single defect was realized by means of optically detected magnetic resonance (ODMR)
owing to its unique optical excitation cycle that leads to the optical alignment of a triplet sublevels
of the defect ground state. Such systems are the most prominent objects for applications in new
generation of supersensitive magnetometers, biosensors, single photon sources [1-7]. The diamond
NV defect is in many ways the ideal qubit but it is currently quite difficult to fabricate devices from
diamond. It remains difficult to gate these defects electrically. A search for systems possessing
unique quantum properties of the NV defect in diamond that can extend the functionality of such
systems seems to be a very promising objective. A search to find defects with even more potential
(better than excellent [8-10]) has now been launched. SiC was suggested to be able to open up a
whole new world of scientific applications.
A convincing point with SiC is that, similar to diamond, the stable spinless nuclear isotopes
guarantee long dephasing times. Unusual polarization properties of various vacancy related defects
in SiC (exchange-coupled vacancy pairs P3, P5, P6 and P7) were observed by means of electron
paramagnetic resonance (EPR) under optical excitation and reported for the first time in the works
of Ref. [11], later in Refs. [12-15]. One of the main questions was to establish whether the observed
EPR spectra belong to the ground or to excited state (similar problem existed before also for NV
defects in diamond). EPR experiments performed at high frequency and at very low temperatures in
darkness excluded the possibility of a thermal or optically excited states and as a result it was
proved that the EPR spectra of P3, P5, P6 and P7 defects belong to the ground state for all the
defects [16,17].
The recent experiments demonstrated [18-22] that several highly controllable defects exist in
SiC, and some of them can be manipulated even at room temperatures (RT).
Results and discussion. The optically induced inverse
population of the defect spin sublevels in 6H-SiC
observed at 77 K in Ref.11, labeled as P3, P5, P6, P7, P10
and P11 were identified as Si-C vacancy pair centers in
the triplet (S=1) state with zero-field splitting (ZFS) of 43,
9, 449, 442, 17 and 4.10-4 cm-1, respectively. All the
centers except P7 have the axial symmetry along c-axis.
Models showing a possible configurations of V –related
defects in 6H-SiC lattice in (1120) plane are presented in
Fig. 1. P6 and P7 centers were suggested in Ref. 11 to be
Si-C vacancy pair with the shortest internal distance, that
is along the Si-C bonds. There are two types of the Si-C
bonds in SiC: parallel to the c-axis and inclined at an
angle of 710 giving rise for two possible modification of
the defect – P6 and P7 centers (Fig. 1). The other centers
Fig.1 Models showing possible
with axial symmetry along c-axis and smaller values of
configurations of V –related defects
ZFS were suggested in Ref. [11] to have large internal Si
distances between Si and C vacancies and possible in 6H-SiC lattice in (1120) plane.
configurations of V
–related defects, labeled as [V
] in 6H-SiC lattice in (1120) plane are shown
in Fig. 1. The EPR spectra with ZFS of P3 and P5 centers were detected by ODMR by monitoring
the zero-phonon lines (ZPL’s) at 1.433 (V1), 1.398 (V2), and 1.368 eV (V3) in 6H-SiC [13] (ZFL is
also included in the designation of the center). Distance between vacancies increases with
decreasing zero-field splitting. This paper presents a review of the recent studies of the defects with
optically induced inverse population in two main SiC polytypes: 4H-SiC and 6H-SiC. Vacancies
into the crystalline SiC lattice were introduced by neutron irradiation (n-irr) with a dose of 1015
cm−2–1020 cm−2 or by quenching. The EPR spectra were detected at X- (9.3 GHz) and W- (95 GHz)
bands on a continuous wave (cw) and pulse spectrometers. A direct-detection EPR (DD-EPR)
technique [18] and optically detected magnetic resonance (ODMR) were also used. In DD-EPR
experiments sample was selectively excited at 890 nm with 6 ns flashes (ca. 1.5 mJ per flash) from
a parametric oscillator LP603 pumped by a Nd-YAG, which was operated at a repetition rate of 11
Hz and signals induced by optical flash are measured in direct absorption and emission mode in the
continuous wave regime.
Figure 2 shows EPR spectra of the P6 and P7 centers in n-irr 6H-SiC crystal with dose 1020 cm−2
measured for two orientations (a) by the electron spin echo (ESE) technique at W-band at 1.2 and
1.5 K in darkness, (b) at X-band at 7 K under optical illumination ( n-irr dose of 1018 cm−2). The
high-frequency EPR experiments were performed at low temperatures in total darkness, which
excluded the possibility of thermal or optical population of the excited state and P6 and P7 centers
were concluded to have the triplet ground state. The intensities of the low and high-field fine-
structure components measured in the EPR spectra by ESE at temperatures of 1.2 K and 1.5 K
sharply differ from each other because of a strong difference in the populations of triplet sublevels
at low temperatures and large Zeeman splittings. Intensity ratio of these components gives direct
information on the temperature of the sample and allows the positive sign of the fine-structure
splitting D to be determined.
Figure 3 shows cw X-band EPR spectra of the V –related defects detected at 6H-SiC (a) and
4H-SiC (b) with the magnetic field parallel to the c-axis. Spectra detected under continuous optical
illumination (solid red lines) and without optical illumination (dashed black lines). Vertical bars
indicate the positions of the lines for the V - related defects. The central signal in Figs. 3(a) and
3(b), marked by V –, accompanied by a set of hyperfine (HF) lines with a splitting of 0.29 mT and
an intensity ratio to the central line of about 0.3. Such signal previously was attributed to the
negatively charged silicon vacancy V – with S=3/2 and a fine structure splitting D close to zero.
From spectra demonstrated on Fig. 3(a) a saturation effect of the signal can be clearly seen in devi-
ation from the first derivative of the EPR signal. Such
EPR signals have several contrary explanation. To date
three possible models are proposed for such V related
defect: neutral silicon vacancy V 0 with S=1, recently
revised a low-symmetry modification of the well studied
negatively charged silicon vacancy V – in the regular
environment with S = 3/2 [14] and previously proposed
model where the EPR signals were attributed to the P3
and P5 centers described in [11], which were suggested to
be exchanged coupled silicon-carbon vacancy pairs
aligned along c-axis of the SiC crystal (later P5 signal was
shown by ODMR to be associated with two centers which
are characterized by almost equal parameters of ZFS).
Despite the fact that in [11] P3/P5 were attributed to the
triplet center (S= 1) the model can be revised to S=3/2
ground spin state if propose the negatively charged silicon
vacancy which interacts with neutral carbon vacancy.
Such model can easely describe EPR signals labled as P3,
P5, P10, P11 in Ref.11, because the farther away the
carbon vacancy located from the V – the smaller D
Fig. 2. EPR spectra of the P6 and P7
splitting to be expected. So the difference of the ZFS
centers in n-irradiated 6H-SiC
values can be explained by different distance between V
crystal measured for two orientations
and V . It is important to underline that the questions of
(a) by the ESE technique at W-band
the spin state and hence of the charge state as well as the
at 1.2 and 1.5 K in darkness; (b) at
model of these V -related defects are still under
X-band at 7 K under optical
discussion. But what is seen from Fig. 3 it is that under
illumination.
optical pumping the intensity of the EPR spectra grows
substantially and a phase reversal is observed for one of the two transitions in each pair of lines. For
instance, [V ](V1,V3) in 6H-SiC at low temperatures (below 30 K) and [V ](V2) in 4H-SiC at all
temperatures, demonstrate a phase for the high-field transition, while [V ](V1,V3) in 6H-SiC at
high temperatures (above 30 K) and [V ](V2) in 6H-SiC at all temperatures demonstrate a phase
reversal for the low-field transition. As a result of the optical pumping, the distribution of the
populations of the spin sublevels in the ground state departs from a Boltzmann distribution. Even an
inverse population is created between certain spin sublevels, and emission rather than absorption is
detected for one of the transitions (high-field or low-field, depending on the polytype, crystal
position, and temperature). Based on a study of the EPR spectra of the [V ]-related defects [16,17]
at 95 GHz and low temperatures (1.2–1.5 K) in full darkness, it was unambiguously shown that
these spectra belonged to the high-spin ground state and that the sign of the fine-structure splitting
D is positive. At a temperature of 30 K and with optical excitation the signal [V ](V1,V3) in 6H-
SiC disappears indicating that at this temperature the equal spin sublevel populations are realized.
To explain the photokinetic processes leading to spin alignment under optical pumping, the
presence of the excited metastable state is suggested and a spin-dependent intersystem crossing
(ICS) between such state, the metastable state and the ground state can be proposed. As was menti-
oned above two different models of optical alignment
have to be considered for V -related defects (including
divacancies P6 and P7) – with S=1 or S=3/2 ground
state. The first one is the same as for the NV defect in
diamond, because the spin state, as well, as the local
symmetry of the defect are similar. The second case with
S= 3/2 has not been investigated theoretically yet, but
some general suggestions can be made with an eye on
the triplet model. Shortly 3A (4A) ground state, 3E (4E)
excited state and one 1A (2A) metastable state to be
needed in order to explain predominant population of
Ms=0 (Ms= ±1/2) spin sublevel, giving rise for the
emissive high field transition, if propose that component
of the emission decay after optical pumping, related with
transition from Ms=±1 (Ms=±3/2) of 3E (4E) to the
metastable state 1A (2A) is much larger than for the
Ms=0 (Ms=±1/2) of 3E (4E) sublevel and further the rates
between 1A (2A) metastable state and the sublevel M =0
(Ms=±1/2) of the 3A(4A) ground state is much larger
than the rates of the transitions from 1A (2A) to M = ±1
(Ms= ±3/2) of the ground state. As a result, the spin
sublevel M =0 (Ms=±1/2) of the 3A (4A) ground state is
predominantly populated, as shown on Fig. 4 (left), and
an inverse population is created. This scheme is realized
Fig. 3. X-band EPR spectra of the for divacancies P6, P7 and [V ](V1,V3) in 6H-SiC at
V - related defects [V ] recorded in low temperatures (below 30 K) and for [V ](V2) in 4H-
6H-SiC: (a) and in 4H-SiC (b) with SiC at all temperatures. Another type of optical
the magnetic field parallel to the c- alignment shown, on Fig. 4 (right), is realized for the V
axis. Spectra detected under –related defect in [V ](V1,V3) and [V ](V2) in the 6H-
continuous optical illumination – SiC at temperatures above 30K and as it will be shown
solid red lines, without optical further even at RT as well. Here 3A (4A) ground state, 3E
illumination – dashed black lines. (4E) excited state and metastable 1E (2E) state. After
optical pumping the rate of the transition from the M =±1 (M =±3/2) of the exited state 3E (4E) to
the metastable 1E (2E) state is again much larger than the rates of the transitions from the M =0
(M =±1/2) sublevel, the rates between the state 1E (2E) and sublevel M =0 (M =±1/2) of the 3A (4A)
ground state is much less however than the rates of the transitions from 1E(2E) to the levels Ms=±1
(M =±3/2). As a result, the spin sublevel M =±1 (±3/2) of the 3A (4A) ground state is predominantly
populated.
Further investigation of the VSi–related defect properties were produced by means of DD-EPR
at temperature T= 300K. Signals of [V ] –related defect recorded at RT in the 4H and 6H-SiC for
orientation of the magnetic field perpendicular to the c-axis is shown in Fig.5 (top) after excitation
of the samples by optical flash into the absorption band of the defect at 890 nm. Under optical
pumping, a phase reversal is observed for the [V ](V2) in 4H-SiC even at RT. For 6H-SiC the a
phase reversal is observed for [V ](V2) and for [V ](V1,V3) as well. The optical alignment
scheme for 4H-SiC is the same as discussed before and shown on Fig.3 (a),(b) though for 6H-SiC
we obtain somewhat like RT maser effect as shown on Fig.4.
To determine time dependent spin properties of the
optically aligned ground spin state of the [V ]–related
defect, measurements of the light flash induced DD-
EPR signal at the resonant field as a function of time
delay after flash were performed. The results of such
experiments for the [Vsi](V2) in 4H-SiC are presented
on Fig.5(bottom). The transient nutations at RT are
shown for three values of microwave power P at
Fig. 4 Two energy-levels schemes for
resonant magnetic field B = 321.5mT (low field
opposite types of optical alignment of the
transition). The transition nutation decays due to
spin sublevels for the ground state of the
inhomogeneity of the B1 microwave field over the
V – related defects in magnetic field on
Si sample. In addition, the resonance frequencies are also
the assumption of the S =1 and S=3/2
spread around some mean value of resonance Larmor
models.
frequency ‹ω › leading to the inhomogeneous line
broadening. Clearly, the observed oscillatory behavior demonstrates that the probed spin ensemble
can be prepared in a coherent superposition of the spin states at resonant magnetic fields at RT. The
population difference of spin states becomes modulated in time with the Rabi frequency given by
ω = γB , where γ is the gyromagnetic ratio for the
electron. The Fourier transforms corresponding to
observed oscillations are presented in the insets in
Fig.5(bottom). The Rabi frequencies are 0.02, 0.16 and
0.5MHz at P= 30dB, 20dB, and 10 dB, respectively. Rabi
oscillations decay with a characteristic time constant τ
that depends on the microwave power. Empirically, τ is
generally smaller than the spin-spin relaxation time (T2),
thus, the lower limit of T2 is about 80 µs at RT.
In edition low temperature zero-field ODMR
experiments on quenched 6H-SiC sample were performed
in order to show the possibility of manipulation of the
ground state spin population by applying of the
radiofrequency which corresponds for the ZFS of the
silicon vacancy related defect. Here we demonstrate ZF
ODMR effect only for V2 line just as an example.
Fluorescence-excitation spectrum of V2 was recorded
after single-mode Ti-sapphire laser excitation between
337.0 and 340.17 THz at 4 W/cm2 and shown in Fig.6(a)
curve1. Curve 2 in the same figure represents increasing
of the fluorescence intensity after resonant radio-
frequency field 130MHz have been applied. Spectrum in
Fig 6(b) shows the ODMR spectra obtained with
excitation of the V2 ZPL and detection at 937 nm. The
ODMR spectrum of V2 has its main feature at 130 MHz.
As can be seen from the ODMR spectrum resonant radio-
Fig.5 (top) DD-EPR spectra of the V
frequency field destroyed optically aligned ground state
–related defects detected in 4H-SiC
what causes the increasing of the corresponding
and 6H-SiC (bottom) at temperature
photoluminescence.
T= 300K. Transient nutations for the
In conclusion, optically induced alignment
defect in 4H-SiC at RT are shown for
(polarization) of the ground-state spin sublevels of the V
three values of microwave power. Si
– related defect in 4H and 6H-SiC was observed for the
(Inset) Fast Fourier transform (FFT).
first time at RT. In distinction from the known NV defect
in diamond, two opposite schemes for the optical spin alignment of V –related defects in 4H- and
6H-SiC were realized at low temperatures and RT upon illumination with unpolarized light. The
alignment schemes depending on the crystal polytype and
structure of the V –related defects which was depicted in
Fig. 1. Observed Rabi nutations persist for 80µs at RT and
evidence that the probed V – related defects spin ensemble
can be prepared in a coherent superposition of the spin
states at resonant magnetic fields at RT. In addition the
electron spin of the defects can be manipulated by low-
energy radio field 30-130MHz. Demonstrated spin
properties of the defects open up new avenues for quantum
computing and magnetometry.
This work was supported by Ministry of Education and
Science, Russia, by Contracts the Programs of the Russian
Academy of Sciences: "Spin Phenomena in SolidState
Nanostructures and Spintronics", "Fundamentals of
nanostructure and nanomaterial technologies" №
14.740.11.0048., and by the Russian Foundation for B.R.