Page 1 of 8 Review Article
Political Theology as critical theology
Author: This article attempts to draw the scope and content of contemporary Political Theology, based
Tanya van Wyk1
on a review of the 2013 publication titled, Political Theology: Contemporary challenges and future
Affiliation: directions, edited by Francis Schüssler Fiorenza, Klaus Tanner and Michael Welker. The book
1Department of Dogmatics is a collection of contributions which explore the contemporary content and potential future
and Christian Ethics, Faculty of the subject discipline. ‘Political Theology’ as critical theology and as a ‘theology with its
of Theology, University of
face towards the world’ is committed to ‘justice, peace and the integrity of creation’ and is
Pretoria, South Africa
multifaceted. It represents a discipline with which theologians reflect on political-theological
Correspondence to: objectives across continents and paradigms. The article concludes with a brief investigation
Tanya van Wyk of the implications of insights offered in the book for the South African context (as part of the
African continent).
Email:
tanya.vanwyk@up.ac.za
‘There is no such thing as an un-political theology’. (Moltmann 2013:2)
Postal address:
Private Bag X20, Hatfield
0028, Pretoria, South Africa Introduction
Dates: The politics of theology
Received: 06 May 2015
Accepted: 18 May 2015 One of the biggest concerns since the genesis of the discipline – or rather the movement (as it
Published: 12 Aug. 2015 turned out) – has been the concern that Political Theology entails a mixture of subject matter that
cannot and ought not to be mixed. The liberation theologian, Alistair Kee, described it in his book,
How to cite this article:
The scope of political theology (1978), as a concern about a ‘strange alchemy between oil and water’
Van Wyk, T., 2015, ‘Political
Theology as critical theology’, (Kee 1978:2). This concern conjures up images about the subject content of Political Theology that
HTS Teologiese Studies/ was thought to be either a ‘theology of politics’, which would involve direct political involvement,
Theological Studies 71(3),
or a ‘liberation theology’, which would exclusively (and one-sidedly) involve revolutionary
dx.doi.org/10.4102/hts. action (Francis Schüssler Fiorenza 1977:143).
v71i3.3026
When Jürgen Moltmann and Johann Baptist Metz developed the notion ‘Political Theology’
Copyright:
during the 1960s as a socio-critical theology (cf. Schüssler Fiorenza 2013:38), the concern
© 2015. The Authors.
Licensee: AOSIS was that this ‘strange mixture’ would entail the politicisation of the church. In reaction, both
OpenJournals. This work is theologians pointed out that there is no such thing as un-political theology. Where concern
licensed under the Creative
about Political Theology as the politicisation of the church exists, it points towards a lack of
Commons Attribution
awareness of the political dimension of theology, or as I refer to it, a lack of a hermeneutics
License.
of suspicion.1 In his contribution to the book reviewed in this article Moltmann categorically
expresses this:
There is consciously political theology, there is politically un-conscious theology, but there is no such
thing as an un-political theology, at least not on this earth and presumably not even in the heavenly
politeuma. (Moltmann 2013:2; cf. Schüssler Fiorenza, Tanner & Welker 2013:vii)
Alistair Kee expressed more or less the same sentiments in his 1978 work, namely that politics
and theology cannot be separated and
the attempt at separating politics and theology is invariably done out of self-interest: political theology
does not arise from opportunism or the attempt to win a strategic advantage, but of a particular
understanding of the way we can be true to the fundamental character of Christian faith. (Kee 1978:3)
A socio-critical theology, true to the fundamental character of Christian faith, and a theology
with its ‘face toward the world’2 in this regard, is much more than a strange mixture of two
disciplines. Political Theology could be considered to be a ‘foundational theology’ (Schüssler
Read online: Fiorenza 1977:142–177). As a foundational theology, Political Theology
Scan this QR
code with your 1.For a recent discussion on Ricoeur’s use of the notion ‘hermeneutics of suspicion’, the notion’s origins in the philosophies of Marx,
smart phone or Nietzsche and Freud, Ricoeur’s adjustment of their insights with regard to ‘religion critique’, and Ricoeur’s most influential publications
mobile device on the matter, see Alexis Itao (2010:1–17).
to read online.
2.In reference to the theme of the Political Theology of Johann Baptist Metz ([1968] 1969:83).
Page 2 of 8 Review Article
analyses the concrete horizons of theology … it seeks to reflect conceptions of ‘political’, that is a good and just life (classic)
upon the total praxis (intellectual as well as imaginative, and the good government of the state (modern). In the same
symbolic as well as conceptual, individual as well as social) of vein, Metz warns against a simple distinction between ‘old’
religious conversion and flowing from religious conversion. and ‘new’, because the old (or classic) Political Theology’s
(Schüssler Fiorenza 1977:142)
concern with nation and state has its own origin and
development (cf. Metz 2012:319; Schmitt 2012:275). Classic
The book Political Theology: Contemporary challenges and future
(‘old’) Political Theology had a specific understanding of
directions, edited by Francis Schüssler Fiorenza et al. (2013),
politics and that was in terms of national and legal policy
is the result of a series of lectures and discussions about
(Metz 2013:13) and the legitimisation of an absolute and
Political Theology that took place during January 2010 at
infallible state. This was the main idea of Carl Schmitt’s
the University of Heidelberg in Germany. Contributions and
Political Theology4 ([1922]1985:1–67) – that together God and
discussions during this meeting highlighted the complex
the state was the last safeguard and protection from complete
nature of Political Theology and the interconnectedness apocalyptic chaos. It was a theology of political sovereignty
of various facets of Political Theology (Schüssler Fiorenza (Schmitt [1922]1985:xvii; 5–15; cf. Schmitt 2012:275–276),
et al. 2013:vii). Its overall theme and structure portrays which meant that the end justified the means, whatever the
the complex and varietal character of Political Theology means might be.
as critical theology, with a commitment towards justice,
peace and the integrity of creation3 (cf. Moltmann 2013:4). Moltmann’s ‘new’ Political Theology developed in the
Although the contributions speak of an awareness of and two decades after the Second World War in the shadow
a sensitivity towards nuanced differences in different of the time after Auschwitz and the Nazi-theologisation
contexts, they also address challenges for Political Theology of the power of the state; therefore it started out as a
if it is to remain relevant, and more importantly, effective. ‘theology after Auschwitz’ (Moltmann 2013:1; cf. Metz
The issues are addressed and discussed in terms of a 2012:322–323). Together with Metz (and also Dorothee
distinction between ‘old’ and ‘new’ Political Theology. Sölle) (cf. 1995:59–72; cf. 1974:1–25) in the German context,
Although the history of Political Theology does portray a this was broadened and a turn towards a ‘new’ Political
movement from one to the other, it is not a case of a linear
Theology involved a hermeneutical rather than a political
movement. It does not represent a shift from ‘old’ to ‘new’
category. For Moltmann, ‘new’ Political Theology is
or a precise demarcation between ‘old’ and ‘new’. Due to
based largely on (his theological paradigm) a ‘theology of
recurring themes, the paradigm changes with regard to the
hope’; it is a theology of ‘ethical and political anticipation’
role and function of theology (cf. Metz 2012:316–318) and
(Moltmann 2013:4; cf. Schüssler Fiorenza 2013:37), and it
re-emergence (or recycling) of classic and modern political
is an ecumenical endeavour in a world that is burdened
theories (Schüssler Fiorenza 2013:38–43; cf. 1977:3–4). In this
by violence and injustice. For Francis Schüssler Fiorenza
regard, the contributions offer a complex portrayal of ‘old’
(2013:37) this turn in Political Theology in Germany was
and ‘new’, and an overarching conclusion is that Political
a ‘critical reflection upon past theological conceptions of
Theology today is not about the ‘politicization of the church’,
the relation of religion and society’ (cf. Schüssler Fiorenza
but rather about a theological-ethical hermeneutic paradigm
1982:59–101). The theology that emerged offered the reality
that problematises power, ecumenical as well as global.
of the promise of God’s Kingdom. Metz (2012) described
this ‘turn’ as one
‘Old’ and ‘new’ Political Theology
… which will bring us face to face with the suffering and the
At least three contributors in the book make the distinction victims … It criticizes the high degree of apathy in theological
between ‘old’ Political Theology and ‘new’ Political Theology idealism, and its defective sensibility for the interruptive
their starting point for determining the challenges and future character of historical and political catastrophes … it [political
directions of Political Theology (Metz 2013:13–16; Moltmann theology] is not theology in terms of a system, but a theology in
2013:1–4; Schüssler Fiorenza 2013:37–41). This is a distinction terms of human subjects. (p. 322)
between an ‘old’ Political Theology of ‘political sovereignty’
Francis Schüssler Fiorenza (2013:38–39) does however make
(Moltmann 2013:3) and ‘statism’ or Staatlichkeit (Metz 2013:13;
a distinction between the contexts in which this theology
cf. Metz 2012:319–322) and a ‘new’ Political Theology as a
emerged. He contrasts German Political Theology with Latin
prophetic (liberation) theology (Moltmann 2013:11) and a
American Liberation Theology, a distinction also made by
theology of justice (Metz 2013:16–20).
Moltmann (2013:4–5) in his contribution. The point here is
that ‘new’ Political Theology does not mean the same thing
In one of his earlier works, Schüssler Fiorenza (1977:143)
stated that many of the misunderstandings or concerns about
the content of Political Theology can be traced to a failure 4.Metz (2013:13; cf. Schüssler Fiorenza 1977:148–166) traces discussions about
to distinguish between differences with regard to diverse Political Theology’s focus on the state back to Stoic Philosophy and Ancient Rome
and how the conception of the state is found in early Christian theologies, such
as Eusebius’ theology. Roman political theology was developed further during the
Renaissance and influenced the Enlightenment and perceptions of democracy
during French Traditionalism. These influenced political Romanticism and the
3.In reference to the objective of the World Council of Churches, stated at its 6th theories of Hegel about the law and the state. Carl Schmitt’s Political Theology was
resources/documents/assembly/1983-vancouver, viewed 02 May 2015). 1985:viii; xxiii 16–36; 53–67).
Page 3 of 8 Review Article
for all contexts, and ‘new’ is not always ‘better’, or different – debate, in which many different opinions are expressed7.
an aspect which I will take up more extensively in the next The important aspect of this theology of peace, which for
section. This aspect about the paradigm shift in Political Moltmann is a contemporary challenge to Political Theology,
Theology is also pointed out by Elisabeth Schüssler is that ‘the church becomes an ecumenical church of peace
Fiorenza. A theology in terms of ‘human subjects’ implies independent of the state’ (Moltmann 2013:7). In this regard,
a more concrete and specific form of critical theology – and Political Theology is a theology which engages constantly
this is precisely the challenge she makes towards a ‘new’ and critically with its function and content, with regard to
Political Theology in her contribution (Schüssler Fiorenza community and context. This links up with how Moltmann
2013:24). Although a movement was seemingly made articulates ‘political theology’ in The politics of discipleship and
from ‘old’ Political Theology to ‘new’ Political Theology, discipleship in politics (2006):
which focused on people and not systems, this shift in
… reflective consciousness has no longer a self-forgetting
focus did not have a similar impact in terms of the public
contemplative relationship to reality but has won an immanent,
consciousness of women. She cannot therefore ‘label’ her
operative and therefore self-critical relationship to reality
particular feminist theology as ‘political’ or ‘postcolonial’
instead…. A church which engages in this may no longer ask
or ‘liberation’ theology only, but rather as a ‘decolonizing abstractly about the relationship of ‘the church and politics’, as if
political theology of liberation’ (Schüssler Fiorenza 2013:23). these were two separate things which must be brought together,
For her, feminist theology as a critical theology is a process rather this church must begin with a critical awareness of its own
of raising consciousness and she understands this (as well as political existence and its actual social functions. (p. 36)
her own work) as decolonising rather than postcolonial. For
her, ‘decolonizing’ points to a historical redistribution, an The key aspect of his challenge to Political Theology is one of
ideological deconstruction and ethical-political constructive ‘speaking up’, which Moltmann articulates as the prophetic
representation5 (cf. Schüssler Fiorenza 2007:25). The three task of Political Theology. This task is a challenge and it
forms of so-called progressive theology (political/liberation/ might be articulated differently in different contexts and
postcolonial), or the emergent theologies, have not theorised communities, but prophetic theology is the unifying concept
the lack of public awareness and consciousness about the in different forms of political theologies. He recounts that
religious and cultural exclusion of women and the fact that he first realised that South American liberation theologians
the ‘largest portion of the poor and disenfranchised were – did not view their theology as Political Theology when a
and still are – women’ (Schüssler Fiorenza 2013:24). Despite group of students from South America visited Tübingen in
the seeming ‘progression’ in political theology mentioned 1975, where he was teaching at the time, and the students
above, critical feminist analysis and an awareness of the announced that they were ‘seeking liberation from the
problem of power is still lacking when it comes to the dominance of European culture and theology’ (Moltmann
situation of women. 2013:5). The South American liberation theologians
sought to differ from political theologians in terms of
Contemporary challenges: Creating
their interpretation of contexts and concerns (cf. Schüssler
and sustaining awareness Fiorenza 2013:38). A focused incarnational interpretation
of hope (eschatology) highlighted the need for concrete
Prophetic Theology
options – more concrete options than Political Theology in
For Moltmann it is the context and community that shape the general provided. Different concerns and different resources
hermeneutics of Political Theology, and by his own admission (indigenous native narratives and native spirituality) shaped
he conceives this in a broader sense than he and Metz did at their ‘theology of criticism’ as a liberation theology and not a
the beginning of their endeavours in political hermeneutics ‘Political Theology’ as such (Moltmann 2013:4–5; cf. Schüssler
(Moltmann 2013:5). The hermeneutics of a Christian response Fiorenza 2013:39). Moltmann however suggests that what is
to war and violence is always complex and a challenge – and ‘Political Theology’ in one context is ‘liberation theology’
the context of a divided Germany and the response to the in another: ‘Political Theology as prophetic theology is
many atom bombs housed in warehouses in East and West liberation theology, and liberation theology is Political
Germany respectively was a challenge. Moltmann writes that Theology’ (Moltmann 2013:11). He emphasises that the
people responded to this challenge with the peace movement6. ‘theology of liberation’ was more influential in ecumenical
There were mass demonstrations (that eventually led to contexts because it was a phrase encompassing more than
the toppling of the Berlin Wall) during which non-violence just one area for the practice and theology of Christianity.
was practised. This is not as straightforward as it might
seem – the use of violence to deter power is a continuous
7.For example, for Dietrich Bonhoeffer ‘it was not enough to help the victims that
are caught up in the spoke of the wheel, but to jam the wheel itself’ (Bonhoeffer in
Wind 2002:65, cf. Doblmeier 2003). In a rare public exchange, the Niebuhr brothers
engaged on this issue – applied to post-Second World War America (Cavanaugh,
5.She does not set out her understanding of ‘decolonize’ in detail in this particular Bailey & Hovey 2012:254–264). Richard Niebuhr ([1932] 1992a) wrote about ‘The
contribution. For this, see one of her earlier works, The power of the Word: Scripture grace of doing nothing’ (in Miller 1992:6–11). Reinhold Niebuhr asks ‘Must we do
and the rhetoric of Empire (Schüssler Fiorenza 2007). nothing?’ (in Miller 1992:12–18). For Richard Niebuhr it is about a choice between
different kinds of inactivity, not a choice between action and inaction. Reinhold
6.In his contribution, Moltmann specifically refers to the Mennonites as a role model Niebuhr however argues that Christians should be active in politics, not huddle
in the formation of a theology of peace. He referred to this in one of his other works in the catacombs. For him, tragic decisions about lesser evils must be made in a
as well: The politics of discipleship and discipleship in politics (Moltmann 2006: fallen world (see also Cavanaugh et al. [2012], An Eerdmans reader in contemporary
15–25). political theology).
Page 4 of 8 Review Article
Therefore ‘prophetic political theology’ is also an ecumenical to different contexts and Metz’s warning about an over-
endeavour, ecologically and globally. simplistic distinction between ‘old’ and ‘new’ comes to
mind. Francis Schüssler-Fiorenza (2013:38–49) asks about
Theology of justice and a humane society the articulation of the ‘new’ Political Theology in different
contexts and the context of the USA in particular. In his
Metz (2013:16) views the ‘new’ Political Theology as a
contribution, Metz makes a passing comment to this effect,
fundamental theology, whereas Francis Schüssler Fiorenza
namely that some of Carl Schmitt’s ‘old’ Political Theology is
(see above) describes it as a foundational theology.
being revisited in the USA (Metz 2013:13). Schüssler Fiorenza
Although Schüssler Fiorenza (1977:134) acknowledges
(2013:39–42) takes this further in his contribution. He admits
that ‘foundational theology’ is understood in different
that a comparison between contexts is always a complex
ways, Political Theology to him is foundational rather
endeavour and should not be undertaken simplistically.
than fundamental, because he understands ‘fundamental
There is however a ‘remarkable parallelism’ between the
theology’ to be prior to theology, as a type of prolegomenon,
Bush administration’s justification of a war on terror in terms
whereas Political Theology as a foundational theology
of ‘exception’ and ‘sovereignty [and] emergency legislation’
analyses the concrete horizons of theology. I concur
(Schüssler Fiorenza 2013:40) and Carl Schmitt’s theories
with Metz’s contention that the new Political Theology’s
expressed in his famous (or infamous) maxim, ‘Sovereign
understanding of itself as fundamental theology certainly
is he who decides on the exception’ (Schmitt [1922]1985:5).
has ‘concrete horizons’ in mind, aimed at a public Christian
Francis Schüssler Fiorenza’s observation is that Schmitt’s
discourse about God which ‘proves itself to be, at its very core,
ideas are actually being received in a contrasting way: by both
sensitive to the suffering of others and committed to seeking
conservative political policy and practice and progressive or
justice through sympathy and action’ (Metz 2013:16–17).
radical democratic thought. He is concerned with ‘democratic
Metz therefore awards Political Theology an epistemological
paradoxes’ (Francis Schüssler Fiorenza, in Fiorenza et al.
as well as an ethical function – and the challenge therein
2013:xi), in which universal human rights are appealed to
is a discourse about God which does not only explain,
while at the same time advocating group boundaries based
but also experiences, not only teaches, but also learns ... on an emphasis on cultural, social and ethnic differences.
about ‘the question of justice for the innocent and unjustly The effect is that in certain situations, some ‘groups’ make
suffering victims of our historical existence’ (Metz 2013:17).
the decisions of power and values:
In biblical texts a clear message about salvation and justice is What is learned from Schmitt is the idea that the equality of
humankind cannot provide the basis for a specific government
communicated, connected to understanding ‘time’, specifically
or particular state or political institution. Government is made
as regards to ‘limited time’. A relationship between God and
possible by the possibility of distinction or difference. (Schüssler
humanity unfolds as a relationship between the question
Fiorenza 2013:50)
of God and the question of justice. Many discourses (in
religion and also Christian doctrine) about this relationship
Concern about Political Theology is not about a ‘strange
are about ‘remembering’ the history of God and humanity –
mixture’ of politics and theology that politicises the church
with a twofold aim of hope and resistance; hope about an
or theologises politics. The concern is the challenge that
‘interruption of history’ and resistance to ‘fight for a level
Political Theology faces in terms of articulating the relation
playing field of equality for humanity’ (Metz 2013:18). Metz
between ‘political theology and political practice, between
argues for an awareness in terms of perception and memory,
interpretation and action, between theology and human
which is focused on those who cry for ‘interruption’ in history
rights’ (Schüssler Fiorenza 2013:52). He is of the opinion
in light of God’s promise of mercy and justice. This he sees as
that the emancipatory action that underscores the respective
the challenge of Political Theology – a discourse about the God
political theologies of Metz (in terms of justice for the
of love and justice, which proves itself to be seeking justice. For
suffering) and Moltmann (an eschatological emphasis on
this to happen in a global and pluralistic world, he considers
the rights of all humanity) points to the incompleteness of
‘God as a subject’ for all humanity (Schüssler Fiorenza et al.
contemporary laws, institutions and practices concerned
2013:ix) – together with Karl Rahner, whose anthropological
with emancipatory intent and action. At the conclusion
turn in his theology had a great influence on the theology
of his contribution, Francis Schüssler Fiorenza advocates
(and political theology) of Metz. There is not a single aspect
for the same thing as Elisabeth Schüssler Fiorenza: public
of the suffering of humanity that does not concern the whole
awareness. He argues for a public religious discourse in
of humanity. Metz describes this as a ‘transcultural authority’
which Political Theology will make the public sphere aware
which needs to be recognised to provide orientation for a
of its values and concerns. For this, Political Theology will
discourse that should span the width and breadth of continents
have to develop approaches that link its discourse with other
and religions. It would ultimately be the basis for an ‘ethic of
discourses. The challenge to Christian Political Theology is
freedom’ (Metz 2013:20) for all humanity.
to articulate an understanding of human nature and human
sin – in order to uncover the power within humanity which
A public theology critical of policies
leads to oppression, exclusion and genocide (Schüssler
A clear demarcation of ‘old’ and ‘new’ or a linear movement Fiorenza 2013:59). I understand this ‘public awareness’
from ‘old’ to ‘new’ becomes problematic when it is applied as a hermeneutics of suspicion towards power that needs
Page 5 of 8 Review Article
to be created and fostered on a continuous basis across ‘a political Other’ in its entirety. ‘Ekklēsia’, denoting the
disciplines, contexts and religions. The single greatest democratic assembly (which for a very long time did not
challenge to Political Theology is not to avoid the issue of include women), is qualified by the genitive of ‘wo/men’,
power, but to ‘decolonize’ the ever-present ‘pantopticon’ (in which for Schüssler Fiorenza (2013:34) includes all non-
reference to both Elisabeth Schüssler Fiorenza and Michel citizens of modernity in terms of gender, class, and race.
Foucault – in Van Wyk 2014: 3 of 7) that regulates people in a She attempts to show that the church and the democracy
heteronormative way.8 (theology and politics?) need critical self-awareness, because
neither is what they claim to be: free and fair and inclusive.
Theology of concrete change The challenge is being aware of what shapes your (church’s/
theology’s/politics’/democracy’s) social vision. It requires
In her discussion of the challenge to political theology, insight into your understanding of the concept ‘liberation’
Elisabeth Schüssler Fiorenza highlights the issue of and your ‘construct of Woman as the Other of Man, or of a
language. Her choice of using the*logy instead of theology, “black” or “savage” as the Other of a “white” or “civilized”
and wo/men instead of women, is an epistemological European’ (Schüssler Fiorenza 2013:35). From the perspective
challenge to categories and universal assumptions about of such an understanding and awareness one can take part
any one word or concept that claims to be determinative of in the establishment of a public sphere and of ‘the ekklēsia
the whole of the aspect it aims to denote. For her, language of wo/men’ – particularly as a space from which concrete
is the greatest instrument of exclusion and marginalisation changes can be conceptualised and enacted.
– specifically with regard to consciousness about women. It
has the effect of making invisible even when it attempts to
The grounds for the arguments Schüssler Fiorenza makes
conceptualise. Despite many paradigm shifts in theology,
in her contribution are illustrated in part by another
‘androcentric language’ or kyriocentric language9 makes
contributor, Jürgen Moltmann. As part of his vision about
the presence and actions of women throughout history (in
the contemporary challenges faced by Political Theology, he
society, the church and theology) invisible by using the
describes feminist theology as a ‘form of political theology,
generic masculine to refer to all humanity under the guise
which deals with overcoming cultural patriarchalism, but
of inclusivity. Political theologies, liberation theologies
also fighting for “human rights” for women’ (Moltmann
and postcolonial theologies are male-dominated and she
2013:8). He does, however, mention this in passing, which
maintains that they have not examined the exclusion of
might be due to a more extended contribution by Elisabeth
women theologically (or theoretically) (Schüssler Fiorenza
Schüssler Fiorenza on the subject (to which he refers). On
2013:25).
the other hand, a comment by him in one of his earlier
works seems to reiterate the challenges voiced by Schüssler
She attempts to use the concept or notion of kyriarchy
Fiorenza. Because it is so illustrative of the argument she
to portray how different structures of domination and
makes, Moltmann’s account is provided in full below. By his
oppression are interlinked and how they intersect. One of
own admission (Moltmann 2000:269–270) he did not come to
the greatest problems for critical feminist analyses is how
feminist theology himself. It came to him through his wife,
binary gender dualism determines thought. Kyriarchy as an
Elisabeth Moltmann-Wendel (Moltmann 2000]):
analytical category views oppression systems as a pyramid
with layers according to gender, class, race, religion and
… it was not always easy for me personally to understand the
culture (Schüssler Fiorenza 2013:28), and not as a dualistic necessity for taking this road, but I was curious enough to go
structure. This is because knowledge (and the language it is along with it in keen anticipation … every learning process
expressed in) is not only gendered, but it is also ‘raced’ and involves pain, and every process of personal change even
‘classed’. more so, if it means surrendering a prejudice to which one has
got used to. The two of us started out off as equal and evenly
In this regard, a critical feminist political theology of matched partners. Then came the era of profession and children.
decolonising liberation, which is her own designation and A division of labour followed. For me, one responsibility
interpretation of her enterprise and paradigm, as well as a followed another … father of a family … pastor and a professor
of theology … eaten up by [my] work. It was the practical
challenge she envisages for Political Theology, is a socio-
application of feminist theology to myself which for the first
political emancipatory movement (Schüssler Fiorenza
time slowly opened my eyes to the estrangements involved. It
2013:29). This involves a critical and self-critical feminist
took some time for me to arrive at my own case history, and
theology which uncovers contradictions. She envisages a
for me to realize how I had been turned from a young human
critical and alternative space, which she coins as ‘the ekklēsia
being into ‘a man’. It was not easy to surrender the power …
of wo/men’. This oxymoron is intended to articulate
the encounter with black theologians had already made me very
much aware that I am a white theologian and that this existence
8.See also Foucault’s (1982) use of ‘pantopticon’ as metaphor in ‘The subject and puts its stamp on my perceptions. The encounters with Third
power’ Critical Enquiry 8, 777–795. World theologians had made me aware that I live in the First
9.This refers to Schüssler Fiorenza’s own concept of ‘kyriarchy’ which refers to World and that too put its stamp on my thinking, whether I like it
‘a complex pyramidal system of super- and subordination, of exploitation and
or not. But living with feminist theology brought this necessary
domination’ (Schüssler Fiorenza 2013:26). She coined the term in the 1990s as a
depiction of the intersection of patriarchy and hierarchy, being more comprehensive self-enlightenment with incomparably more force into the very
than both the terms’ meaning, while pointing to the aspects that both the concepts
attempt to denote. heart of personal existence. (pp. 269−270)
Page 6 of 8 Review Article
Future directions of Political law, politics and the economy, and politics and the media
Theology are interdependent. That is why some approaches to Political
Theology only get as far as describing the problem and
Exploring a South African context morally complaining about it.
In his contribution, which is the concluding chapter, Michael
The awareness and analysis must be developed in light of
Welker (2013:81–86; cf. Welker, in Schüssler Fiorenza et
what Welker describes as Political Theology’s context of
al. 2013:xiii–xiv) sets out three main tasks for a Political
theological-pneumatological observations (Welker 2013:84–
Theology of the future:
85). The belief held by the Christian faith and theology is that
• a socio-theoretical awareness of the complexity of the Holy Spirit cultivates diversity and creativity – the Spirit
different relationships of God is poured out on all believers, irrespective of age,
• a clearer assessment of the state of affairs based on class, gender or race. The differences are not eliminated by
continuous social analysis the Spirit. ‘Binary differences’ (Van Wyk 2014:5 of 7) still exist,
• a greater courage to engage multi-contextual and but they are integrated into a complex ‘reconciling diversity’
pluralistic environments. which is never a ‘reconciled’ endeavour, because stability
and dynamics are both connected in the power of the Spirit.
He employs Dietrich Bonhoeffer’s Sanctorum Communio as The Spirit compels us towards bearing prophetic witness and
a model for his starting point, because of its high level of resistance every time an attempt is made to make another
socio-theoretical awareness and because it is a theological human being invisible: ‘[A]gain and again Political Theology
study of the sociology of the Church (cf. Bonhoeffer [1986] must perceive the powerlessness and the limits of moral and
2009). The greatest danger to practicing critical theology legal power’ (Welker 2013:85).
is presuppositions about each other with regard to ‘the
human’: individual, global, private, public, community and The overarching theme and the single greatest challenge
society – especially with regard to their value categories for a Political Theology of the future is the awareness, the
and systems that we associate with. These value systems concrete examination and the constant critique of power and
its symbols. It will not be able to avoid a continuous critique
are visible sometimes, but they are invisible or hidden just
of ideology – even in the face of ‘new’ theological paradigms
as many times (maybe more), and the way we think about
aimed at progress in terms of emancipatory action.
humanity and being human mutually influence one another.
It shapes the structure and content of different relationships.
The self-relation of the individual person (understanding Exploring a South African context
of self), the relationship to God (how God is understood),
Direct linear transference of meaning and value from one
one-to-one relationships (interpersonal understanding),
context to another is problematic. Comparing contexts
and social relationships (forms of sociality and community)
is a complex endeavour which needs to take differing
are multifaceted relationships which influence one another paradigms and epistemologies into account. Engaging with
and connect and intersect on different levels at different different contexts and paradigms other than your own
occasions. from the position of your ‘situatedness’ (or Sitz im Leben)
involves a critical self-awareness. The challenges and tasks
A social-theoretical awareness of the complexities involved expressed by Elisabeth Schüssler Fiorenza speak to the heart
can only function on the basis of a ‘socio-analytical honesty’ of this matter. Presuppositions are expressed in language.
(Welker 2013:83). This honesty means looking at the power Language becomes a tool of exclusion. Her notions of
dynamics that surround different types of relationships – ‘kyriarchy’ and ‘ekklēsia of wo/men’ seek to provide a
institutional, moral and social. A Political Theology of the theoretical framework to ‘decolonize’ the constructs of
future must create a prudent awareness that there is no such power used to give expression (language) to the ontology of
thing as a ‘neutral observer’ and it must try to differentiate human beings. This is done from the perspective of feminist
between power interests and interpret it within a theological theology, from which perspective the ‘social vision and
framework (Welker 2013:82–83). analysis of liberation theology is shaped by the West’, but
which advocates ‘radical democratic well-being’ (Schüssler
Socio-analytical studies which form the stepping stones of the Fiorenza 2013:35) for all the invisible people of modernity.
awareness can furthermore not be done from the perspective Her critique, challenges and suggestions with regard to
of one context. A pluralistic environment requires a multi- critical and self-critical awareness in terms of ‘kyriarchy’
disciplinary approach, and a ‘multi-systemic’ approach are valid for the articulation of a Political Theology in
in which Political Theology is self-critically positioned in terms of the theoretical and political practices of the South
the church, the academy and society. Welker argues for an African context, as part of the context of Africa. One of the
approach which appreciates the complex interplay between greatest theological issues for a Political Theology in South
systemic organisations on the one hand and social institutions Africa (and Africa) is the issue of colonialisation and the
and civil society on the other hand (Welker 2013:84). It is exploration of postcolonial (or in Schüssler Fiorenza’s terms,
about developing a real picture of the contexts. For Welker decolonizing) liberation theology. One of the key aspects of
there is only a vague comprehension of how politics and postcolonial theology is the question of a language for the
Page 7 of 8 Review Article
‘subaltern’ and if the ‘subaltern can speak’ (cf. Said 2006: about politics in Africa also provides a way to view Christianity
24–28; Spivak 2006:28–38). Under the influence of Michel itself as a form of politics … [albeit] a unique performance
Foucault, Schüssler Fiorenza’s choice of using ‘decolonizing’ grounded in different stories. (Katongole 2011:3)
instead of ‘postcolonial’ denotes a critical and self-
critical stance towards presuppositions about context and With this he acknowledges the political dimension in
paradigm; this for example is seen in the work of the African theology (and Christianity), which correlates with Moltmann
feminist theologian from Botswana, Musa Dube (2012: and Metz’s argument about the political nature of theology.
585–600). She maintains she cannot consent to using ‘Africa’ Furthermore, he underscores a unique and different source
as designation of a uniform people (Dube 2012:585). For her for doing theology in Africa, namely the use of ‘stories’
the concept denotes common oppression of many people, (narratives), something also emphasised by Francis Schüssler
and not a uniformity of people. Dube uses the designation Fiorenza in his comparison and distinction of contexts of
with a critical awareness that it has been imposed on the Political Theology. Lastly, it acknowledges the role of the
context itself. She advocates a decolonising reading of the political (in terms of theories and policies).
Bible (Dube 2012:596–599) with which ‘true conversations of
equal subjects’ will be able to take place in a postcolonial In his contribution, Francis Schüssler Fiorenza highlights
and multicultural context. Dube’s concern about the the role of Political Theology in a critical stance towards
imposition of designations as descriptions correlates with government policies and understanding democracy. One of
the South African feminist theologian Denise Ackermann’s the most prominent aspects of South African church history
concern about language and how it contributes to the has been the issue of a self-critical and a critical awareness
formation of consciousness (Ackermann 2011:6). Both of with regard to government policies, and specifically the
these theologians’ concerns correlate with those of Elisabeth issue of democracy. Although giant strides were made
Schüssler Fiorenza, as expressed in her contribution. (see for example the 25th anniversary edition of The church
Furthermore, both Dube (2012:599) and Ackermann (2011: struggle in South Africa by John de Gruchy and his late son,
4–5) remind us of the gross under-representation when it Steve de Gruchy [2005]), one of the greatest religious and
comes to women’s participation in discussions that effect political ethical issues (and challenges) in South Africa and
policy and paradigm shifts in the church (and church polity) Africa remains the articulation and practice of democracy
and theology in Africa and South Africa. (cf. Sindima 1998) and the role of religion in state affairs
and government policies (Sindima 1998:1–13). In the South
Another correlating aspect of the theologians’ contributions African context, it remains a challenge to reconcile diversity.
is that of a hermeneutic framework towards articulating Even though the ideology of apartheid and the apartheid
postcolonial/decolonising liberating theology in terms of system are for the most part in the past, the legacy thereof
what is suggested by Elisabeth Schüssler Fiorenza and the
and how the different peoples of South Africa grapple with
distinction and/or separation of political and liberation
the legacy remain a challenge. Johann Baptist Metz’s concern
theology referred to by Jürgen Moltmann. The students
about ‘old’ and ‘new’ and Francis Schüssler Fiorenza’s
from South America who visited Moltmann in Tübingen
expression of the re-emergence of ‘old’ political theories
voiced their concern about the difference in perspective
and policies is just as relevant for a South African context
and paradigm; they preferred to speak of their theology as
as any other. It was George Orwell who expressed caution
liberation theology and not Political Theology. Moltmann
about complacency and presuppositions in this regard in his
argues that the one is the other, albeit different contextual
famous novel Animal farm (Orwell [1945] 1983:83). Very soon
articulations of prophetic theology. Prophetic theology
a liberating policy or paradigm becomes the next oppressing
is certainly a prominent function of a South African (and
one, and the oppressed become the new oppressor. In a 2014
African) political/liberation theology as well (Tutu 2012:482–
public lecture at the University of Pretoria on social cohesion,
502). The 2012 publication, Prophet from the South. Essays in
Allan Boesak, in his (unpublished) reply on receiving a
honour of Allan Aubrey Boesak, is illustrative of the prophetic
Festschrift in his honour, titled Prophet from the South: Essays
witness of a liberation theology in South Africa. The main
in honour of Allan Aubrey Boesak, edited by Dibeela et al. (2014),
aspects of such a liberation theology is ‘resisting power’
expressed the same type of concern applied to the current
(Smit 2013:77–95; cf. Dibeela, Lenka-Bula & Vellem 2014:11–
South African political landscape.
35) and it is articulated in terms of ‘Black Theology’ (cf.
Dibeela et al. 2014:201–276). On the other hand, Emmanuel
It seems the overarching theme of the contributions (also in
Katongole (2011:1–25) uses the concept and notion of Political
reference to how it applies to a South African context) is that
Theology specifically in his discussion of the challenges and
the price of freedom is constant vigilance.
tasks facing Africa in terms of a Christian social ethics and
Christianity’s role ‘in the search for peace, democracy
Therefore, the challenges and tasks outlined by the
and development in Africa’ (Katongole 2011:2). He suggests
publication in terms of a European and North American
a shift from strategies to stories,
background are relevant to a South African (African) context,
to provide a fresh way to talk about politics: politics as dramatic but in a nuanced way. Political Theology is emphasised as
performance grounded in a particular story that requires, and a critical theology (with its face towards the world!), which
in the end shapes, particular characters … this way of thinking uncovers and criticises power, paradigms, theories, policies,
Page 8 of 8 Review Article
traditions and theologies that stimulate and perpetuate Moltmann, J., 2013, ‘Political theology in ecumenical contexts’, in F. Schüssler Fiorenza,
K. Tanner & M. Welker (eds.), Political theology: Contemporary challenges and
oppression, alienation and violence. future directions, pp. 1–12, Westminster John Knox Press, Louisville, CY.
Niebuhr, R.H., [1932] 1992a, ‘The grace of doing nothing’, in R.B. Miller (ed.), War in
Acknowledgements the twentieth century: Theological ethics, pp. 6–11, Westminster John Knox Press.
Louisville, CY.
Competing interests Niebuhr, R.H., [1932] 1992b, ‘Must we do nothing?’, in R.B. Miller (ed.), War in the
twentieth century: Theological ethics, pp. 12–18, Westminster John Knox Press,
Louisville, CY.
The author declares that she has no financial or personal
Orwell, G., [1945] 1983, Animal farm, Longman House, Essex.
relationships which may have inappropriately influenced
Said, E.W., 2006, ‘Orientalism’, in B. Ashcroft, G. Griffiths & H. Tiffin (eds.), The post-
her in writing this article. colonial studies reader, pp. 24–28, Routledge, New York, NY.
Schmitt, C., [1922] 1985, Political theology: Four chapters on the concept
of sovereignty, transl. G. Schwab, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,