Population genomics of intrapatient HIV-1 evolution
Fabio Zanini1, Johanna Brodin2, Lina Thebo2, Christa Lanz1, Göran Bratt4, Jan Albert2,3∗ and Richard
A. Neher1∗
1EvolutionaryDynamics and Biophysics, Max Planck Institute for Developmental Biology,
72076 Tübingen, Germany
2Department of Microbiology, Tumor and Cell Biology, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden
3Department of Clinical Microbiology, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden
4Department of Clinical Science and Education, Venhälsan, Stockholm South General Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden
∗ correspondingauthor.
(Dated: November 13, 2018)
Manymicrobialpopulationsrapidlyadapttochangingenvironmentswithmultiplevariantscom-
peting for survival. To quantify such complex evolutionary dynamics in vivo, time resolved and
genome wide data including rare variants are essential. We performed whole-genome deep se-
quencingofHIV-1populationsin9untreatedpatients,with6-12longitudinalsamplesperpatient
spanning5-8yearsofinfection. Weshowthatpatternsofminordiversityarereproduciblebetween
patientsandmirror globalHIV-1 diversity, suggesting auniversallandscapeof fitnesscosts that
control diversity. Reversions towards the ancestral HIV-1 sequence are observed throughout in-
fectionandaccountforalmostonethirdofallsequencechanges. Reversionratesdependstrongly
onconservation. Frequentrecombinationlimitslinkagedisequilibriumtoabout100bpinmostof
thegenome,butstronghitch-hikingduetoshortrangelinkagelimitsdiversity.
The human immunodeficiency virus 1 (HIV-1) is a ofintrapatientHIV-1variabilityincludingraremutations
paradigmatic example of a rapidly adapting popula- (Fischer et al., 2010; Hedskog et al., 2010; Tsibris et al.,
tion characterized by high diversity, strong selection, 2009). However, these studies had limited follow-up (i.e.
and recombination. HIV-1 has originated from multi- onlyoneorafewtimepointsweresequenced)orfocused
ple zoonotic transmissions from apes in the early part of onsmallpartsofthegenome. Hennet al.(2012)wasthe
the 20th century (Sharp and Hahn, 2011), one of which first studyto sequencethe majorityof thevirus genome,
gave rise to the worldwide pandemic. This lineage is butisrestrictedtoasinglepatientwithlimitedfollow-up.
called group M and has diversified into different sub-
types at a rate of about 1 in 1000 substitutions per year
To develop a comprehensive and quantitative under-
(Lemey et al., 2005; Li et al., 2015). This diversifica- standing of the evolution and diversification of HIV-
tion has been extensively characterized and sequences of
1 populations, we generated a whole-genome, deep-
tens of thousand of HIV-1 variants are available in the
sequencing data set covering 9 patients over 5 to 8 years
LosAlamosNationalLaboratoriesHIVdatabase(LANL)
with 6 to 12 time points per patient. Importantly, the
(Foley et al., 2013). data set covers the entire genome such that no substi-
The evolution of HIV-1 ultimately takes place within tution is missed and includes early samples defining the
infectedindividualsandcanbeobserveddirectlyinlongi- initial population. To our knowledge, this is the only
tudinal samples of virus populations from the same indi- whole-genomedeepsequencingdatasetwithlongfollow-
vidual. The detailed knowledge of HIV-1 biology paired up of multiple patients.
with historical samples make HIV-1 an ideal system to
studygeneralfeaturesofevolutionathighmutationrates
Below,wefirstdescribethemethodologywedeveloped
andstrongselectionthatareotherwiseonlyaccessiblein
to sequence the entire HIV-1 genome at a great depth
evolution experiments (Elena and Lenski, 2003; Miralles
while preserving linkage over several hundred base pairs.
et al., 1999). WethenanalyzetheintrapatientevolutionofHIV-1and
Longitudinaldatahasbeenusedtocharacterizeescape show that the minor variants in the virus population ex-
from cytotoxic T-cells (CTL) (Kearney et al., 2009; Liu plore sequence space in predictable fashion at the single
et al., 2011; Salazar-Gonzalez et al., 2009), track evo- site level. At the same time, we observe a strong ten-
lution driven by the humoral immune response against dency for reversion towards the global HIV-1 consensus.
HIV-1 (Richman et al., 2003; Shankarappa et al., 1999) Reversionisfasteratsitesthataremoreconservedatthe
and to study the emergence of drug resistance (Pare- globallevel–suggestingadirectrelationshipbetweenin-
des et al., 2009). In a pioneering study, Shankarappa trapatient fitness cost and global conservation. We fur-
etal.(1999)characterizedHIV-1evolutionofpartsofthe ther find frequent recombination, which allows the viral
gp120 envelope protein over approximately 6-12 years in populationtoevolveindependentlyindifferentregionsof
11 patients, demonstrating consistent evolution of diver- the genome. Nevertheless, recombination is not frequent
sity and divergence. While this early study was limited enough to decouple mutations closer than 100 base pairs
to about 10 sequences per sample, next-generation se- and we observe signatures of hitch-hiking at short dis-
quencing technology today allows deep characterization tances (Maynard Smith and Haigh, 1974).
]EP.oib-q[
1v38420.9051:viXra
The study included nine HIV-1-infected patients who
were diagnosed in Sweden between 1990 and 2003. Data
fromtwoadditionalpatientswereexcludedfromanalysis
becauseofsuspectedsuperinfectionandfailuretoamplify
earlysampleswithlowviruslevels,respectively. Thepa-
tientswereselectedtohavearelativelywell-definedtime
of infection and have been treatment-naive for a mini-
mum of five years. Patients diagnosed in recent years
rarelyfulfilltheseinclusioncriteriabecausetherapyisal-
mostuniversallyrecommended,butthiswasnotthecase
when the study patients were diagnosed. Basic charac-
teristics of the patients and the samples are presented
in Table I. The method to estimate the time since infec-
tion (ETI) is described in Materials and Methods. Of
the nine patients, eight were males, seven were men who
have sex with men (MSM), two were heterosexually in-
fected (HET), and eight were infected in Sweden. We
retrieved longitudinal biobank plasma samples covering
the time period during which the patients had been un- 100
treated (5.5-8.3 years). The number of samples per pa-
tient ranged between 6 and 12 and in total we investi-
gated 73 samples. The median plasma HIV-1 RNA level
was12,000copies/mlforthesampleswithavailabledata
onRNAlevels. SomesampleshadlowRNAlevels,which 10-2
partlyisexplainedbythestudydesignthatrequiredthat
the patients were treatment-naive for at least five years.
For detailed information about each individual sample
see supplementary table S1 (S1_samples.csv).
0 500 1000 1500
Position [bp]
HIV-1 whole-genome deep sequencing
We extracted viral RNA and amplified and sequenced
it as explained in Materials and Methods. The basic
steps are illustrated in Figure 1. Viral RNA was ex-
tractedfrom400µlpatientplasmaandusedforone-step
RT-PCR amplification with six overlapping primer sets
that span almost the complete HIV-1 genome, similar to
the strategy developed by Gall et al. (2012). Sequencing
libraries were made starting from 0.1 – 1.5 ng of DNA
withastringentsizeselectionforlonginserts(>400bp);
the sequencing reads were filtered and mapped to the
individual fragments defined by the PCR primers. Se-
quencing was performed on the Illumina MiSeq platform
and sequence reads were quality filtered and assembled
usinganin-housedataprocessingpipeline(seeMaterials
and Methods). In total approximately 100 million reads
passed the quality filtering. The coverage varied consid-
erably between samples and amplicons, but was mostly
of the order of several thousands or more, see Figure 1B.
Importantly, sequencing depth is determined not only
by coverage but also by template availability and se-
quencing errors. We performed a number of control ex-
periments to quantify templates and assess the accuracy
of estimates of frequencies of SNP. The results are sum-
marized in the following section and described in detail
100 101 102
Number of positions
Figure 1 Sequencing, coverage, and error rates. (A)
schematics of the sample preparation protocol, see text and
Materials and Methods for details. (B) Read coverage for a
representative sample. Coverage of separate PCR amplicons
isshownindifferenthues,theblacklineisthetotalcoverage.
The coverage of PCR fragment F5 is lower than the other
amplicons, but it is still larger than number of input HIV-1
RNA molecules; this situation is typical in our samples. (C)
EachbluecirclecorrespondstoaSNPfrequencyinamplicon
F1 of a late sample of patient 11, while red squares are SNP
frequenciesinthesequencedatageneratedfrom10,000copies
of plasmid NL4-3. The histogram on the right shows the
distributionofSNPfrequenciesinthepatientsampleandthe
control. Minor SNPs observed in reads generated from the
plasmid,whichrepresentPCRandsequencingerrors,didnot
exceed 0.3%.
in Materials and Methods.
WequantifiedthenumberofHIV-1genomesthatcon-
tributedtoeachsequencinglibrarybyPCRlimitingdilu-
tion. Comparison with routine plasma HIV-1 RNA level
measurements performed at time of sampling showed
that the median template cDNA recovery efficiency was
30%. MostsampleshadlowtomoderateHIV-1RNAlev-
elsandhencetemplateavailability,ratherthancoverage,
Patient Gender Transmission Subtype Age* Fiebig BED* No. of Firstsample Lastsample HLAtype
route [years] stage* [ODn] samples [days] [years] A B C
p1 F HET 01_AE 37 IV 0.41 12 49 8.0 02/02 08/15 03/06
p2 M MSM B 32 V 0.17 6 74 5.5 01/24 08/39 07/12
p3 M MSM B 52 VI 0.89 10 104 8.3 02/11 15/44 03/16
p5 M MSM B 38 III-IV n.a. 7 132 5.9 03/33 14/58 03/08
p6 M HET C 31 IV 0.29 7 46 7.0 02/02 44/51 05/16
p8 M MSM B 35 V 0.15 7 64 6.0 03/32 07/40 02/07
p9 M MSM B 32 VI 0.27 8 106 8.1 25/32 07/44 04/07
p10 M MSM B 34 II 0.10 9 18 6.1 32/32 44/50 06/16
p11 M MSM B 53 VI 1.22 7 167 5.5 02/32 39/44 05/12
Table I Summary of patient characteristics. Sample times from estimated date of infection. ∗, at base line; MSM, men who
have sex with men; HET, heterosexual.
determined the sequencing depth, see Figure 1B.
1 month 4 years 8 years
WeestimatedtheerrorrateofthePCRandsequencing 100
pipeline by amplifying and sequencing a plasmid clone.
Figure 1C compares the SNP frequencies observed in a 10­1
clone to those observed in a patient sample. After qual-
ity filtering, PCR and sequencing errors never exceeded 10­2
0.3% of reads covering a particular position. To detect 0 150 300 0 150 300 0 150 300
and control for variation in PCR efficiency among frag- Position [bp]
ments and skewed amplification of different variants, we 100
comparedfrequenciesofvariantsinoverlapsbetweenthe
six amplicons. A SNP in the overlap is amplified and 10­1
sequenced twice independently and the concordance of
the two measurements of variant frequencies was used to 10­2
estimate the fragment specific depth, see Materials and 0 2 4 6 8
Methods and Figure 9. Frequency estimates were often ETI [years]
reproducible to within 1%. Sometimes, however, variant
recovery was poor (mostly in fragment 5) and frequency
estimates less accurate.
We minimized PCR recombination by reducing the
number of PCR cycles and optimizing the reaction pro-
tocol (see Materials and Methods, Di Giallonardo et al.
(2013); Mild et al. (2011)). Control experiments using
mixturesoftwoculturedviruspopulationsshowthatless
than10%ofreadshaveexperiencedRT-PCRrecombina-
tion.
Takentogether,ourcontrolexperimentsshowthatde-
pending on the sample and fragment, we could estimate
frequenciesofSNPsdownto1%accuracy(corresponding
to several thousand effective templates). In some cases,
however, the template number was low or template re-
covery poor such that only presence or absence of a vari-
ant could be called. Furthermore, SNPs remained linked
through PCR and sequencing.
Consistent evolution across the entire genome
In most patients, the virus populations was initially
homogeneous and diversified over the years, as expected
for an infection with a single or small number of similar
founder viruses (Keele et al., 2008). In two patients, p3
and p10, the first sample displayed diversity consistent
Figure 2 The dynamics of SNP frequencies. The upper
panelsshowsinglenucleotidepolymorphismfrequenciesalong
p17atthreetimepointsinpatientp1. Thelowerpanelshows
the trajectories of SNPs through time. Color corresponds to
positioninthesequence. Trajectorythatreachhighfrequen-
ciesareshownwiththickerandmoreopaquelines. Analogous
dataisavailableforallpatientsformostoftheHIV-1genome.
with the transmission of several variants from the same
donor. For each of the nine patients we reconstructed
the HIV-1 genome sequence of the first sample by an
iterative mapping procedure described in Materials and
Methods. This initial consensus sequence approximates
the sequence of the founder virus(es).
Figure 2 shows an example of the dynamics of fre-
quencies of SNP relative to the founder sequence over
time, where each dot (top) or line (bottom) represents
the frequency of a nucleotide different from the founder
sequence. Interactive versions of this graph are available
for the entire genome of all patients at hiv.tuebingen.
mpg.de.
To measure the rate at which the virus population ac-
cumulates mutations, we calculated the average distance
of each sample from the founder sequence in 300bp win-
dows. Regressing this divergence against time yields the
ecnegreviD
Spearman's ρ Fraction of SNPs > 0.01
Patients A B
p1 p5 p9 p1 p8 0.3 Conservation p2 p6 p11 0.50 p p 2 3 p p 9 10 Q Q 1 2 Q Q 3 4 p3 p8 average p5 p11
0 2 4 6 8 0 2 4 6 8
ETI [years] ETI [years]
Figure 4 Within patient variation mirrors global vari-
ation. (A) Intrapatient variation at individual sites is corre-
LTR5' gag vif vpu RRE nef lated with diversity at homologous positions in an alignment
pol gp120 gp41 of sequences representative of HIV-1 group M. This corre-
0 2000 4000 6000 8000 10000 lation increases reproducibly throughout the infection. Error
Position [bp] barsshowstandarddeviationsovergenomicregions. (B)Sim-
ilarly, the fraction of sites with minor variants above 1% in-
Figure3 Consistentevolutionacrosstheviralgenome. creasesovertimeattheleastconstrainedpositions(quartiles
The figure shows the rate of sequence divergence averaged Q3 and Q4), while few sites in the most conserved quartiles
in a sliding window of length 300 bp for individual study (Q1 and Q2) are polymorphic.
participants(incolor)andaveragedoverall(black). Rapidly
evolving(Vloopsingp120)andconserved(RRE)regionsare
readily apparent. The divergence rates are determined by
linear regression of the distance from the putative founder
sequenceagainstETI.Thisdistanceincludescontributionsof
minor variants. All positions are given in HxB2 numbering. within patients, it tends to accumulate at positions that
arenotconserved,resultinginarankcorrelationofabout
0.4-0.5 after about 8 years. These correlations are in-
dividually significant and reproducible among different
rate of divergence in different regions of the genome, see genomic regions (error bars in Figure 4).
Figure 3. As expected, some regions such as the vari-
able loops in gp120 and nef evolve faster, while enzymes Figure 4B offers an alternative perspective on the ex-
– protease (PR), reverse transcriptase (RT) – and the ploration of sequence space by the HIV-1 populations.
rev response element (RRE) evolve more slowly. The Weclassifiednucleotidepositionsinthegenomeintofour
rate of divergence varies by about a factor of 10 along categoriesrangingfromhighlyconservedpositionstoless
the genome, but it is consistent with typically about conserved positions within group M (Q1 - Q4) using the
1.5-fold differences across patients (standard deviation same alignment as above. Next we asked what fraction
of log2(fold change) 0.6±0.2). The overall pattern of of sites within these categories show intrapatient varia-
the rate of mutation accumulation agrees with a recent tion at a level of at least 1%. For the least conserved
map of HIV genome-wide variation from a population positions, this fraction increased steadily to about 20%
perspective (Li et al., 2015) and correlates well with en- after 8 years, while less than 1% of the most conserved
tropy in a large HIV-1 group M alignment (Spearman’s sitesshowsvariationatthe1%level. Thislatterfraction
ρ=0.7 after the same smoothing). rapidly saturates and does not increase over time. Since
variantamplification,sequencingandvariantcallingdoes
notuseanyinformationoncross-sectionalconservations,
Minor variants reproducibly explore global HIV-1 diversity the absence of variation above 1% at conserved sites
is further evidence that our amplification and sequenc-
Having found that coarse patterns of divergence are ing pipeline does not generate spurious variation. Other
comparable among patients, we asked whether intrap- thresholds yield similar results.
atient diversity at individual sites in the viral genome
follows general and predictable patterns. To this end, Takentogether,theobservationsinFigure4showthat
we compared diversity at each position to the diversity variation is not limited by the mutational input, but
observedinHIV-1groupM(seeMaterialsandMethods). that HIV-1 populations accumulate diversity wherever
Figure4Ashowstherankcorrelationbetweenthesite- mutations do not severely compromise virus replication.
by-site diversity in each patient and a global collection At the single nucleotide level, the spectrum of muta-
of HIV-1 sequences, both measured by Shannon entropy tional possibilities is explored reproducibly and the level
(seeMaterialsandMethods). Inallcasescorrelationwith of within-host diversity is predicted by time since infec-
cross-sectionaldiversitywasinitiallylow,asexpectedfor tion and cross-sectional diversity. Conserved positions
largely homogeneous populations. As diversity increases are typically monomorphic even in deep samples.
Divergence Diversity
envelope nonsyn. 0.04 accessory syn.
structural 0.02
0 2 4 6 8 0 2 4 6 8
ETI [years] ETI [years]
0.000 0.005 0.010
Nonsyn. divergence
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
ent regions of the genome. In agreement with the results
presented in Figure 3, the observed rate of evolution at
nonsynonymous sites differed substantially between ge-
nomic regions, with env being fastest and pol slowest.
Divergenceatsynonymoussites,however,variesverylit-
tle between different genomic regions indicating random
accumulationofsynonymousmutations(ratherthanpos-
itive selection).
Figure 5B shows the corresponding plot for diversity,
i.e.,thedistancesbetweensequencesfromthesamesam-
ple. Diversity at nonsynonymous sites (solid lines) satu-
rates after about 2-4 years, suggesting that nonsynony-
mous SNPs either stay at low frequency because they
are deleterious, or rapidly increase in frequency and fix
without contributing much to diversity. Synonymous di-
versity increases steadily in the 5’ part of the genome
(structuralandenzymes),whileitsaturatesinthe3’half
of the genome after a few years – the exact opposite of
nonsynonymous divergence.
Indeed, we observe a strong anti-correlation between
synonymous diversity and nonsynonymous divergence,
which is further quantified in Figure 5C. This suggests
Figure 5 Distinct patterns of evolution across muta- that frequent non-synonymous substitutions limit syn-
tion types and regions. PanelAshowsdivergenceatnon-
onymous because they drive linked synonymous muta-
synonymous (solid) and synonymous (dashed) positions over
tions to fixation or to extinction (Maynard Smith and
time for different genomic regions averaged over all patients.
Haigh, 1974). We will quantify linkage and recombina-
While synonymous divergence is very similar in different re-
tion below, but the differences in diversity accumulation
gions,nonsynonynousdivergencevaries. PanelBshowsdiver-
sitythoughtime. Regionswithhighnonsynonymousdiversity already suggest that linkage is restricted to short dis-
(and divergence) tend to have low synonymous diversity. Er- tances.
ror bars represent standard deviations of patient bootstrap The contrasting behavior of synonymous and nonsyn-
replicates. Panel C shows the anti-correlation between the onymous SNPs is also seen in the SNP frequency spec-
rateofnonsynonymousdivergenceandsynonymousdiversity trum – the histogram of SNP abundance – shown in
in 1kb windows across the genome (color indicates position
Figure 5D. While the spectra agree for frequencies be-
on the genome blue→green→yellow→red). Panel D shows
low 20%, synonymous mutations are strongly under-
the site frequency spectrum of synonymous (blue) and non-
represented at higher frequencies (Fisher’s exact test
synonymous (green) SNPs.
at frequency 0.5, p-value ∼ 10−80). This corroborates
the interpretation that due to substantial recombina-
tion, sweeping nonsynonymous mutations only occasion-
ally “drag” adjacent synonymous mutations to fixation.
The majority of nonsynonymous substitutions are positively
Synonymous mutations rarely rise in frequency because
of their own effect on fitness, since they usually have
In addition to the reproducible patterns of minor di- small or deleterious phenotypic effects and do not con-
versity, virus evolution is characterized by adaptations tribute directly in immune evasion (Zanini and Neher,
that are specific to the host. Immune selection results in 2013). The about 5-fold excess of nonsynonymous over
escape mutations that rapidly spread through the pop- synonymous SNPs at high frequencies (see Figure 5D)
ulation (Richman et al., 2003; Walker and McMichael, showsthatthemajorityofcommonnonsynonymousmu-
2012). Such mutations tend to be nonsynonymous, i.e., tations spread due to positive selection.
changetheviralproteins,whileevolutionatsynonymous Next, we sought to quantify what fraction of nonsyn-
sites is expected to be conservative. Nevertheless, syn- onymous divergence is driven by escape from cytotoxic
onymous mutations are affected by “selective sweeps” of T-lymphocytes (CTLs). Four-digit HLA types were de-
linked nonsynonymous mutations (Maynard Smith and termined for all patients and a set of putatively targeted
Haigh, 1974). HIV-1 epitopes were determined using the epitope bind-
To quantify the degree at which the evolutionary dy- ing prediction tool MHCi (tools.immuneepitope.org/
namics of HIV-1 is dominated by selective sweeps, we mhci). We then asked whether we observed more non-
calculated divergence and diversity separately nonsyn- synonymoussubstitutionsinepitopespredictedtobetar-
onymous and synonymous in different parts of the HIV- geted than expected by chance (excluding the variable
1 genome. Figure 5A compares nonsynonymous (solid loops of gp120 and the external part of gp41, see Mate-
lines)andsynonymousdivergence(dashedlines)indiffer- rials and Methods). We found a significant enrichment
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
ETI [years]
ecnegreviD
founder = subtype
founder subtype
founder = group M
founder group M 10­1
10­2 10­1 100
Variability [bits]
ecnegreviD
group M consensus. Reversion towards group M con- B
sensus occurs at a roughly constant rate throughout the
observation time (5-8 years).
Of all changes accumulated by the viral populations,
30 ± 2.5% are reversions towards group M consensus
(meanandstandarddeviationofpatientbootstrapsafter
4-7 years). Similar results are found when comparing to
the subtype consensus of each patient virus (24±2.5%).
Reversionsarebetween4and5timesmorefrequentthan
expected in absence of a reversion bias (7.8% and 4.5%,
respectively). These findings agree with results by Allen
et al. (2005), who report that about 20% of amino acid
substitutions are reversions.
By focusing on sites where the founder virus differed
Figure 6 Rapid reversion at conserved sites. Panel A:
fromthegroupMconsensus,wearepredominantlylook-
Sites where the founder sequence differed from the subtype
or group M consensus (upper curves) diverged about 10 fold ing at weakly conserved sites. To control for conserva-
morerapidlythansitesthatinitiallyagreedwiththeconsen- tion, we carried out the same analysis after stratifying
sus (lower curves). Panel B: The rate of reversion increased sitesbyoveralllevelofconservation. Figure6Bshowsthe
with conservation (lower variability), while divergence away resultofthisanalysis,focusingonsamplesafter5-6years
from consensus showed the opposite behavior (divergence is for the sake of clarity. We find that the rate of reversion
measured at 5-6 years). Error bars report the standard devi- is highest at the most conserved sites. Almost 50% of
ation of patient bootstraps.
all non-consensus positions at highly conserved sites had
reverted to consensus after about 5 years – an almost
1000-fold excess. Even at the least conserved sites, di-
vergencetowardsgroupMconsensusexceededdivergence
by a factor 1.9 in the putatively targeted region (p-value
awayfromgroupMconsensusbyafactorof3. Thesere-
<3×10−6),correspondingto5.5excessnonsynonymous
sults suggest that the global HIV-1 group M consensus
substitutions, whereby the total number of nonsynony-
sequence represents an “optimal” HIV-1 sequence, which
moussubstitutionsperpatientisonaverage43(median,
actsasanattractorfortheevolutionarydynamicswithin
quartiles36–64). Notethatthesetofpredictedepitopes
hosts. Thisattractionisstrongestatconservedsites,but
will contain false positives and lack true epitopes, hence
extends to the least conserved sites in the genome.
the actual number of CTL driven substitutions could be
higher as for example suggested by Allen et al. (2005)
who report that roughly half of non-envelope mutations
are associated with CTL responses. Lack of long-range linkage due to frequent recombination
ToquantifythedecouplingofSNPsbyrecombination,
wecalculatedlinkagedisequilibrium(LD)betweenSNPs
Extensive reversion towards consensus
asafunctionofdistanceforeachofthesixfragments,see
ManyCTLescapemutationsreducethereplicativeca- Figure 7. For most fragments, we observed a consistent
pacity of the virus and it is known that such escape mu- decrease of LD over the first 100-200 bps, with fragment
tationsoftenrevertupontransmissiontoahostinwhich 5 being an exception with linkage of mutations at longer
the corresponding epitope is not targeted (Friedrich distances. Importantly, our linkage control (a 50/50 mix
et al., 2004; Herbeck et al., 2006; Leslie et al., 2004). of two distinct virus isolates and a total of 1,250 RNA
The balance between escape and reversion results in as- moleculesperPCRfragment)showsnodecayofLDwith
sociationbetweenspecificescapemutationsandtheHLA distanceatall,suggestingnegligibleRT-PCRrecombina-
typesofthehosts(Kawashimaet al.,2009;Palmeret al., tion.
2013). In a large population of hosts, the most common The observed decay of LD in patient samples is con-
allele at a specific site is likely favored, while rare alleles sistent with a recombination rate of 10−5/bp/day as es-
tend to be escape mutations that reduce viral replicative timated in (Batorsky et al., 2011; Neher and Leitner,
capacity (Carlson et al., 2014). 2010). Our reasoning proceeds as follows. Figure 6B
To quantify patterns of reversion and fitness cost, we indicatesthatdiversityaccumulatesoveratimeframeof
classified sites in the approximate founder sequence of 2-4years,i.e.,about1,000days. Recombinationatarate
theviralpopulationsineachsubjectasbeingidenticalor of 10−5/bp/day hits a genome on average every 100 bps
different from the HIV-1 group M consensus. Figure 6A in 1000 days. Mutations further apart than 100bps are
showsthefractionofsiteswherethefoundernucleotideis hence often separated by recombination and retain little
replaced by a mutant during the infection. This fraction linkageconsistentwiththeobserveddecaylengthinFig-
is about 10 fold higher if the founder nucleotide differs ure7. Thelongerlinkageinfragment5(env)mighthave
from the group M consensus than if it is identical to the severalreasonsthatextendbeyondoursimpleargument:
0 100 200 300 400
Distance [bp]
muirbiliuqesid
F3 control
Figure8 Phylogenetic trees of minor genetic variants.
Inrapidlyevolvinggenomicregions,treesthatincludeminor
geneticvariants(haplotypes)approximatethetruephylogeny.
Herep17ingag andthevariableloop3inenv frompatientp1
Figure 7 Linkage and recombination. Linkage disequi-
are compared. Trees are reconstructed using FastTree (Price
librium decays rapidly with distance between SNPs. Colored
et al., 2009).
linescorrespondtothedifferentfragments,eachaveragedover
patients. The dashed line shows data from a control experi-
ment for PCR recombination, where two cultured virus pop-
ulations were mixed. No PCR recombination is observed.
mulatesubstitutionsindependentlyindifferentregionsof
thegenomeassuggestedbytheoreticalmodels(Mostowy
et al., 2011; Rouzine and Coffin, 2005). Nonetheless, lo-
(i)homologousrecombinationmightbesuppressedinthe
caldynamicsofSNPsisoftendominatedbyhitch-hiking
mostvariableregions,(ii)theaccuracyofSNPfrequency
between neighboring mutations, resulting in an anticor-
estimates is lower in F5 due to poorer amplification, and
relationbetweennonsynonymousdivergenceandsynony-
(iii)therapidevolutionofenv duefrequentsubstitutions
mous diversity. A large fraction of all substitutions are
andsweepsgiveslesstimetobreakuplinkage. Inpartic-
reversions towards the global HIV-1 consensus sequence,
ular,asshowninFigure5C,frequentandstrongselective
and these reversions steadily accumulate throughout in-
sweepsaffectsynonymousdiversityinphysicalproximity
fection.
along the genome, confirming the presence of linkage at
TheevolutionarydynamicsofHIV-1populationsisthe
short distances.
resultofstochasticforceslikemutationandfrequentbot-
For phylogenetic analysis, we can extract haplotypes
tlenecks, deterministic fixation of favorable mutations,
from the sequencing reads up to 500bp in length. Only
and recombination. The relative importance of these
in the more diverse regions are 500bp sufficient for well
forces remains unclear (Brown, 1997; Frost et al., 2000;
resolved phylogenies (see Figure 8). However, we find
Kouyos et al., 2006; Maldarelli et al., 2013; Pennings
that linkage does not extend beyond 100-200bp. Hence
et al., 2014; Rouzine and Coffin, 1999). Our observation
thereadlengthisnotalimitingfactor. Onlyduringrapid
that intrapatient diversity recapitulates diversity seen
population shifts such as drug resistance evolution, long
across HIV-1 group M and the strong tendency to revert
read technologies such as PacBio would be necessary to
towardsconsensussuggestthatinchronicinfectionselec-
capture the evolutionary dynamics (Nijhuis et al., 1998). tion determines diversity. The reproducible exploration
of sequence space can coexist with frequent adaptation
only in frequently recombining large populations (Neher
Discussion et al., 2013). We observe that mutations further apart
than 100 bp are effectively shuffled by recombination in
We have presented a comprehensive portrait of intra- mostpartsofgenome,consistentwithpreviousestimates
patient evolution of HIV-1 that covers almost the entire of the HIV-1 recombination rate (Batorsky et al., 2011;
genomeofthevirus,characterizesminorgeneticvariants, Neher and Leitner, 2010). Linkage and stochastic effects
and tracks the fate and dynamics of these variants over become stronger with increasing frequency of strength
afollow-upperiodofupto8yearsin9patients. Wefind of selection, consistent with lower synonymous diversity
that during the infection HIV-1 explores the sequence and more LD in env.
spacesurroundingthefoundervirussystematically;simi- WhilerapidCTLescapeat5-10sitesoverthefirsttwo
larmutationalpatternsareobservedwithindifferent,un- years of infection has been documented in detail (Allen
relatedpatients. Linkagebetweenmutationsislimitedto etal.,2005;Herbecketal.,2006;Liuetal.,2011;Salazar-
approximately 100bp, so the virus population can accu- Gonzalez et al., 2009) and population level associations
between specific HLA types and escape variants suggest vide a direct justification for this approach. However, 9
widespread CTL escape (Kawashima et al., 2009), the patients are insufficient to extend this analysis to fitness
effect of escape and reversion on long-term evolutionary interactions between mutations.
trends is less clear (Lythgoe and Fraser, 2012; Roberts
Onelimitationofthisstudywastheavailabilityofsam-
et al., 2015). We find a strong tendency for viral pop- ples from patients with sufficiently long follow-up with-
ulations to revert towards the global HIV-1 consensus.
out therapy after a well-defined time of infection. The
Atsiteswherethefoundersequencediffersfromthesub-
majority of patients were MSM infected with subtype
type consensus, substitutions are almost 5-fold overrep-
B virus. Thus, we cannot exclude that the aspects of
resented: Instead of ≈ 5% reversions expected based on HIV-1evolutionthatwehaveinvestigateddifferbetween
the fraction of sequence at which the founder virus dif-
transmission routes or HIV-1 subtypes. While substitu-
fersfromconsensusoftheHIV-1subtype, almost25%of
tion and recombination errors of our optimized protocol
substitutionsarereversions,inagreementwithearlierre-
for HIV-1 RNA extraction and an RT PCR are low, the
ports on reversion of CTL escapes (Allen et al., 2005; Li other main limitation was the at times small number of
et al., 2007). This tendency to revert increases with the availabletemplatemoleculesthatwequantifiedbylimit-
levelofconservationofthesite,suggestingaquantitative
ing dilution. In principle, the Primer ID method, which
relationshipbetweenfitnesscostandconservation. While
labels and resequences each individual template, allows
reversion is particularly prevalent in acute infection (Li
quantificationoftemplatesandalmostcompleteelimina-
etal.,2007),weshowthatreversionisnotlimitedtoearly
tion of experimental substitution and recombination er-
infection but happens throughout chronic infection.
rors (Jabara et al., 2011). However, we are not aware of
The bias towards reversion results in a two to three a Primer ID protocol for genome-wide sequencing which
foldreductionofthelong-termevolutionaryrateofHIV, was essential to our study.
atrendthatisreinforcedbyselectionduringtransmission
HIV-1andothermicrobialpopulationsevolveinacon-
(Carlsonet al.,2014;Sagaret al.,2009). Inter-individual
stantstrugglebetweenadaptationtoachangingenviron-
evolutionary rates of HIV-1 are two to six times lower
ment and maintenance of functionality. Large mutations
than intra-individual rates, and a number of possible
rates and population sizes generate standing genetic di-
mechanisms have been suggested to explain this discrep-
versity that is limited by the fitness costs rather than
ancy (Lythgoe and Fraser, 2012). Our results strongly
mutation rates. Hence the limiting factor for adapta-
indicate that most of this mismatch can be explained by
tion is not generating the useful mutations, but combin-
steady reversion during infection; other factors such as
ing multiple mutations necessary to survive – e.g. escape
retrieval of “stored” latent variants or stage-specific se-
mutations and reversions – and pruning deleterious mu-
lection might also contribute to the rate mismatch (Im-
tations. In HIV-1, this process is facilitated by frequent
monen and Leitner, 2014; Lythgoe and Fraser, 2012).
recombination.
The high rate of reversion has implications for phylo-
Weexpectthatthesystematicexplorationofsequence
genetic dating. Given the 5-fold excess of reverting mi-
space, the reproducible patterns of minor variation, and
nor variation, reversion would balance divergence once
frequent reversion will be characteristic of other RNA
the typical distance from the consensus sequence equals
viruses. Properties of linkage between mutation will dif-
17%, corresponding to a nucleotide diversity of about
fer since mechanisms of recombination are diverse. But
30%; this is remarkably close to the actual divergence
even though selective forces, recombination, and time
between HIV-1 groups M, N and O (Li et al., 2015).
scales will vary among different microbial populations,
On longer distances, this simple argument will have to
theoretical models of rapid adaptation population have
be modified due to compensatory mutations resulting in
shown that many features of the evolutionary dynamics
gradual shift of the preferred state at some positions;
are independent of the specific system (Fisher, 2013; Ne-
nonetheless, it indicates a dramatic slowing down of di-
her, 2013). Intrapatient evolution of HIV-1 is a unique
vergenceatascaleoftheHIV-1-SIVcpzdivergence. This
opportunitytostudythisevolutionarydynamicsdirectly
apparentdecelerationofevolutioncouldexplainthecon-
in vivo.
tradictory findings of attempts to date the age of HIV-1
and SIV (Worobey et al., 2010). The strong and lasting
preference for specific nucleotides needs to be accounted
for in phylogenetic analysis, as has recently been shown
usingexperimentallydeterminedfitnesslandscapesofin- Materials and Methods
fluenza virus proteins (Bloom, 2014).
The concordance between intrahost variation and pat- Ethical statement
ternsofconservationacrossHIV-1groupMhintsatuni-
versalfitnesscostsofmutations. Recently,cross-sectional The study was carried out according to the Declara-
conservation has been used as a proxy for fitness costs tionofHelsinki. EthicalapprovalwasgrantedbytheRe-
in models of HIV-1 fitness landscapes (Ferguson et al., gional Ethical Review board in Stockholm, Sweden (Dnr
2013). Sincereproducibleintrapatientdiversitylikelyre- 2012/505-31/12). Patients participating in the study
flects fitness costs of mutations in vivo, our results pro- gave written and oral informed consent to participate.
Patient selection and samples 2. For patients in Fiebig stage VI or with unclear
Fiebig stage, ETI was considered to be midpoint
Theinclusioncriteriaforthestudypatientswere: a)a between the dates for last negative and the first
relatively well-defined time of infection based on a neg- positiveHIVtestsifthetimeintervalbetweenthese
ative HIV antibody test less than two years before a tests was <1 year. This was applicable to patient
first positive test or a laboratory documented primary no. 5.
HIV infection; b) no antiretroviral therapy (ART) for a
3. For remaining patients ETI was calculated using a
minimum of approximately five years following diagno-
publishedtime-continuousmodelofdevelopmentof
sis; and c) availability of biobank plasma samples cov-
ering this time period. An additional inclusion criterion antibodies reactive in the BED assay (Skar et al.,
2013). However, ETI was not considered to be
was used to allow inclusion in an ongoing substudy; suc-
<100daysforpatientsinFiebigstageVI.Thiswas
cessful ART (plasma viral levels <50 copies/µl) for a
applicable to patients no. 3, 9 and 11.
minimum of two years after at least five years without
therapy. The patients were selected from the Venhälsan
HIVclinicinStockholm,Swedenandwerediagnosedbe-
tween 1990 and 2003. Seven to twelve plasma samples Primer design
per patient (200 µl - 1000 µl) were retrieved from the
Primers were designed to cover almost the full HIV
biobanks of the Karolinska University Hospital and the
genome in six overlapping fragments, called fragments
Public Health Agency of Sweden. These samples had
F1-F6asillustratedinFigure1. Thisallowedsequencing
been stored at -70◦C following routine HIV RNA quan-
ofnucleotidepositions571to9567intheHxB2reference
tification. Information about the patients and the sam-
sequence according to the Sequence Locator Tool avail-
plesaresummarizedinTableS1(S1_samples.csv). Re-
sultsfromroutineHIVantibodytests,HIVantigentests,
able at www.hiv.lanl.gov. Because of the redundancy
of the long terminal repeats (LTRs) this means that all
plasma HIV RNA levels and CD4 counts were collected
genomicregionsexceptpositions482-571intheRregion
fromthepatientrecords. Four-digitHLAtypingofHLA
of the LTRs were sequenced. Primer design was per-
classIlociA,B,CandclassIIlociDRandDQwasper-
formed using the subtype reference alignment and the
formedattheLaboratoryofImmunpathology, Tübingen
University Hospital. PrimerDesign software available at www.hiv.lanl.gov
InthecontrolexperimentsweusedHIVDNAfromthe (Brodin et al., 2013). PrimerDesign was used to find
candidate forward and reverse primers targeting highly
following plasmids; NL4-3 (subtype B, DNA concentra-
conserved regions of the HIV genome, with similar melt-
tion 110 ng/µl corresponding to 1.35×1010 copies/µl),
ingtemperatures,andwithminimaltendencyforhairpin
SF162 (subtype B, DNA concentration 117 ng/µl corre-
and primer-dimer formation. Candidate primers were
sponding to 1.43×1010 copies/µl), pZM246F_10 (sub-
manually adjusted if needed, tested and sometimes re-
type C, DNA concentration 101 ng/µl corresponding to
designed. For each genome fragment both outer PCR
1.35×109 copies/µl).
primers and nested, inner primers were designed; inner
We also used HIV RNA from the following virus iso-
primers were only used for template quantification and
lates LAI III (subtype B, 7,500 copies/µl), 38540 (sub-
internal testing purposes. Alternative primer sets were
typeC,225,000copies/µl)and38304(subtypeB,45,000
created for genome fragments F3 and F5 because the
copies/µl).
PCRs with the original primers sometimes were ineffi-
cient. For fragment F5 the amplification problem was
not completely alleviated despite trials with several dif-
Estimated time since infection (ETI)
ferent primer pairs. We believe that this might be be
The patients were classified according to the Fiebig due to the extensive secondary structere in the RRE re-
staging system for primary and early HIV infection gion. The primers are presented in supplementary table
(Fiebig et al., 2003). In addition, we performed BED S2 (S2_primer_list.pdf). All primer positions except
tests(Aware(cid:114)BED(cid:114)EIAHIV-1IncidenceTest,Calypte the 5’ primer of F1 and the 3’ primer of F6 are con-
Biomedical Corporation, Portland, OR, USA). For each tainedinneighboringampliconsandhencesequenced. Of
patient the date of infection was estimated using results course, the primer part of the reads itself was trimmed
from laboratory tests according to the following hierar- after sequencing (see below).
chical scheme.
1. Fiebig staging (Fiebig et al., 2003) was used if re- RNA extraction and amplification
sults on HIV RNA, antigen, EIA and Western blot
wereavailableandthepatientfoundtobeinFiebig For each sample, 400 µl of plasma (if available) was
stageI-V.FiebigstagesI-VIwereconsideredtocor- divided into two 200 µl aliquots. Total RNA was ex-
respond to 13, 18, 22, 27, 65 and >100 days since tracted using RNeasy(cid:114) Lipid Tissue Mini Kit (Qiagen
infection based on Cohen et al. (2011). This was Cat. No. 74804). Each aliquot was eluted twice with 50
applicable to patients no. 1, 2, 6, 8 and 10. µlRNasefreewatertomaximizeHIVRNArecovery. The
foureluateswerepooledgivingatotalvolumeof200µlof paired-endsequencingruns. Overall,weobtainedaround
RNApersample. TheRNAwasdividedintotwelve14µl 200 Gbases of output, i.e. 300 Mbases for each PCR
aliquots for duplicate one-step RT-PCR with the outer amplicon. The median number of reads per amplicon
primers for fragments F1 to F6 and Superscript (cid:114) III was 80,000 (quartiles 20,000-220,000, max 2 millions).
One-Step RT-PCR with Platinum (cid:114) Taq High Fidelity All read files have been uploaded to ENA with study
Enzyme Mix (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, California, US). accession number PRJEB9618.
Remaining RNA was used for template quantification
(see below). The one-step RT-PCR was started with
cDNA synthesis at 50◦C for 30 min and denaturation
Read mapping and filtering
step at 94◦C for 2 min followed by 30 PCR cycles of de-
naturation at 94◦C for 15 sec, annealing at 50◦C for 30 Bases were called from the raw images using Casava
secandextensionat68◦Cfor90secandafinalextension 1.8. The reads were analyzed from that point on using a
step at 68◦C for 5 min. A second nested PCR was used custom pipeline written in Python 2.7 and C++. We fa-
for template quantification and in some of the control voredthispipelineoverexistingprogramsbecauseHIV-1
experiments. For the second PCR, 2.5 µl of the prod- is a diverse species and both coverage and genetic di-
uctfromthefirstPCRwasamplifiedwithPlatinumTaq versity typically fluctuate by many orders of magnitude
High Fidelity. The second PCR consisted of a denatura- across the genome. The pipeline works as follows: (i)
tion step at 94 ◦C for 2 min, followed by 30 PCR cycles reads were mapped onto the HIV-1 reference HxB2, us-
with denaturation at 94◦C for 15 sec, annealing at 50◦C ing the probabilistic mapper Stampy (Lunter and Good-
for 20 sec and extension at 72◦C for 90 sec and a final son, 2011); (ii) mapped reads were classified into one of
extensionat72◦Cfor6min. OtherPCRconditionswere thesixoverlappingfragmentsusedforRT-PCR(ambigu-
also tried during assay development. ous and chimeric reads were discarded), and trimmed
After PCR, the duplicate amplicons from each of the for PHRED quality above or equal 30 except for one
six overlapping PCRs were pooled and purified with Il- isolated position per read; RT-PCR primers were also
lustra™GFX™PCRDNAandGelBandPurificationKit trimmedatthisstep;(iii)aconsensussequencewascom-
(28-9034-70, VWR) or AGENCOURT™ AMPure™ XP puted for each fragment in each sample from a subset
PCR purification kit (A63881, Beckman Coulter AB). of the reads, using a chain of overlapping local multi-
Purifiedampliconsfromeachsamplewerequantifiedwith ple sequence alignments (each covering around 150 bp);
Qubit™ assays (Q32851, Life Technologies) and there- (iv) the reads were re-mapped, this time against their
after diluted and pooled in equimolar concentrations. own consensus; (vii) genetic distance from the consen-
sus were computed, and reads with a distance higher
than a sample- and fragment-specific threshold were dis-
DNA library preparation carded. Eachthreshold,calculatedtoexcludeeventraces
ofcross-contaminationthatmighthavehappenedduring
TheIlluminaNexteraXTlibrarypreparationprotocol RNA extraction, PCR amplification, or library prepa-
and kit were used to produce DNA libraries. The origi- ration, was established by plotting the distribution of
nalprotocolwasoptimizedforlongerreadsandamplicon Hamming distances of reads from the sample consensus,
inputinthefollowingfashion: (i)InputDNAconcentra- and excluding reads that are further away than the tail
tiontotagmentationwasincreasedto0.3ng/µltoreduce of the main peak. Contaminations appeared as a sec-
overtagmentation; (ii) The number of post-tagmentation ond peak at higher distances, recombinants as a fat tail:
PCR cycles was raised up to 14 for samples with very both were excluded. Reads were also trimmed for map-
lowinputDNA;(iii)Post-PCRpurificationwasdoneus- pingerrorsattheedges(smallindels);(viii)filteredreads
ing Qiagen Qiaquick columns to maximize large-inserts were mapped a third time against a patient-specific ref-
throughput as compared to magnetic-bead based proto- erence that was as similar as possible to the consensus
cols; (iv) Size selection was performed using the Sage- sequence from the earliest time point; (ix) reads were re-
Science BluePippin system with 1.5% agarose gel cas- filtered and checked again for cross-contamination. The
settes and internal marker R2, selecting sizes of 550 to pipeline was equipped with extensive consistency checks
900 bp (including dual index Nextera adapters, final in- forbasequality,mappingerrors,andcontamination,and
sertsizes400bpto700bp);(v)Size-selectedeluateswere isbasedontheopensourceprojectsnumpy(vanderWalt
pooled,buffer-exchangedintoEB(10mMTris-HCl),and etal.,2011),matplotlib(Hunter,2007),Biopython(Cock
reconcentrated to at least 2 nM. et al., 2009), samtools (Li et al., 2009), pandas (McKin-
ney, 2011), and SeqAn (Döring et al., 2008).
Sequencing
Quality controls
The Illumina MiSeq instrument with 2×250bp or 2×
300bp sequencing kits (MS-102-2003/MS-102-3003) was PCRandsequencingerrors We added 1-5% of PhiX con-
used to sequence the DNA libraries. We performed 26 trolDNAtoalloursequencingruns. Comparisonofreads
that mapped to PhiX with the PhiX reference sequence fragment completely independently and the concordance
revealed that the Phred quality score were a rather re- of the observed variant frequencies, see Figure 9, can be
liable indicator of error rates, with saturation around used to detect PCR amplification bias or poor recovery
0.1%. SNP calls were calculated from the reads using a in a subset of the fragments.
custompile-uprestrictedtoreadswithaPHREDquality If deviations of SNP frequencies are due to random
>=30 corresponding to a minimal theoretical error rate sampling from the pool of RNA molecules and stochas-
of 0.1% per base. However, in a dedicated set of control tic PCR efficiency, the variance between the frequen-
experiments,weestablishedthatthemainsourceoferror cies observed on two neighboring fragments should be
is PCR, see Figure 1 in the main text. x(1−x)(n−1 +n−1), where x is the true frequency of
We estimated the error rate of the PCR and sequenc- the SNP. The numbers n and n correspond to effec-
ingpipelinebyamplifyingandsequencingplasmidclones tive templatenumbersspecifictoleading(L)andtrailing
(NL4-3,SF162,LAI-III).Inmostoftheseexperimentswe (T) fragment. For each SNP in the overlap, we calculate
used 104 template molecules. The distribution of single the difference δ and the mean x of the frequencies re-
nucleotide polymorphism(SNP) frequencies found in the ported on the L/T fragment. An estimate of n−1+n−1
sequencing reads generated from the plasmid were com- is then given by
paredtosequencingresultsfromatypicalpatientsample,
seeFigure1. Afterqualityfiltering,PCRandsequencing 1 (cid:34) (cid:88) k δ2 p (cid:35)
errors never exceed 0.3% of reads covering a particular i + , (1)
position. Hence SNPs found in more than 0.3% of all i dil
reads likely represent biological variation. Note thatthis
wherekisthenumberofSNPsintheoverlap. Toincrease
neither implies that we detect all biological variants at
robustness of this estimate, we include p pseudo counts
frequenciesabove0.3%, nordoesthefrequencyofaSNP
eachofwhichcontributesn−1,wheren isthetemplate
among the reads necessarily reflect the frequency of that dil dil
numberestimatedfromthedilutionseries. Sincewehave
SNPinthesample. Formanysamplesthedetectionlimit
6 fragments but (in the best case) only 5 overlaps, the
and accuracy of quantification of minor variants was not
effectivefragmenttemplatenumbersarenotuniquelyde-
limited by the sequencing error, but by the RNA tem-
termined. However, their inverse has to be smaller than
plate input and potential PCR bias.
the minimum of the estimate of n−1+n−1 at any over-
lapthefragmentparticipatesin. Wehenceassignalower
boundforthefragmentspecifictemplateestimatebyus-
Template input To roughly quantify the actual number ing the inverse of this minimum, provided with find at
of HIV RNA templates that were subjected to sequenc- least k =5 SNPs in the overlap at an average frequency
ing, we analyzed a dilution series of the RNA (1:10, above 0.03. We use p = 3. Changing the parameters
1:100, 1:1,000, and 1:10,000) with the nested primers for doesn’t change the numbers qualitatively.
fragment F4 using the PCR conditions described above. The fragment specific estimates of template numbers
Tests were done in duplicate on the same plate as ampli- are consistent with the estimates based on limiting dilu-
fications for sequencing and the amplicons were visual- tion (see Figure 9, rank correlation around ρ = 0.5 for
ized by agarose gel electrophoresis. Templates numbers mostofthefragments),butindicatedthatvariantrecov-
were estimatedbased onthe assumptionofPoissonsam- ery in fragment F5 was sometimes poor, consistent with
pling. Thus, for each sample, this dilution series pro- thedifficultiesweencounteredwhenamplifyingfragment
vides an estimate of the number of templates that make F5. Furthermore, the agreement of SNP frequencies in
itintothesequencinglibrary. Theresultsfromthelimit- theoverlapsindicatethattheprimerswerewell-designed
ingdilutionexperimentscorrelatedwell(rankcorrelation and did not induce significant primer-related PCR am-
ρ=0.7) with routine plasma HIV-1 RNA level measure- plification biases. These fragment specific estimates are
ments that had been performed at time of sampling, see only available for samples and fragments with sufficient
Figure 9. These comparisons showed that the median diversity in the overlap regions and are often lacking for
template cDNA recovery efficiency was 30% (quartiles early samples and fragment F6. The latter is due to the
17% – 60%), which should be regarded as satisfactory very conserved overlap with fragment F5.
since the amplicons were relatively long and the samples Taken together, these controls show that depending
had been stored for up to 24 years and sometimes also on the sample and fragment, we can estimate frequen-
freeze-thawed prior to this study. ciesofSNPsdownto1%accuracy(correspondingtosev-
eral thousand effective templates). In some cases, how-
ever,thetemplatenumberwasloworrecoverypoorsuch
PCRbias Inadditiontoquantificationoftemplateinput that no more than presence absence of a variant could
for each sample, we separately estimated the recovery of be called. All fragment available specific estimates are
sequence variation in each of the six sequenced ampli- shown in Figure 9B. In addition to lack of concordance
cons. Adjacent fragments overlap each other by a few of SNP frequencies in overlaps, problematic fragments
hundred bases. Variation in the overlapping regions is lack diversity or have a granular distribution of SNP fre-
amplifiedandsequencedonboththeleadingandtrailing quenciessuchthattheycanbeflaggedandremovedfrom
specific analysis. The fact that PCR efficiency can vary Divergence and diversity: Average divergence defined as
withinonesampleisillustratedinFigure9–supplement the fraction of non-founder alleles in a sliding window
1 that compares SNP frequencies estimated in samples of 300bp was regressed against the estimated times since
4 and 5 of patient 1 that are only 30 days apart: While infection using a linear model without intercept. Differ-
SNP frequencies agree to within expectation for 5 out of ent data points were weighted by the total divergence,
6 fragment, fragment F5 shows strong deviations linked reflecting the expected scaling of the variance if diver-
tosuboptimalPCRefficiency. However,eveninproblem- gence is due to changes at many independent sites. The
atic samples our amplification and sequencing approach evolutionaryratewasthanmappedtothecorresponding
doesnotgeneratespuriousvariation,asshownbytheab- coordinate in the HxB2 reference.
sence of diversity in early samples or conserved sites (see
below).
Phylogenetic analysis: To construct trees in different re-
gions of the HIV-1 genome, we extracted reads covering
the desired region, restricted them to haplotypes above
the desired frequency threshold and constructed a max-
In vitro recombination and linkage The paired-end reads imum likelihood phylogeny using FastTree (Price et al.,
obtained correspond to inserts of up to 700bp in length
2009). Trees were rooted at the consensus sequence of
and therefore provide information on linkage of muta-
the earliest available sample.
tions up to that distance. However, cDNA synthesis and
PCR have both the potential to generate in vitro recom-
bination, and true biological linkage is preserved only if
Linkage disequilibrium: To calculate linkage disequilib-
the frequency of in vitro recombination is low. To es-
rium, we first constructed four dimensional matrices for
timate the in vitro recombination in our experimental
each fragment and each sample, that report the num-
setup, virions from two subtype B HIV isolates, LAI III
ber of times reads mapped such that a nucleotide n at
and38304(thelatterobtainedfromaSwedishHIV-1pa- 1
position x was jointly observed with nucleotide n at
tient infected in Brazil), were mixed in equal concentra- 1 2
position x . From these matrices, we calculate the joint
tions. Aliquots of this mix (approximately 1,250 RNA 2
frequency p (x ,x ) of the majority nucleotide at po-
molecules per PCR fragment) were amplified with the 12 1 2
sitions (x ,x ). The normalized linkage disequilibrium
six overlapping one-step RT-PCRs as described above in 1 2
measure is then given by
both single PCR and nested PCR mode and then se-
quenced. |p −p p |
D(cid:48) = 12 1 2 (2)
PCR recombination is known to occur predominantly D
at high amplicon concentrations due to hetero duplex
formation of incompletely extended molecules (Di Gial- wherep 1 ,p 2 arethefrequenciesofthemajoritynucleotide
at the respective positions, and
lonardo et al., 2013; Mild et al., 2011)). Consistently,
we observe no PCR recombination within the first PCR (cid:40)
(whichstartingatlowtemplateinputdoesnotsaturate), D = min(p 1 p 2 ,(1−p 1 )(1−p 2 )) p 12 <p 1 p 2
while we observe substantial PCR recombination dur- min(p (1−p ),(1−p )p ) p >p p
1 2 1 2 12 1 2
ing a second nested PCR. Since our library preparation
protocol requires very low input DNA, we do not need Values of D(cid:48) are then binned by distance and plotted.
nestedPCR,avoidingthissourceofPCRrecombination. To reduce noise, only SNPs at frequencies between 20
The fact that PCR recombination occurs during a sec- and 80% at positions with a coverage > 200 were in-
ond PCR shows that the two viruses used for this con- cluded. Furthermore,werequiredthatthefragmentspe-
trol(bothsubtypeB)aresimilarenoughthatdivergence cific depth estimate exceeded 40 or the estimated tem-
doesnotinterferewithheteroduplexformation. Figure7 plate input exceeded 200. The latter is necessary to in-
includes the linkage disequilibrium observed in the con- clude fragment F6, since the overlap with fragment 5
trol experiment as a function of distance, showing that often had in-sufficient diversity to allow for a fragment-
linkageishighandnotlostwithdistanceduringthefirst specific depth estimate.
PCR.
Diversity and divergence Synonymous and non-
synonymous divergence was analyzed on a per site
basis to avoid confounding by different number of
Analysis transitions and transversions. Positions were classified
as synonymous based on the following criterion: The
Python scripts that generate each figure shown in consensus amino acid at this position did not change
the manuscript are available at github.com/neherlab/ throughout infection and at least the transition at this
HIVEVO_figures. In these scripts, all parameters, set- site is synonymous. In this case, the observed mutations
tings, and calculations are explicitly documented. at this site are almost always synonymous.
Figure 9 Template quantification and accuracy of SNP frequency estimates. The left panel shows actual template
numbersasexperimentallydeterminedbyendpointdilution(y-axis)vsthemaximumtheoreticaltemplateinputasestimated
based on plasma virus levels. The estimates from the dilutions are typically a factor of three below the expectation from
viral load, suggesting generally good template recovery. The center panel show the correlation of fragment specific effective
templatenumbersestimatedfromtheconcordanceofSNPsinfragmentoverlaps. Again,thecorrelationisgenerallygood,but
fragment F5 often has estimates lower than those from the dilution series consistent with problems faced in amplification of
this fragment. Information from fragment F6 is largely absent, since there is very little variation in the F5-F6 overlap. The
rightpanelplotsSNPfrequenciesinoverlapsmeasuredintheleadingfragmentagainstthetrailingfragment. Deviationsfrom
the diagonal are due PCR bias and random sampling from limited template molecules. Given enough diversity in overlap
regions, the concordance of variant frequencies can be used to estimate fragment specific template input and accuracy of SNP
frequencies.
Thefunctionalcategoriesforgenomicregionswerethe nal part of gp41 from this analysis to avoid confounding
following: structural: p17, p24, p6, p7; enzymes: pro- by antibody selection. Repeating the same analysis for
tease, RT, p15, integrase; accessory: vif, vpu, vpr, nef; synonymous mutations did not yield any enrichment as
envelope: gp120 and gp41. For the CTL epitope predic- expected. The results are insensitive to the number of
tion, ranked epitope lists were obtained using the web predicted epitopes used.
service MHCi (tools.immuneepitope.org/mhci). This
tool uses several prediction methods ranked based on
previously observed performance: Consensus (Moutaftsi
et al., 2006) > Artificial Neural Network (Nielsen et al.,
2003) > Stabilized Matrix Method (Peters and Sette, Comparison with subtype diversity Full genome HIV-
2005) > NetMHCpan (Hoof et al., 2008). For each pa- 1/SIVcpz sequences were downloaded from LANL HIV
tient, we submitted the consensus amino acid sequences data base. Sequences belonging to subtypes B, C, and
of the viral proteins at the first time point together with 01_AE were individually aligned to HxB2 (using pair-
4-digit HLA types at MHC-I. To analyze putative CTL wise alignment functions from SeqAn (Döring et al.,
escapeinourpatients,weusedthefirst80epitopesfrom 2008)) to construct a summary of diversity within sub-
the ranked list as a compromise between false negatives types in HxB2 coordinates. Similarly, a group M di-
and false positives. This number maximized the statis- versity summary in HxB2 coordinates with made from
tical signature for HIV-1 substitutions being within epi- sequences of subtypes A, B, C, D, F, G, H, restricted
topes, but similar results were obtained by taking the to at most 50 sequences from any given subtype. From
first 50-100 epitopes in the lists. these HxB2 indexed alignments, entropy was calculated
columnwise and the consensus sequence determined as
We preferred computational predictions over experi-
the majority nucleotide.
mentally verified CTL epitopes, since the latter are in-
complete and biased towards common virus sequences When comparing HIV variation within patients to
and HLA types. For each patient, we submitted the ap- cross-sectionaldiversity,onlypositionsofthefounderse-
proximate founder sequence (consensus sequence of the quence were used that mapped to HxB2. Similarly, only
first sample) to MHCi and obtained a list of peptides positions in the cross-sectional alignment were used that
putatively presented by the HLA alleles (A/B/C) of the had less than 5% gaps relative to HxB2. This effectively
respective host ranked by prediction score. maskedregionsofthegenomethatfrequentlyexperience
insertions of deletions.
WeconsideredthepartsoftheHIV-1genomethatpu-
tativelyistargetedinanyoftheninepatients,andasked To investigate divergence and reversion, intrapatient
whether the density of nonsynonymous substitutions is evolution was studied separately at sites where the ap-
higher in the part that is predicted to be presented in a proximate founder sequence agreed/disagreed with the
focal patient compared to the part that is not presented. respective subtype or group M consensus. Divergence
We excluded the variable loops of gp120 and the exter- was assessed on a per site basis.
I. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS Mothé,J.Sidney,A.Sette,K.Kunstman,etal.,2004,Nat
Med 10(3), 275.
This work was supported by the European research Frost, S. D., M. Nijhuis, R. Schuurman, C. A. Boucher, and
council through grant Stg. 260686. We would like to A. J. Brown, 2000, J. Virol. 74(14), 6262.
Gall, A., B. Ferns, C. Morris, S. Watson, M. Cotten,
thank Bianca Regenbogen and Diep Thi Ngoc Tran for
M. Robinson, N. Berry, D. Pillay, and P. Kellam, 2012,
helpwiththedesignofthewebpageandThomasLeitner
J Clin Microbiol 50(12), 3838.
for helpful feedback and discussion. We would also like
Hedskog, C., M. Mild, J. Jernberg, E. Sherwood, G. Bratt,
to express our gratitude to the study participants.
T. Leitner, J. Lundeberg, B. Andersson, and J. Albert,
2010, PloS one 5(7), e11345.
Henn, M. R., C. L. Boutwell, P. Charlebois, N. J. Lennon,
K. A. Power, A. R. Macalalad, A. M. Berlin, C. M. Mal-
References boeuf, E. M. Ryan, S. Gnerre, M. C. Zody, R. L. Erlich,
et al., 2012, PLoS Pathog 8(3), e1002529.
Allen, T. M., M. Altfeld, S. C. Geer, E. T. Kalife, C. Moore, Herbeck, J. T., D. C. Nickle, G. H. Learn, G. S. Gottlieb,
K.M.O’Sullivan,I.DeSouza,M.E.Feeney,R.L.Eldridge, M. E. Curlin, L. Heath, and J. I. Mullins, 2006, J. Virol.
E. L. Maier, D. E. Kaufmann, M. P. Lahaie, et al., 2005, 80(4), 1637.
J. Virol. 79(21), 13239. Hoof, I., B. Peters, J. Sidney, L. E. Pedersen, A. Sette,
Batorsky, R., M. F. Kearney, S. E. Palmer, F. Maldarelli, O. Lund, S. Buus, and M. Nielsen, 2008, Immunogenet-
I. M. Rouzine, and J. M. Coffin, 2011, Proceedings of the ics 61(1), 1.
NationalAcademyofSciencesoftheUnitedStatesofAmer- Hunter, J. D., 2007, Computing In Science & Engineering
ica 108(14), 5661. 9(3), 90.
Bloom, J. D., 2014, Mol Biol Evol 31(8), 1956. Immonen, T. T., and T. Leitner, 2014, Retrovirology 11(1),
Brodin, J., M. Krishnamoorthy, G. Athreya, W. Fischer, 81, ISSN 1742-4690.
P. Hraber, C. Gleasner, L. Green, B. Korber, and T. Leit- Jabara, C. B., C. D. Jones, J. Roach, J. A. Anderson, and
ner, 2013, BMC Bioinformatics 14(1), 255. R. Swanstrom, 2011, PNAS 108(50), 20166.
Brown,A.J.,1997,Proc.Natl.Acad.Sci.U.S.A.94(5),1862. Kawashima, Y., K. Pfafferott, J. Frater, P. Matthews,
Carlson,J.M.,M.Schaefer,D.C.Monaco,R.Batorsky,D.T. R.Payne,M.Addo,H.Gatanaga,M.Fujiwara,A.Hachiya,
Claiborne, J. Prince, M. J. Deymier, Z. S. Ende, N. R. H. Koizumi, N. Kuse, S. Oka, et al., 2009, Nature
Klatt,C.E.DeZiel,T.-H.Lin,J.Peng,etal.,2014,Science 458(7238), 641.
345(6193), 1254031. Kearney, M., F. Maldarelli, W. Shao, J. B. Margolick, E. S.
Cock, P. J. A., T. Antao, J. T. Chang, B. A. Chapman, Daar, J. W. Mellors, V. Rao, J. M. Coffin, and S. Palmer,
C. J. Cox, A. Dalke, I. Friedberg, T. Hamelryck, F. Kauff, 2009, J Virol 83(6), 2715.
B.Wilczynski, andM.J.L.d.Hoon, 2009, Bioinformatics Keele, B. F., E. E. Giorgi, J. F. Salazar-Gonzalez, J. M.
25(11), 1422. Decker, K. T. Pham, M. G. Salazar, C. Sun, T. Grayson,
Cohen, M. S., G. M. Shaw, A. J. McMichael, and B. F. S. Wang, H. Li, X. Wei, C. Jiang, et al., 2008, PNAS
Haynes, 2011, New England Journal of Medicine 364(20), 105(21), 7552.
1943. Kouyos,R.D.,C.L.Althaus,andS.Bonhoeffer,2006,Trends
Di Giallonardo, F., O. Zagordi, Y. Duport, C. Leemann, in Microbiology 14(12), 507, ISSN 0966-842X.
B.Joos,M.Künzli-Gontarczyk,R.Bruggmann,N.Beeren- Lemey,P.,A.Rambaut,andO.Pybus,2005,AIDSRev8(3),
winkel,H.F.Günthard,andK.J.Metzner,2013,PloSOne 125.
8(9), e74249. Leslie, A. J., K. J. Pfafferott, P. Chetty, R. Draenert, M. M.
Döring,A.,D.Weese,T.Rausch,andK.Reinert,2008,BMC Addo, M. Feeney, Y. Tang, E. C. Holmes, T. Allen, J. G.
Bioinformatics 9(1), 11. Prado, M. Altfeld, C. Brander, et al., 2004, Nat. Med.
Elena, S. F., and R. E. Lenski, 2003, Nat Rev Genet 4(6), 10(3), 282.
457, ISSN 1471-0056. Li,B.,A.D.Gladden,M.Altfeld,J.M.Kaldor,D.A.Cooper,
Ferguson, A., J. Mann, S. Omarjee, T. Ndung’u, B. Walker, A.D.Kelleher,andT.M.Allen,2007,J.Virol.81(1),193.
and A. Chakraborty, 2013, Immunity 38(3), 606. Li, G., S. Piampongsant, N. R. Faria, A. Voet, A.-C.
Fiebig, E. W., D. J. Wright, B. D. Rawal, P. E. Garrett, Pineda-Peña,R.Khouri,P.Lemey,A.-M.Vandamme,and
R. T. Schumacher, L. Peddada, C. Heldebrant, R. Smith, K. Theys, 2015, Retrovirology 12(1), 18.
A. Conrad, S. H. Kleinman, and M. P. Busch, 2003, AIDS Li, H., B. Handsaker, A. Wysoker, T. Fennell, J. Ruan,
17(13), 1871. N. Homer, G. Marth, G. Abecasis, R. Durbin, and . G.
Fischer,W.,V.V.Ganusov,E.E.Giorgi,P.T.Hraber,B.F. P. D. P. Subgroup, 2009, Bioinformatics 25(16), 2078.
Keele, T. Leitner, C. S. Han, C. D. Gleasner, L. Green, Liu, Y., J. P. McNevin, S. Holte, M. J. McElrath, and J. I.
C.-C. Lo, A. Nag, T. C. Wallstrom, et al., 2010, PloS one Mullins, 2011, PLoS ONE 6(1), e15639.
5(8), e12303. Lunter, G., and M. Goodson, 2011, Genome Res. 21(6), 936.
Fisher, D. S., 2013, JSTAT 2013(01), P01011, ISSN 1742- Lythgoe,K.A.,andC.Fraser,2012,ProcBiolSci279(1741),
5468. 3367.
Foley, B., T. Leitner, C. Apetrei, B. Hahn, I. Mizrachi, Maldarelli,F.,M.Kearney,S.Palmer,R.Stephens,J.Mican,
J.Mullins,A.Rambaut,S.Wolinsky,andB.Korber,2013, M. A. Polis, R. T. Davey, J. Kovacs, W. Shao, D. Rock-
TheoreticalBiologyandBiophysicsGroup,LosAlamosNa- Kress,J.A.Metcalf,C.Rehm,etal.,2013,J.Virol.87(18),
tional Laboratory, Los Alamos, NM, LAUR , 13. 10313.
Friedrich,T.C.,E.J.Dodds,L.J.Yant,L.Vojnov,R.Rud- Maynard Smith, J., and J. Haigh, 1974, Genetics Research
ersdorf, C. Cullen, D. T. Evans, R. C. Desrosiers, B. R. 23(01), 23.
McKinney, W., 2011. Roberts,H.E.,J.Hurst,N.Robinson,H.Brown,P.Flanagan,
Mild,M.,C.Hedskog,J.Jernberg,andJ.Albert,2011,PLoS L. Vass, S. Fidler, J. Weber, A. Babiker, R. E. Phillips,
ONE 6(7), e22741. A. R. McLean, J. Frater, et al., 2015, PLoS Genet 11(2),
Miralles, R., P. J. Gerrish, A. Moya, and S. F. Elena, 1999, e1004914.
Science 285(5434), 1745, ISSN 0036-8075, 1095-9203. Rouzine,I.M.,andJ.M.Coffin,1999,ProcNatlAcadSciU
Mostowy, R., R. D. Kouyos, D. Fouchet, and S. Bonhoeffer, S A 96(19), 10758.
2011, PLoS ONE 6(2), e16052. Rouzine, I. M., and J. M. Coffin, 2005, Genetics 170(1), 7,
Moutaftsi, M., B. Peters, V. Pasquetto, D. C. Tscharke, ISSN 0016-6731, 1943-2631.
J. Sidney, H.-H. Bui, H. Grey, and A. Sette, 2006, Nature Sagar,M.,O.Laeyendecker,S.Lee,J.Gamiel,M.J.Wawer,
Biotechnology 24(7), 817. R. H. Gray, D. Serwadda, N. K. Sewankambo, J. C. Shep-
Neher, R., and T. Leitner, 2010, PLoS Comput Biol 6(1), herd,J.Toma,W.Huang,andT.C.Quinn,2009,JInfect
e1000660. Dis. 199(4), 580.
Neher, R. A., 2013, Annual Review of Ecology, Evolution, Salazar-Gonzalez, J. F., M. G. Salazar, B. F. Keele, G. H.
and Systematics 44(1), 195. Learn, E. E. Giorgi, H. Li, J. M. Decker, S. Wang,
Neher, R. A., T. A. Kessinger, and B. I. Shraiman, 2013, J. Baalwa, M. H. Kraus, N. F. Parrish, K. S. Shaw, et al.,
PNAS 110(39), 15836. 2009, J Exp Med 206(6), 1273.
Nielsen, M., C. Lundegaard, P. Worning, S. L. Lauemøller, Shankarappa,R.,J.Margolick,S.Gange,A.Rodrigo,D.Up-
K.Lamberth,S.Buus,S.Brunak,andO.Lund,2003,Pro- church, H. Farzadegan, P. Gupta, C. Rinaldo, G. Learn,
tein Science 12(5), 1007. X. He, et al., 1999, Journal of Virology 73(12), 10489.
Nijhuis, M., C. A. B. Boucher, P. Schipper, T. Leitner, Sharp, P. M., and B. H. Hahn, 2011, Cold Spring Harb Per-
R. Schuurman, and J. Albert, 1998, PNAS 95(24), 14441. spect Med 1(1), a006841, ISSN , 2157-1422.
Palmer, D., J. Frater, R. Phillips, A. R. McLean, and Skar, H., J. Albert, and T. Leitner, 2013, PLoS ONE 8(4),
G. McVean, 2013, Proceedings of the Royal Society of e60906.
London B: Biological Sciences 280(1762), 20130696, ISSN Tsibris,A.M.N.,B.Korber,R.Arnaout,C.Russ,C.-C.Lo,
0962-8452, 1471-2954. T.Leitner,B.Gaschen,J.Theiler,R.Paredes,Z.Su,M.D.
Paredes, R., M. Sagar, V. C. Marconi, R. Hoh, J. N. Martin, Hughes, R. M. Gulick, et al., 2009, PloS one 4(5), e5683.
N. T. Parkin, C. J. Petropoulos, S. G. Deeks, and D. R. Walker, B., and A. McMichael, 2012, Cold Spring Harb Per-
Kuritzkes, 2009, J. Virol. 83(4), 2038, ISSN 0022-538X, spect Med 2(11).
1098-5514. van der Walt, S., S. Colbert, and G. Varoquaux, 2011, Com-
Pennings,P.S.,S.Kryazhimskiy,andJ.Wakeley,2014,PLoS puting in Science Engineering 13(2), 22.
Genet 10(1), e1004000. Worobey,M.,P.Telfer,S.Souquière,M.Hunter,C.A.Cole-
Peters,B.,andA.Sette,2005,BMCBioinformatics6(1),132, man, M. J. Metzger, P. Reed, M. Makuwa, G. Hearn,
ISSN 1471-2105. S. Honarvar, P. Roques, C. Apetrei, et al., 2010, Science
Price, M. N., P. S. Dehal, and A. P. Arkin, 2009, Mol Biol 329(5998), 1487.
Evol 26(7), 1641. Zanini, F., and R. A. Neher, 2013, J. Virol. 87(21), 11843.
Richman,D.D.,T.Wrin,S.J.Little,andC.J.Petropoulos,
2003, PNAS 100(7), 4144.