Geoarchaeology and Archaeomineralogy (Eds. R. I. Kostov, B. Gaydarska, M. Gurova). 2008.
Proceedings of the International Conference, 29-30 October 2008 Sofia, Publishing House “St. Ivan Rilski”, Sofia, 320-324.
POTENTIAL AND LIMITATIONS OF THE ARCHAEO-GEOPHYSICAL TECHNIQUES
Yavor Shopov, Diana Stoykova, Antoniya Petrova, Valentin Vasilev, Ludmil Tsankov
Archaeological Geophysics Lab., Dept. of Physics, Sofia University, James Baurchier 5, 1164 Sofia; YYShopov@phys.uni-sofia.bg
ABSTRACT. This work demonstrates the potential and the limitations of archaeo-geophysical techniques available at the Archaeological
Geophysics Laboratory of the Department of Physics at the University of Sofia with various case studies in natural and artificial environment.
Special attention is focused on GPR which is the most powerful archaeogeophysical technique This laboratory is the only one in Bulgaria, which
develops new geophysical techniques and equipment for survey of archaeological sites and their dating.
Introduction
The Archaeological Geophysics Lab of the Department of
Physics at Sofia University is the only one in Bulgaria which
develops new geophysical methods and equipment for study of
archaeological sites and their dating (Shopov et al., 1993;
Dermendjiev et al., 1996). This lab has equipment and
specialists that use a broad range of archaeogeophysical
methods. Here, the possibilities of these techniques to solve
various archaeological tasks are demonstrated.
Archaeogeophysical methods
This lab uses the following archaeogeophysical methods for
exploration and non-destructive investigation of archaeological
sites:
I. Radar Methods
Ground penetrating radar (GPR). This method was
developed by NASA to study the lunar ground. The Fig. 1. Amplitude Slice Map 100-150 cm under the surface demonstrating
foundations of a building and a possible Roman water line (above) by
introduction of this space technology to archaeology makes
(Conyers et al., 2004)
GPR the most powerful archaeogeophysical technique
(Conyers, 2004), but the interpretation of GPR data is very
complicated and requires very complex data computing. It is
the most complicated and complex archaeogeophysical
technique. GPR allows the registration of such fine
archaeological objects that are hard to see by eye and can be
missed during archaeological excavations (Conyers, 2004).
Advantages: а. GPR is the only archaeogeophysical method
which allows preparation of 2D slices (maps) of underground
objects at various depths under the surface without their
excavation (Conyers et al., 2004) (Fig. 1);
b. It is the only archaeogeophysical method which allows the
preparation of 3D reconstructions of the precise shapes and
depths of underground objects (Conyers et al., 2004) (Fig. 2);
c. It allows precise determination of depths of the
underground objects under the surface;
d. It allows the visualization of underground objects as radar
Fig. 2. Three-dimensional rendered surface of the foundations of the
images in real time during the measurements;
building on Fig. 1 constructed from Amplitude Slice Maps like this on
e. It allows simultaneous geophysical exploration and Fig.1 from various depths under the surface (Conyers et al., 2004); even
archaeological excavation of the registered anomalies. separate stones are visible
f. It has the highest resolution from all geophysical
techniques;
g. It can be used for scanning of vertical walls and
localization of unhomogeneities in it;
h. Registered signal can undergo further computing for
extraction of invisible details from the raw scan and graphic
display of the results;
i. It allows fast scanning of a large area. It is effective for
large scale exploration with high horizontal resolution;
j. It allows connecting of different archaeological excavations
by GPR exploration of the space between them;
k. GPR exploration can be done through ice, asphalt,
concrete etc. (Archaeological Geophysics Lab website, 2007);
l. On rough terrains step-by-step measurements can be
made which allow deeper penetration of the radar signal.
Disadvantages: а. The interpretation of the signal is
extremely complicated (Conyers, 2004) and requires years of
experience of GPR studies of archaeological sites;
b. Very high cost of the equipments;
c. It can not be used in conductive environment (like Sea
water) or salty soils;
d. Limited penetration depth which depends on the soil
humidity. Usually it varies from 1 meter in wet soil to 17 m in
buildings (Archaeological Geophysics…, 2007);
e. Archaeological applications of GPR require an expert of
Fig. 3. Amplitude Slice Map of the reflection of the radar radiation from
very unusual training in specific fields of geophysics, geology the concrete bars on the ceiling of the 4-rd floor measured on 35-62 cm
and statistical physics. Experience in other GPR applications depth through the concrete foundation of the 5th floor (Y. Shopov & D.
can not be applied on archaeological sites and such experts Stoykova); dimensions of X and Y axis are in meters (above); photo of
the same concrete bars on the ceilin g of the 4-rd floor of building “B” of
can not be easily trained in archaeological applications of
Dept. of Physics of Sofia University scanned by GPR (down)
GPR.
GPR applications in archaeology (Archaeological
Geophysics…, 2007) is non-destructive localization and
mapping of cultural layers in subsequently buried
archaeological features: tombs and burials; tunnels,
catacombs, wattle-and daub huts and underground channels;
building walls; fire places; metal and ceramic artefacts and
coatings; cavities and defects in buildings; caves, bunkers,
caverns and karst futures; underground reservoirs and buried
pipes.
Non-destructive stratification of: sediments, river and lake
deposits; soil layers including ancient arable lands; water table;
faults and land slides.
Non-destructive study and monitoring of archaeological sites,
cultural heritage and underground communications.
Experimental part
Calibration Experiments
Large numbers of calibration experiments were made inside
the building of Department of Physics of Sofia University (Fig.
3) and adjacent areas with known underground
communications (pipes, canals, tunnels, etc.) before the start
of the field GPR measurements. They demonstrated that this
Fig. 4. Amplitude Slice Map of the reflection of the radar radiation
equipment works perfectly on open ground and inside buildings
from the two concrete bars supporting the ceiling of the basement
and visualize all known features of the studied terrains (Fig. 3, measured on 17.11-17.38 m depth from the 5th floor through five
4). It can work up to 17 meters deep in dry environment (Fig. concrete foundations with total thickness of 3.25 m (Shopov &
4). This depth is 70% deeper than the claims of the producer of Stoykova) (above); photo of the same concrete bars on the ceiling of
the basement (-1st floor) of building “B” of Dept. of Physics of Sofia
this GPR unit and antenna.
University scanned by GPR (down)
GPR measurements of Bulgarian archaeological sites The obtained slices have resolution of 0.1 m in horizontal,
First GPR measurements on Bulgarian archaeological site but 0.5 m in vertical direction. The scanned tomb camera is
(Fig. 5) were made in 2007 in the tomb “Golyamata Kosmatka” round, so the obtained slices are segments of a circle (Fig. 6).
(Shopov, in press). 60 scans of the walls and the floor of the The 2D maps look as prints of cylindrical seals (Fig. 5). They
tomb were measured with resolution varying from 1.3 to 1.7 demonstrate that a second unexcavated camera is located
cm. Four groups, each of 5 parallel scans, were measured behind the west wall of the tomb. It is twice as big as the
over the walls of the tomb on height from 0 to 250 cm. They camera in the excavated tomb.
were summed in a 3D data base. Then it was sliced to 15
slices (Fig. 6) of 20 nanoseconds (corresponding to a Scans of the walls of the tomb in the lowest scanning
thickness of 75 cm if the radar beam passes through soil and position suggest that the radar radiation penetrates trough
up to 3 m – of it passes through air). homogeneous material (Fig. 7a) at least to 16 m in all
directions. The material of the walls is granite. It means that
Fig. 6. Scheme of the tomb, distribution of the radar radiation during its
scanning and positions of the 15 slices of 20 nanoseconds each
(corresponding to a thickness of 75 cm if the radar beam passes through
soil but up to 3 m through air). It was unusually complicated because all
important scans are vertical due to the great depth of the tomb, which
makes it impossible to measure from the surface of the mound by GPR
Fig. 5. Vertical Amplitude Slice maps of the intensity of the radar
radiation reflected by objects at the “Golyamata Kosmatka” tomb (Fig. 6)
measured through the wall of its round camera; a vertical slice 100-150
cm behind the wall of the camera (above) – external wall of another Fig. 7. A scan of the walls of the vestibule of the tomb 0-50 сm above the
unknown round building is intersected in the middle of the scans; a floor suggesting that the radar radiation penetrates through
vertical slice 150-225 cm behind the wall of the camera (middle) – in the homogeneous material at least 16 meters in all directions (above); a scan
beginning and the end of the scans the external walls of the other round of the walls of the vestibule of the tomb 200- 250 сm above the floor
building are intersected; (Down) a vertical slice 450-525 cm behind the (below) – it demonstrates that the radar radiation penetrates through the
wall of the camera (below) – in the beginning and the end of the scans granite wall of the tomb in the homogeneous soil fill of the mound
external walls of the other round building are intersected, three vertical outside the tomb wall
structures between them can be internal columns (color codes of the
intensity of the reflected radar radiation are given to the right)
the whole tomb is embedded at least 50 cm deep in a granite asphalt. GPR became the main technique for localizing and
square and at least 35 m in diameter. This does not mean that mapping of non-conductive, non-metal and non-magnetic
the square is circled. It can be extended in all directions but the objects. It can even be used for exploration of under-water
radar radiation can not reach its edges. The soil fill of the objects in fresh water basins (Archaeological Geophysics…,
mound is detected through the granite wall of the tomb (Fig. 2007).Therefore, in the last years it is the main focus of work of
7b) everywhere over 50 cm above the floor. Archaeological Geophysics Lab at Sofia University.
GPR measurements of prehistoric archaeological sites II. Electrical resistivity methods
Prehistoric sites are the most difficult archaeological objects
Electrical profiling. It measures profiles of the electric
for archaeogeophysical survey due to lack of metal objects.
resistivity (Fig. 9). It allowed the deepest geophysical
Most of the artifacts have the same chemical composition and
exploration of a Bulgarian archaeological site at 19 m below
physical properties as the surrounding ground. Especially the
the surface (Shopov, 2007) but such measurements can be
stone artifacts have the same properties as the stones around.
done even to 40 m depth. The methods is most appropriate for
So GPR is the most appropriate archaeogeophysical technique
searching of tombs, caves, tunnels or bunkers.
for survey of Neolithic settlements (Fig. 8) and is the only one
usable for survey of Paleolithic sites.
Vertical electrical probing. The method detects the same
objects as electrical profiling – serving for determination of the
depth of the detected anomalies.
Electrical tomography (continuous electrical probing). Allows
the visualization of anomalies of electric resistivity and of the
objects that create it.
Fig. 8. Amplitude Slice Map, 252-261.5 cm under the surface of an Although their great depth of operation these methods are
archaeological site in South Bulgaria demonstrating foundations of a extremely slow, labour-intensive and expensive, and have
possible stone wall (above) of a potential Neolithic building measured by
many limitations and interferences. So now the Archaeological
Y. Shopov, A. Petrova, D. Stoykova and V. Vasilev; dimensions of X and
Y axis are in meters Geophysics Lab has abandoned these methods except the
Vertical Electrical Probing which sometimes can help GPR to
GPR is the most suitable geophysical technique to solve determine the depth of the detected anomalies.
many of the tasks of archaeological exploration. Before its
development it was considered impossible to locate
underground objects like plastics, terracotta, concrete and
Fig. 9. Map of the electric resistivity of the Omurtag tomb; vertical axis is in units of Omh/m (Shopov, 2007)
III. Induction methods. Application as military Acknowledgements. We express special thanks to V. Mutafov, A.
Koichev and M. Purvin for their help in the terrain measurements, to
technologies for location of mines.
Assoc. Prof. Dr. D. Gergova, Assoc. Prof. Dr. G. Kitov and Assoc.
Prof. Dr. K. Leshtakov for the helpful data, discussions and provision
Pulse induction. Allows localization of large metal objects at
of technical support at their excavation sites. We thank to Hydroloc
depth up to 6 meters. Its equipment emits powerful
Ltd. for providing their equipment for field research. We thank Prof. G.
electromagnetic pulses and measures the inducted current of Tenchov for the discussions.
the underground objects between the pulses (Aittoniemi et al.,
1986). It works through walls and stones. It allows very fast
scanning and high precession of localization of the objects, but