PPPPrrrreeee----sssseeeerrrrvvvviiiicccceeee TTTTeeeeaaaacccchhhheeeerrrrssss’’’’ PPPPeeeerrrrcccceeeeppppttttiiiioooonnnn ooooffff uuuussssiiiinnnngggg MMMMoooobbbbiiiilllleeee DDDDeeeevvvviiiicccceeeessss iiiinnnn TTTTeeeeaaaacccchhhhiiiinnnngggg
CCCClllliiiimmmmaaaatttteeee CCCChhhhaaaannnnggggeeee iiiinnnn PPPPrrrriiiimmmmaaaarrrryyyy SSSScccchhhhoooooooollllssss
Dr.C.A. Obiefuna
carolobiefuna@yahoo.com
Alvan Ikoku Federal College of Education, Owerri, Imo State
Prof. G.C.Offorma
gchiofforma@gmail.com
University of Nigeria, Nsukka, Enugu State.
The realities of climate change are gradually dawning on everyone including children.
The need for a disaster reduction education requires the use of mobile technologies to identify
some of the impact of climate change within an environment and create awareness on the
dangers associated with climate change. Since the pre-service teachers will teach the primary
school pupils, it is aptthat the use of mobile technologies should constitute part of their
preparation while in training. This paper examined pre-service teachers’ perception of using
mobile technologies in teaching climate change in the primary school. One hundred and fifty
(150) pre-service teachers in two Colleges of Education in the erosion disaster zones of
Anambra and Imo States in the south eastern state of Nigeria were used for the study. Three
research questions guided the study. The study utilized a survey approach to collect and
analyze the data. The results from the study show that the pre-service teachers were confident
that the use of mobile devices will createsignificant climate change awareness.However, the
pre-service teachers saw the need for using mobile devices fin their preparation.Suggestions
were made towards ensuring the integration of mobile technology literacy in the pre-service
teacher education curriculum.
Introduction
Climate change is becoming a topical issue worldwide. The aggressive and
catastrophic nature in which the ecosystem is depleted creates some doubt,if
enough energy and measures are in place to address the climate change
menace.Some of the menace Euro News in Avwiri (2013) include severe drought,
extreme hot/ cold weather conditions, flooding that have led to the destruction of
lives and properties. In Nigeria for instance, flooding isexperienced with greater
velocity. Extraordinarycalamities occur againsteach previous year. Thus, land,
properties and human lives are lost annually to erosion menace. Offorma, (2013)
for instance observed that the 2012 flooding in Nigeria led to the stagnation of
economic and social activities. While, Odjugo (2010) noted that the evolving
climate change coupled with increasing temperature has plunged some localities
into experiencing extreme weather conditions. Egboka, Igbokwe in (Obiefuna,
2013) cited 49 communities in the South East Nigeria that were traumatized with
about 2.300 gully erosions. The gullies are still active and have defied control
measures from the Federal government, states and local communities.(Ezim.O,
2011).Discussing the impact of gully erosion, (Obiefuna, 2013)observed that
children are more vulnerable to the climate change aftermath. In attestation to the
above observation, UNICEF, (2012) for instance notes that the number of children
affected by disasters range from 66.5 million per year in the late 1990s, to as many
as 175 million.These observations are not only worrisome but also challengethe
environmental experts on ways to ameliorate the situation. One strategy, the
awareness education among school children has remained deficient. The school
children are not considered as participants to the challenges of the environmental
problems despite the advocacy on the need to develop strategic plans which
emphasize the importance of recognizing children as key stakeholders in the policy
making process and promoting environmental education. The nine year basic
education curriculum in Nigeria for instance includedenvironmental education as
one of the emerging issues that will lead to the attainment of Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs) and National Economic Empowerment and
Development Strategies. (NEEDS) The environmental education which will help
toimprove the children’s knowledge and commitment towards their environment
supportsUNICEF’s advocacy on educating a child on disaster risk empowermentof
the child to use such knowledge.The UN convention on the rights of children in
strong terms opine that children have right to participate in decisions that affects
them. The climate change is one of such problems and requires the active
participation of children. This paper examined the pre-service teachers’ perception
on the use of mobile devices in teaching climate change in the primary school.
Climate change literacy advocacy
The National policy on environment according to AGENCY (1998) made a provision on
strategies that lead Nigeria into an era of social justice, self-reliance and sustainable
development in the 21st Century. Some of the strategies include:
• review of curricula at all levels of the educational system and promote the formal
study of environmental concepts and sciences;
• Boosting environmental awareness and education through the involvement of
indigenous social structures, voluntary associations and occupational organizations.
The review of the curriculum from the revised edition of the UBE curriculum
according(Danmole, 2011), in a similar way incorporated emergent curricular issues for
which environmental education is one.
The climate change can be taught under environmental education. This willkeep the
children informedabout their environment and make them active participants. The inclusion
of environmental education will inculcate climate literacy in the children and encourage them
in climate change intervention programme. Climate literacy according to Young involves
one’s ability to participate in a discourse about climate change and show full understanding
of such terminologies as global warming, greenhouse gas emission and energy consumption.
Climate change discourse and active participation will involveusing ICT to gain and
disseminate information.PANT and HEEKS (nd).,Mobile devices such as the mobile phones
can be used to gain knowledge and disseminate information on climate change.Climate
change literacy equally involves the application of experiences using different school
subjects. Young for instance was of the view that teaching climate change in a foreign
language such as English language prevents students from comprehending that climate
change is a local issue. Young’s observation is right because in Nigerian school system
learners read topics on erosion, HIV Aids for examination purposes rather than for lifelong
education and problem solving. The non-attachment of value to emergent issues in the
curriculum is because value, a standard that guides and determines action, attitudes towards
objects and situations have not been properly inculcated in the learner. Yogesh (2008).
Children need to learn about the impact of climate change and the posttraumatic stress that
accompany it by exchanging ideas with affected children. This willmake the children have a
feel of what a disaster area looks like and be in a position to appreciate the UN convention on
their right to participate in decisions affecting them. Children’s literacy on climate change
will largely makethem attach value to emergency situations, especially when they learn how
to use technological tools in identifying, monitoring and disseminating information on
climate change. The use of mobile technologies is discussed in the next section
Mobile Devices and Climate change
The idea of boosting environmental awareness among children using mobile technologies
is completely new in the average Nigerian classroom. The 21st century skills however require
knowledge of technology.(Kukulska-Hulme (2006); Kukulska-Hulme, 2007) concept of
mobile technologies include mobile devices such as cell phones,Personal media players,
Personal Digital Assistants (PDAs), smart phones and wireless laptops.Winters, (2007)
viewsthe following as the characteristics of mobile devices
• Enables knowledge building by learners in different context
• Enabling learners to construct understanding
• Enables change pattern of learning/work activities
• It is more than time and space
D. Laurillard (2007),As a mediating tool, the mobile technologies during the learning process
address as follows:
• The learner and their personal relationship to the teacher and peer groups
• Relationship of the prior experience to the new topic and
• Where and when the learners are learning.
Winters and Laurrilard’s observations on the mobile technologies call to mind some of
the deficiencies encountered in use of the old technologies in teaching. There is nogainsaying
that some of the old technologies were static and were time and space bound. They were
more of teacher centered than learner centered. Knowledgeconstruction was hindered as a
result of passive nature in which the teaching learning process situates the learner. Some of
the old technologies may not have promoted personalized learning, authentic and
collaborative learning whichKukulska-Hulme (2006) described as new forms of learning.
The use of the mobile devices among children is becoming a common
phenomenon.Oksman and Rautiainen (2003) noted that young people have been particularly
quick to adopt the mobile phones and the internet in their lives, and about 60% of children
aged 9-12 in Finland own mobile devices. In a survey on the use of mobile devices for
environmental education, Sulake in Ferry (2009) found out that teenagers use the mobile
devices for taking pictures, sending text messages, listening to music and playing games.
Bachmair (2007), notes that mobile devices such as PDAs and the mobile phones are used to
access information from the web. Roberts (2008) in a digital shoebox project notes that
children can use mobile phones to capture images from home, share them in an online
environment and use the photographs as a resource materials.Willems (2012).citedinstances
where mobile technologies, mobile apps and social networking were major sources of
information during emergencies and after disaster.A major disadvantage in the use of mobile
devices according to (MTEGA et al.) is the limiting screen size,and memory capacity,
inability to use words, excel and power point functions.In Nigeria, the use of mobile phones
among children is equally not new as most parents allow their children to make use of mobile
devices. However, what may be new is the children’s use of mobile devices in learning.
Nigerian children can embark on projects on climate change using mobile technologies if
they are properly guided. The observations on the use of mobile phones during emergency
lay credibility that mobile phone can be allowed by school authority, rather than the
reprimand against the use of cell phones The pre service teachers are to facilitate and guide
the young learner in mobile phone usage, it may be righty assumed that by their training, the
pre service teachers are competent in the use of mobile technologies in teaching the primary
school children. The next section discusses the pre-service teacher competency in the use of
mobile devices.
Pre- Service Teachers and the Use of Mobile Devices
The pre service teachers or the intern teachers are the future teachers who are expected to
take over the leadership and management of primary school teaching on graduation.
Theobjectives of the teacher education programme in section 8 article 71 of the National
Policy on Education,(2004) include among others, providing motivated and conscientious
teachers, who are creative, committed to the teaching profession and can adapt to the
changing situations. One of such changing situations is competency in the use of Information
and Communication Technology. The Federal government therefore in conformity with her
promise on IT education as contained in the in the National Information Communication
Technology Policy made ICT compulsory in schools, noted thus:
In recognition of the prominent role of ICT in advancing knowledge and
skills necessary for effective functioning in the modern world, there is
need to integrate ICT into the Nigerian education system, and shall
therefore provide basic infrastructures and training in realization of
this goal. (NPE, 2004, p17).
The use of ICT by pre service teachers prepares them for the immediate and future
challenges especially as Prensky, (2006) has described most 21 century children as digital
natives who understand and speak in the language of technology.
ICT according toOlakulehin and Island (2007) facilitates interaction between and among
individuals, provides more flexible and effective ways for lifelong professional development
for today’s teachers. Jung (2005) opines that ICT promotes active and autonomous
learning,Smeets (2005) was of the view that ICT provides computer based tools for subject
areas such as mathematics and technical drawing.The use of mobile technology is an aspect
of ICT and requires the pre-service teachers’ knowledge of how to store,retrieve and
shareinformation. The pre-service teachers, in addition to their knowledge of ICT are exposed
to general studies courses where they study emergent issues such as climate change. This
preparation enables them meet the challenges such as the use ICT for climate change.
This paper examined the pre-service teachers’ perception of using mobile technologies in
teaching climate change.
Statement of the Problem
The pre-service teachers are expected to teach primary school children. In the 21st century
teaching and learning, they are expected to be literate in ICT.The high incidence on climate
change devastation calls for creation of awareness through data collection, storing and
retrieval of data, disseminating and sharing of information using mobile devices. The
objective of this paper is to ascertain the pre-service teachers’ perception of using mobile
technologies to teach climate change in the primary school. Specifically, the objective is
posed using the following research questions;
1. To what extent will the use of mobile devices in teaching climate change in the
primary school create awareness?
2. To what extent will the use of mobile devices help in reducing climate change
devastations?
3. To what extent are the pre-service teachers competent in the use of mobile devices?
Methodology
This is a descriptive study investigatng the pre-service teacher’s perception of the use
of mobile technologies in teaching climate change in the classroom. The area of the study
is the south east geo political zone of Nigeria. The population of the study consists of all
the pre-service teachers in the Colleges of Education in the South East of Nigeria.Two
Colleges of Education were purposively sampled out of the five Colleges of Education.
All the second year students in the selected Colleges of Education were used for the
study,A total of one hundred and fifty students (150) were systematically sampled from
three hundred and seventy five second year students qualified for the teaching practice
exercise. A major instrument for data collection was the questionnaire.A twenty item
semi structured questionnaire on Likert four point scale was administered to the students
through the informed consent forms in keeping with. British Association Research
Association (BERA) on ethical guidelines for educational research. The data were
analyzed using the simple means. A mean score of 2.5 was accepted, while a mean score
of below 2.5 was rejected. The results from the survey are discussed in the next section.
.
Mean Responses
Fig.1 . Responses of Pre-ssseeerrrvvviiiccceee TTTeeeaaaccchhheeerrrsss’’’ ooonnn uuusssiiinnnggg MMMooobbbiiillleee DDDeeevvviiiccceeesss iiinnn TTTeeeaaaccchhhiiinnnggg CCCllliiimmmaaattteee
cchhaannggee ttoo ccrreeaattee AAwwaarreenneessss
The different mean resposes iinn Fig. 1 above show that with 2.5 iinn eeaacchh iitteemm indicate that
using mmoobbiillee ddeevviicceess to teach in the primary school can ccrreeaattee climate change
awareness.
Mobile Mobile Mobile Mobile With mobile The use of
devices can be devices can devices can devices can devices , the mobile
used to alert help children promote promote number of devices can be
children take quick collaboration collaboration children incorporated
during action during and social and social vulnerable to in the school
emergency emergency networking networking climate curriculum
situations change will
Fig 2: Pre-service Teachers’ Response on the use of mobile devices to reduce climate
change devastations
All the means in Fig2 are above 2.5 showing that mobile devices can be used in reducing
climate change devastations.
Pre service Pre service Pre service Pre service Pre service
teachers teachers teachers teachers teachers
own mobile are are taught learn using can use
devices provided using mobile mobile
with mobile mobile devices devices to
devices by devices design
the school lessons
Fig 3. Pre-service Teachers competency in the use of mobile devices in teaching climate
The result in Fig 3 shows majority of the means are below 2.5indicating that pre-servce
teachers lack competence in the use of mobile devices in teaching climate change in
the primary school.
Summary of Findings
The results from the study show that the pre-service teacher were of the opinion that the use
of mobile devicesin teaching climate change in the primary schoolcreatessawareness
and can help to prepare childrenduring emergency situations. thereby helping in the
reduction of climate change devastation, The pre-service teachers,however, lack
competence in the use of the mobile devices in teaching climate change in the primary
school.
Discussion
Research Question1. Sought to find out the extent the use mobile devices in teaching climate
change in the primary school can create awareness. In Fig1, the average means show
that the pre-service teachers were of the view that the use of mobile devices in
teaching climate change can create awareness. A mean score of 3.6 shows that the
use of mobile devices can create a deeper awareness on climate change.Children can
use mobile device such as the smart phones to collect pictures of erosion sites,
flooded environments, gas flaring and upload such pictures on the internet and share
with their peers in other environments. The children can also use text messages to
inform and share ideas of the pictures with their peers. The uploaded pictures can
trigger discussions and children can make contributions and exchange information on
profering solutions..This interaction involves actual participation and hands on
experience rather thanin the traditional classroom setting where children memorise
lessons without actual participation, The discussion on the uploaded pictures supports
Vygotsky’s social learning theories which encourages the 4cs of creativity,
connstruction,communication and collaborative learning,group work and discussion
based learning. The discussion which emmanatesas a result of use of the mobile
devices also supportWinters (2012) description of the charateristics of mobile
technologyof knowledge consrtuction and building. The knowledge construction and
building creats a deeper sense of value attachment unlike when the lesson is imagined
and memorized.The discourse in knowledge building encourages active participation
which according to UN convention on the rights of the children provide themwith
opportunity to contribute to what affects them.
A mean score of 3.36 shows that with the use of mobile devices such as the smart phone or
the camera, the children will be able to store and retrieve information and share such
information with their peers. Information storage and retrivalhas been one of the
challenges learners encounter. After lessons for instance,some learners hardly store
or retrieve information from the long term memory and According to Thorne (2005)
these group of children receive grades that do not match time and effort spent in
studying. The use of mobile devices will improve information storage and retrieval in
learners, especially with the mobility of the devices. thuslearning can take place both
in the classroom and out of class, formally and informally.It supports and
encouragesanywhere and anytime learning,change in classroom activity patterns and
above all ability to personalise learning.(Diana Laurillard, 2007; Winters, 2012).
however, MTEGA et al.’s) observation on the limitations in memeory storage of the
mobile devices is the major handicap, as limitated information will be stored,or new
ones replace the old.
Research Question 2. To what extent will the use of mobile technology help in reducing
climate change devastations?
The finding in Fig 2 shows that with a mean of 3.05, the pre-service teachers’ were of the
opinion that the mobile devices will help to reduce climate change devastation. The
use of the mobile devices for instance will help to alert children during emergencies
and spur them into quick action such as alerting others, providing people outside the
scenerio with information about their safety or help needs. Children’s ability to
upload pictures during crises will help to promote social networking.The pictures will
serve as a first hand information of what happened and can lbe used forsharing ideas.
The use of the mobile devices supports UNICEF’ (2012) Willems (2012)views on
emergency preparations towards climate change crisies or disaster. The pre-service
teachers were of the view that the incorporation of mobile device as a mediating tool
in the school curriculum will be applied in real life situationduring emergency. This is
correct because the application will be based on problem solving advocated for in
teaching and learning. Willem had earlier shown that the use of mobile devices
reduced vunrability of earth quake victims as a result of transfer of applicaion of what
was learnt in class into a real life situation.
Research Question 3. To what extent are the pre-service teachers competent in the use of
mobile devices?
The result in Fig. 3. shows a grand mean of 2.19. This mean is below the expected mean and
indicates incompetence of the pre-service teachers in the use of mobile devices.
However,a mean of 3.86 show that a good number of the pre-service teachers own
mobile devices. The pre-service teachers with means score of less than 2 show that
the school does not provide them withmobile devices. They were not taught how to
use the mobile devices neither do they learn using the mobile devics. The observation
negates the policy satement of the Federal government on ensuring that ICT is
incoporated in the school curriculum. If incorporation is based mainly on verbal
statements without enforcing it by providing the necessary ICT materials and training
of teacher educators who train the pre-service teachers, very little is expected from
the pre-service teachers on graduation. Policy statements are backed up with facilities
and infrastructures. There is need for the government to ensure the implementation of
its policy statements.
The ownership of the mobile deivices by the pre-service teachers is a step forward into the
effective utilization of the mobile devices. Students can be taught how to use mobile
devices in teaching and learning to enable them prepare for the challenges they will
meet in the labour market. Secondly, it will be absurd that primary school children are
digitally informed but their teachers are not. The onus lies on the schools preparing
the future teachers to ensure that the teaching and learning with ICT is made
compulsory. This will enable the pre-service teachers appreciate the need for the use
of ICT especially the mobile phones that isavailable and affordable.
Conclusion
The study investigated pre-service teachers’ perception on the use of mobille devices in
teaching climate change in the primary school. Three research questions were used for
the study. The results from the study show that the pre service teachers were
optimistic that the use of the mobile devices in teaching climate change will to a great
extent create awareness that will enable the children contribute and participate in the
climate change reduction exercise. The use of the mobile phone will also enable the
children take safety action especially when they are alerted during emergency
situations.The pre-service teachers incompetence in the use of the mobile devices in
teaching however is a major predicament. The preservice teachers were not taught
how to use the mobile devices in teaching and learning and will find it difficult to
teach the primary school children with mobile devices. Recommendations were made
towards ensuring that the use of mobile devices in teachingwere incorporated in the
pre-service teachers’ training. The Federal government should also ensure that the
promise made towards incorporationg ICT into the school curriculum isactualized as
Nigeria strives to achieve vison 20:20 through Information and Communication
Technology.