]hp-oa.scisyhp[
1v75570.3051:viXra
Current Climate Change Reports manuscript No.
(will be inserted by the editor)
Precipitation extremes under climate change
Paul A. O’Gorman
Received: date /Accepted: date
Abstract The response of precipitation extremes to extensivestudybecauseofthepotentialimpactsonhu-
climate change is considered using results from theory, mansocietyandecosystems[30].Anearlystudyusinga
modeling, and observations,with a focus on the physi- 4-levelgeneralcirculationmodelfoundthatheavydaily
cal factors that control the response.Observations and precipitation events become more frequent in response
simulations with climate models show that precipita- to elevated atmospheric CO2 concentrations [27]. Nu-
tion extremes intensify in response to a warming cli- merous model studies since then have also found an
mate.However,thesensitivityofprecipitationextremes intensification of precipitation extremes with climate
to warming remains uncertain when convection is im- warming(with importantregionalvariations),andthis
portant, and it may be higher in the tropics than the has been confirmed in the available historical record
extratropics. Several physical contributions govern the overland,aswillbediscussedindetailinlatersections.
responseofprecipitationextremes.Thethermodynamic Understanding of changesinprecipitationextremes
contributionisrobustandwellunderstood,buttheoret- isbetterthanforchangesinotherextremessuchastor-
ical understanding of the microphysicaland dynamical nadoes [44], but large uncertainties and research chal-
contributions is still being developed. Orographic pre- lengesremain.Ifchangesindynamicsandprecipitation
cipitation extremes and snowfall extremes respond dif- efficiencyarenegligible,precipitationextremesincrease
ferently from other precipitation extremes and require withwarmingbecauseofincreasesinthesaturationva-
particular attention. Outstanding research challenges por pressure of water [85,86,4,62]; this will be made
include the influence of mesoscale convective organiza- more precise in section 3. However, dynamical contri-
tion, the dependence on the duration considered, and butionsandchangesinprecipitationefficiencymayalso
the need to better constrain the sensitivity of tropical play an important role. Mesoscale convective organi-
precipitation extremes to warming. zation is important for the dynamics of precipitation
extremes in the tropics (and seasonally in the midlat-
Keywords Extremes · Global warming · Rainfall ·
itudes) but it is not resolved in global models, while
Snowfall · Convection · Orographic Precipitation ·
at the same time there are relatively few observational
Climate models
recordsoftropicalprecipitationextremesforestimating
long-term trends and sensitivities. At higher latitudes,
the effect of climate change on snowfall extremes and
1 Introduction freezing rain will be different from its effect on rainfall
extremes and requires further study. In terms of im-
The response of precipitation extremes (heavy precipi- pacts,the durationofextremeprecipitationeventsand
tationevents)toclimatechangehasbeenthesubjectof the response of orographic precipitation extremes are
both important and are only now receiving substantial
P.A. O’Gorman
researchattention.
Department of Earth, Atmospheric, and Planetary Sciences,
This paper reviews and elaborates on some of the
MassachusettsInstituteofTechnology,77MassachusettsAv-
enue, Cambridge, MA02139 recent research on how climate change affects precipi-
E-mail: pog@mit.edu tationextremes, including observedchangesin the his-
2 Paul A. O’Gorman
ytivitisneS
erutarepmet
Latitude (degrees)
ytivitisneS
)deretlif(
erutarepmet
sificationofprecipitationextremesoverNorthernHemi-
sphere land [53,95]. Assessments have also been made
oftheeffectofanthropogenicforcingontheprobability
of specific extreme precipitation or flooding events us-
ing ensembles of climate-model simulations [64,63,32].
Oneapproachthatreducestheinfluenceofunforced
variability while still distinguishing large-scale varia-
tions is to analyze the sensitivity of precipitation ex-
tremes averaged over all stations or grid boxes in a
latitude band [91,6]. Figure 1a shows an example of
this type of analysis in which annual-maximum daily
precipitationratesoverlandfromthe HadEX2gridded
20 dataset [23] have been regressed over the period 1901
to 2010 against temperature anomalies from NOAA’s
MergedLand-OceanSurfaceTemperatureAnalysis(MLOST)
10 [80].Theprecipitationratesareoverlandonly,butpre-
cipitationextremesdonotnecessarilyscalewiththelo-
callandmeantemperaturebecause ofadvectionofwa-
ter vapor from over the ocean such as in atmospheric
−5 rivers [21,46], and the temperatures used here are over
both landand ocean.For eachgridbox with atleast 30
−40 −20 0 20 40 60
years of data, the annual-maximum daily precipitation
ratesareregressedagainsttheglobal-meansurfacetem-
Fig. 1 Sensitivitiesof observed annual-maximum daily pre-
cipitationoverland(solidlineswithcircles;dottedlinesshow perature anomalies using the Theil-Sen estimator, and
the 90% confidence interval) in 15◦ latitude bands relative the regression coefficient is divided by the mean of the
to (a) global-mean surface temperature or (b) mean surface annual-maximum daily precipitation rate at the grid-
temperatureoverthe15◦ latitudeband.Precipitationisfrom
box to give a sensitivity that is expressedin units of %
HadEX2, sensitivities are calculated for gridboxes with at
least 30 annual values, and the median sensitivity is plot- K
−1.
The median of the sensitivities is then calculated
ted for each 15◦ latitude band. Temperatures are over land for all gridboxes in 15 ◦ latitude bands.1 The resulting
andoceanfromNOAAMLOST,andfor(b)thetemperature sensitivity is positive for most latitude bands, the 90%
timeseries were smoothed with a 9-year running-mean filter.
confidence interval is above zero for all latitude bands
in the Northern Hemisphere, and the global sensitiv-
torical record (section 2), physical theory (section 3), ity(averagingoverlatitude bands withareaweighting)
climate-model projections (section 4), orographic pre- is 8% K
with a 90% confidence interval of 5 to 10
cipitation extremes (section 5), snowfall extremes (sec- % K
−1.
These results, similar to those obtained pre-
tion6),andthedurationofprecipitationextremes(sec- viously [91,6], provide evidence for an intensification
tion 7). The primary focus is on the physical factors of annual-maximum daily precipitation as the global-
that control the intensity of precipitation extremes in mean temperature has risen over the last century, and
differentclimates.Openquestionsarediscussedthrough- ataratethatis roughlyconsistentwithwhatmightbe
out and in section 8. expected from theory. However, the meridional struc-
tureofthesensitivitieswithinthetropicsissensitiveto
the details of the analysis (cf. [91,6]).
Extratropicalprecipitation extremes at a given lat-
2 Observed changes in precipitation extremes
itude occur when the atmosphere is warmer than av-
erage and are more closely tied to mean temperatures
Records of precipitation that are sufficient to detect
somewhatfurtherequatorward[61,62,21].However,they
long term trends in extremes are primarily from rain
gaugesoverland.Overtheavailablerecord,therearere-
1 The circles in Fig. 1 are plotted at the midpoints of
gionswithbothincreasinganddecreasingtrendsinpre-
the latitude bands. There are relatively few gridboxes for
cipitation extremes [28,1], as might be expected given some latitude bands, and higher-latitude bands with little
large internal variability [25], but the gridboxes or sta- data are excluded. Uncertainty is estimated by bootstrap-
pingtheyearsusedateach gridbox(1000 bootstrap samples
tionswithsignificantincreasingtrendsoutnumberthose
aregenerated)andthencalculatinga90%confidenceinterval
withsignificantdecreasingtrends[23,91].Anthropogenic
forthemediansensitivityineachlatitudeband(oraveraged
forcinghasbeenshowntohavecontributedtotheinten- overseveral latitudebands).
Precipitation extremes underclimate change 3
are still expected to respond primarily to changes in ciency ǫ is defined as the ratio of surface precipitation
mean temperatures in the extratropics rather than the to the column-integrated net condensation; it accounts
tropics, and recent warming has been greater in the for condensate and precipitation storage or transport
northern extratropics than the tropics. The sensitivi- fromthe column.Note thatǫisnotaconventionalpre-
ties shown in Fig. 1a are based on global-mean surface cipitationefficiencybecauseitisdefinedintermsofnet
temperature and do not account for the variation in condensation (condensation minus evaporation) rather
warming with latitude. Fig. 1b shows an alternative than condensation.
analysis in which the annual-maximum daily precipi- According to equation (1), changes in the precip-
tation rates at each gridbox are regressed against the itation rate in extreme events under climate change
area-weighted mean temperature anomaly for the 15 have a dynamical contribution from changes in ω, a
latitude band that contains the gridbox. The latitude- thermodynamiccontributionfromchangesinS (this is
band temperature timeseries are filtered using a nine- termed thermodynamic since S only depends on tem-
year running mean prior to performing the regression. peratureandpressure),andamicrophysicalcomponent
This filtering reduces the influence of short-term vari- from changes in the precipitation efficiency ǫ. Relative
ability in regional temperatures which has previously humiditydoesnotexplicitlyappearinequation(1),but
been found to give a different sensitivity of precipita- itcanaffectprecipitationextremesthroughthedynam-
tion extremes than long-term climate change [58]. The ics and by helping to set the duration of precipitation
results in Fig. 1b show a higher sensitivity of precipi- events.ThefractionalincreaseinS withwarmingisin-
tation extremes in the tropics compared to the extrat- fluenced by changes in the moist adiabatic lapse rate
ropics, although the uncertainty in the tropics is large [11,62] and varies strongly depending on temperature
reflecting the sparse data there. The sensitivity for the and therefore altitude in the atmosphere. However, for
tropics (30S to 30N) is 9% K
(90% confidence inter- a moist-adiabatic stratification and convergence con-
val6-14%K ),whilefortheextratropicsitis4%K fined to near the surface, the thermodynamic contri-
(90% confidence interval 2-5% K
−1).
The choice of fil- bution can be shown to scale in a similar way to near
ter for the temperature time series affects the overall surfacespecifichumidities[61,70,56].Thisscalingisof-
magnitudes of the sensitivities but not whether sensi- ten referredto as Clausius-Clapeyronscalingand gives
tivities are higher in the tropics than the extratropics. a sensitivity of 6-7% K −1 for typical surface tempera-
Interestingly, higher sensitivities in the tropics are also tures.Moregenerally,the thermodynamiccontribution
found whenprojections fromglobalclimate models are depends on the weighting of S by the vertical veloc-
constrained by satellite observations [58] as discussed ityprofilein the verticalintegralinequation(1),anda
in section 4.2. rangeofhigherandlowerratesofchangefromthether-
modynamic contribution have been found in different
simulations [61,56,73]. It is sometimes stated that the
dynamical contribution must be positive for a warm-
ing climate because of increases in latent heating, but
Tounderstandtheresponseofprecipitationextremesto
this is not necessarily the case because other factors
warming,ourstartingpointisanapproximationforthe
suchas increasesindry static stability orreductionsin
surfaceprecipitationrateP inanextremeprecipitation
meridional temperature gradients can counteract the
increasesinlatentheating.Instead,thedynamicalcon-
P ≃−ǫ{ω(p)S(T,p)}, (1) tribution is discussed here separately for different dy-
where ǫ is a precipitation efficiency, ω is the vertical namical regimes. For example, increases in convective
velocity in pressure coordinates (negative for upward updraft velocities with warming are discussed in the
motion), S(T,p) = dq s /dp| θe ∗ is the derivative of the next paragraph, and changes in large-scale vertical ve-
saturation specific humidity q with respect to pres- locities in the extratropics are discussed in section 4.1
sure p taken at constant saturation equivalent poten- using the omega equation.
tial temperature θ (i.e., the derivative along a moist The simplest configuration for which the contribu-
adiabat), and {·} is a mass-weighted vertical integral tions to changes in precipitation extremes have been
over the troposphere [61,56]. All quantities in equa- analyzed is radiative-convective equilibrium (RCE) in
tion(1)areevaluatedlocallyintheextremeevent.The a doubly periodic domain [70,56,55,77]. There are no
net condensation rate is approximated by −ωS either large-scaledynamics in RCE, and cloud-system resolv-
throughconsiderationofthe condensationrateinaris- ing models (CRMs) are used to resolve the convective-
ing saturated air parcel [62] or using a dry static en- scaledynamics.Boththe convectiveavailablepotential
ergy budget in the tropics [56]. The precipitation effi- energy(CAPE)andtheupdraftvelocitiesinthemiddle
4 Paul A. O’Gorman
Latitude (degrees)
ytivitisneS
factorsthatcontributetoprecipitationintensity[24,65,
Model median 61,83]. Important limitations in the ability of current
Model max, min
30 models to simulate precipitation extremes have also Constrained
been recognized and are related in part to the use of
20 parameterized convection [93,38,58,89,43].
Global models precipitate too frequently with too
10 lowameanprecipitationintensity[20,82],butthisdoes
notnecessarilymeanthattheyunderestimatetheinten-
sity ofprecipitationextremes.For example,in ananal-
ysis of 30-yearreturn values of daily precipitation over
−60 −30 0 30 60 the conterminous United States, most global climate
models were found to overestimate or roughly agree
Fig. 2 Sensitivityofthe99.9thpercentileofdailyprecipita- withobservationsthatwereconservativelyinterpolated
tion to global-mean surface temperature for climate change tothemodelresolutionforcomparison[17].(Appropri-
under the RCP8.5 scenario in CMIP5 global climate-model
ate interpolation of precipitation is important because
simulations. Shown are the multimodel median (green line
with circles) and the full model range (dotted lines). Also ofmismatchesintimeandspacescalesbetweenmodels
shownaresensitivitiesinferredbyconstrainingthemodelsen- and observations.) One exception was the Community
sitivitiesusingobservationsoftropicalvariability(blackline) Climate ModelSystem 3whichunderestimatedthe 30-
witha90% confidenceintervalobtainedbybootstrappingas
year return values [17], and increased horizontal res-
in[58] (gray shading).
olution [90] or use of superparameterization [49] have
been shown to improve the representation of the in-
and upper troposphere increase with warming in RCE tensity distribution of precipitation in the Community
[70,56]; as the atmosphere warms the thermal stratifi- AtmosphereModelversions2and3.The modelbias of
cationremains closeto neutralto astronglyentraining too-frequent precipitation mentioned above will affect
plume, and this implies increases in CAPE (calculated percentilescalculatedoveronlywetdaysratherthanall
based on a non-entraining parcel) and increases in up- days [9], even if the extreme events are properly simu-
draft velocities for more weakly entraining plumes [76, lated,whichsuggeststhatcalculatingextremesusingall
78].Butthe increasesinupdraftvelocitiesinthe upper days (or all hours) is preferable for comparison of pre-
tropospheredo notstronglyaffectthe precipitationex- cipitation extremes between models and observations.
tremes because the factor of S(p) in equation (1) gives
Projectionsof21stcenturyclimatechangewithglobal
more weight to the vertical velocities in the lower tro-
climate models show a generalincreasein the intensity
posphere in determining the intensity of precipitation
of precipitation extremes except in some regions in the
extremes. For surface temperatures near those of the
subtropics [38,39]. To illustrate basic features of the
present-daytropics,theprecipitationextremesincrease
response,Fig.2showsthe sensitivity ofthe 99.9thper-
atcloseto the thermodynamicrate,andthis iscloseto
centile of daily precipitation to warming as a function
Clausius-Clapeyronscalingwiththesurfacespecifichu-
oflatitudeinsimulationswith15globalclimatemodels
midity,withrelativelysmallcontributionsfromchanges
fromtheCoupledModelIntercomparisonProjectphase
inverticalvelocitiesandprecipitationefficiency[70,56, −1
5 (CMIP5). Sensitivities for climate change (% K )
77]. The same behavioris found when convectionis or-
are calculated as the change in the 99.9th percentile
ganizedin asquallline [55]. However,for temperatures
between the final two decades of the 20th century in
below295K,theprecipitationefficiencycanchangesub-
the historical simulations and the final two decades of
stantiallywithwarmingandthescalingofprecipitation
the 21st century in the warmer RCP8.5 simulations,
extremesthendependsontheaccumulationperiodcon-
normalized by the value in the historical simulations
sidered [77], as discussed in section 7.
and the change in global-mean surface air tempera-
ture.2 Note that the sensitivities from observations in
4 Climate-model projections
2 The model names and the exact time periods used are
given in [58]. The daily precipitation rates are first conser-
Climate models provide global coverage for precipita-
vativelyinterpolated[17]toanequal-areagridwithconstant
tion extremes [84,39] and more detailed coverage on spacinginlongitudeof3degrees.Following[61],theprecipita-
regionalscales[22,36,37,8].Theymaybeappliedtodif- tionextremesinagivenclimatearecalculatedbyaggregating
daily precipitation rates (over both land and ocean and in-
ferent emissions scenarios or individual radiative forc-
cludingdrydays)atagivenlatitudeandthencalculatingthe
ings [38,18,35], and they allow relatively straightfor-
99.9thpercentile.Calculatingthechangeinprecipitationex-
wardinvestigationsintotheroleofdynamicsandother tremesateachgridboxandthentakingthezonalaveragehas
Precipitation extremes underclimate change 5
Fig.1andfromsimulationsinFig.2shouldnotbecom- whereω isthe verticalvelocityinpressurecoordinates,
pared in detail because of the different time periods, σ is the dry static stability parameter, J is the dia-
geographic coverage, and measure of extreme precipi- batic heating rate, κ is the ratio of the gas constant
tation used. We next discuss the simulated response of to the specific heat capacity at constant pressure, p is
extratropicalprecipitation extremes,followedby tropi- pressure, f0 is a reference value of the Coriolis param-
calprecipitationextremesandtheuseofobservedvari- eter, and the right-hand-side (RHS) includes vorticity
ability to better constrain the intermodel spread. andtemperatureadvectiontermsbutnotthestaticsta-
bilityordiabatic heatingrate[34].This equationisthe
simplestequationfortheverticalvelocitythataccounts
fordynamicalbalance,andit is usedhere to gainsome
4.1 Extratropicalprecipitation extremes
insight into the controls on large-scale vertical veloci-
Themultimodel-mediansensitivityisshownbythegreen ties in the extratropics, although it is not expected to
line with circles in Fig. 2, and the multimodel-median be quantitatively accurate. In a strong non-convective
of the sensitivity averaged over the extratropics is 6% event with saturated ascent, J will be dominated by
−1 latent heating and σ + κJ/(pω) is a measure of the
K . A slightly lower extratropical sensitivity of 5%
K −1 is obtained if it is normalized by the change in moiststatic stability. This moist static stability will be
extratropical-meansurfacetemperatureratherthanglobal-small if the stratificationis close to moist adiabatic, as
mean surface temperature. The intermodel spread in was the case,for example, in the extreme precipitation
event in the Colorado Front Range in September 2013
the response (dotted lines in Fig. 2) is small in the ex-
[26]. For a region of upward motion that is sufficiently
tratropics, consistent with the fact that most precipi-
tation extremes there are associated with cyclones and broadinthehorizontalwithsmallmoiststaticstability,
fronts [69,13] that may be expected to be reasonably the omegaequation(2) reducesto f 0 2 ∂ ∂ p 2 2 ω ≃RHS,and
well simulated. However, global models with conven- the effect of climate change on the vertical velocity ω
does notdepend onchangesin static stability or latent
tionalparameterizationsareunabletosimulateprecipi-
tationextremesfrommesoscaleconvectivesystemsover heating.TheverticalvelocitystilldependsonRHS,but
midlatitudes in summer [43], and so the results from changesinthiswouldbeexpectedtoberelativelysmall
these models are not reliable for regions and times of given modest changes in eddy kinetic energy [57] and
eddy length [40].
year in which these systems are important.
The omega equation (2) gives, therefore, some in-
Equation(1)withthe precipitationefficiencyǫheld
sight as to why the vertical velocities associated with
fixedreproducesthe fractionalchangesinprecipitation
large-scale extratropical precipitation extremes might
extremes in CMIP3 simulations [61,83]. The thermo-
notchangegreatlyunderclimatechange.Thetermpro-
dynamic contribution in these simulations is close to
portional to f2 on the left hand side of equation (2)
what would be expected from scaling of precipitation 0
arises from planetary rotation and it makes the large-
extremes with surface specific humidity, and this im-
scale vertical velocity much less sensitive to deviations
plies a lower rate of increase than scaling with column
fromamoistadiabaticstratificationwhencomparedto
watervapor[60].Intheextratropics,thesimulatedrate
small-scale convective updrafts (see sections 3 and 7).
ofincreaseofprecipitationextremesisclosetothether-
We next turn to the tropics where the dynamicalinflu-
modynamic contribution at all latitudes, and there is
ence of planetary rotation is weakerand where convec-
little dynamical contribution from changes in vertical
tion is always a key factor for precipitation extremes.
velocities[24,61].Astrongerdynamicalcontributionre-
sembling a poleward shift has been found in idealized
aquaplanet simulations [62,51].
4.2 Tropical precipitation extremes
Whyistherenogeneralstrengtheningorweakening
of large-scale vertical velocities associated with simu- As compared to the extratropics, the intermodel range
latedextratropicalprecipitationextremesdespitechanges inthesensitivityofprecipitationextremesismuchlarger
in latent heating and dry static stability? As a start- in the tropics (Fig. 2), with close to zero sensitivity
ing point, consider the quasigeostrophic omega equa- in some models and greater than 30%K −1 in others.
tion written as Additional reasons to doubt the response of tropical
κJ ∂2 precipitation extremes in these global climate models
∇ (cid:18) σω+ p (cid:19) +f 0 ∂p2 ω =RHS, (2) include the large differences between tropical precipi-
tation extremes in 20th-century simulations in differ-
ent models [38], the inability of the models to repre-
been found to give similar results [65]. The sensitivities are
averaged over 10◦ latitudebandsfor presentation in Fig. 2. sent mesoscale convective organization [72] or to sim-
6 Paul A. O’Gorman
ulate the interannual variability in tropical precipita- ropics (6 % K
90% confidence interval 6-7% K
−1).
tionextremeswhencomparedtoobservations[2,3],and Interestingly, a higher sensitivity in the tropics com-
thedisproportionateincreasesinprecipitationextremes pared to the extratropics was also found using histor-
compared to other parts of the precipitation distribu- ical rain-gauge data (section 2). For the tropics, there
tionthatisfoundinsomemodels–an“extrememode” still remains considerable uncertainty in both the es-
in the tropical response to climate change that relates timate from rain-gauge data and the observationally
to gridpoint storms [67,66]. constrainedestimate discussedinthis section,andbet-
Observations can be used to better constrain the terconstrainingthe sensitivity oftropicalprecipitation
large uncertainty in the response of tropical precipi- extremes is an important researchchallenge.
tation extremes to warming. The sensitivity of tropi-
cal precipitation extremes for climate change in differ-
ent climate models is correlated with their sensitivity 5 Orographic precipitation extremes
for shorter term variability within a climate (variabil-
Idealized simulations have recently been used to study
ity that is primarily related to El Nin˜o-Southern Os-
theresponseoforographicprecipitationextremestocli-
cillation) [58]. For example, models with a relatively
mate warming [74,73] (see also [41] for a more general
high sensitivity of tropical precipitation extremes for
discussion). A striking result from these studies is that
climate change alsohavea relativelyhigh sensitivity of
there are higher fractional changes in precipitation ex-
tropicalprecipitationextremes for variabilityin histor-
tremesontheclimatologicalleewardslopeofthemoun-
ical simulations, although the sensitivities for climate
tain as compared to the windward slope. Orographic
change and variability are generally different in value.
precipitationextremesmustbetreatedasaspecialcase
Therobustrelationshipbetweenthesensitivitiesacross
forseveralreasons.Thethermodynamiccontributionis
models has been used together with observed variabil-
influencedbythe verticalprofileofthe verticalvelocity
ity to constrain the sensitivity of tropical precipitation
(see equation 1), and the shape of this profile will gen-
extremestoclimatechange[58].TheblacklineinFig.2
erally be different over a sloped lower boundary than
showsa similarobservationally-constrainedestimate of
over a flat lower boundary [74]. Downstream transport
the sensitivity of the 99.9th percentile of daily precip-
of precipitation means that the local precipitation ef-
itation for climate change, but instead of considering
ficiency can vary strongly over the mountain, and the
the sensitivity for climate change aggregated over the
condensation that leads to leeward precipitation may
whole tropics as in [58], the analysis is applied sepa-
◦ occurrelativelyhighintheatmospherewheresensitivi-
rately to the sensitivity for climate change in 10 lati-
tude bands in both the tropics and extratropics.3 This tiestotemperaturechangearegreater[74].Inaddition,
changesinverticalvelocitiesaregovernedby mountain
observationally-constrained estimate is similar to the
wavedynamics and have been found to be different for
multimodel medianinthe extratropicsbut higher than
extremeprecipitationeventsonthewesternandeastern
the multimodel median in the tropics. It peaks near
the equator and is higher for the tropics (11 % K
−1, slopes of an idealized midlatitude mountain [73].
90% confidence interval 7-15 % K
than the extrat-
A weakening of orographic rain shadows related to
changes in precipitation extremes has previously been
3 The observationally-constrained estimate is obtained by noted in simulations of climate warming over North
regressing the sensitivityfor climate change against the sen-
America [22,75]. Further study is needed to assess the
sitivityfor variabilityacross themodels, and then usingthis
regressionrelationshiptogetherwiththeobservedsensitivity role played by the physical factors discussed above in
for variability to estimate the sensitivity for climate change. determiningchangesinorographicprecipitationextremes
The sensitivity for variability (% K−1) is calculated in both in comprehensive simulations and observations.
models and observations based on the 99.9th percentile of
daily precipitation rates aggregated over the tropical oceans
and the mean surface temperature over the tropical oceans
(30S to 30N) as described in detail in [58]. The sensitivities 6 Snowfall extremes
for climate change are calculated in 10◦ latitude bands rela-
tivetothechangeinglobal-mean surfacetemperature,asfor Changes in snowfall extremes have received relatively
theothersensitivitiesshowninFig. 2.Differences inconvec-
little research attention, party because of the difficul-
tiveparameterizations arelessimportantintheextratropics,
ties in producing long-term records of snowfall. Obser-
andthecorrelationcoefficientacrossmodelsbetweenthesen-
sitivities for climate change and variability becomes smaller vational studies of daily snowfall extremes have been
forclimatechangeathigherlatitudes,reachingavalueof0.5 regional in nature and have found large interdecadal
at 50S and 40N as compared to a maximum of 0.86 at 20N.
variability with, for example, no long term trend for
SSM/I data from Remote Sensing Systems [33] are used for
Canada[94]butmorefrequentextremessnowstormsin
theobservedprecipitationratesandNOAAMLOSTdata[80]
for theobservedtemperatures. recent decades in the eastern two-thirds of the United
Precipitation extremes underclimate change 7
States[44].Studiesusingdifferentmetricshavereached
differentconclusionsastowhethertherearemoreheavy
snowfall events in anomalously warm or cold years or
seasons in the United States [15,44]
Physically,snowfallextremes are expected to be af-
fected by climate warming through both increases in
saturationvaporpressuresandchangesinthefrequency
ofoccurrenceoftemperaturesbelowtherain-snowtran-
sitiontemperature.Asimpleasymptotictheoryofsnow-
fall extremes has been developed based on the temper-
ature dependencies of precipitation extremes and the
rain-snow transition [59]. According to the simple the-
ory, snowfall extremes tend to occur near an optimal
temperatureofroughly-2 Cwhensnowfallismeasured
by liquid water equivalent. The optimal temperature
arisesbecause saturationvapor pressuresincreasewith
temperature whereas the fraction of precipitation that
falls as snow reduces sharply at surface temperatures
near freezing. When snowfall is measured by depth of
snow, the optimal temperature is lower (roughly -4 C)
becausethevariationofsnowdensitywithtemperature
must also be taken into account. For an infinitesimal
climatewarming,theintensityofsnowfallextremesde-
creasesforclimatological-meantemperaturesabovethe
optimal temperature and increases for climatological-
mean temperatures below it. Furthermore, fractional
changes in high percentiles of snowfall are smaller the
higher the percentile considered (unlike for rainfall ex-
tremes), such that fractional changes in the intensity
of the most extreme events tend to be relatively small.
There may still be large fractional decreases in snow-
fall extremes with warming in regions with climatolog-
ically mild temperatures, and changesin the frequency
of exceeding a high threshold of snowfall may still be
substantial.
Snowfallextremesinsimulationswithglobalclimate
modelsfromCMIP5behavesimilarlytothesimplethe-
ory for sufficiently extreme statistics [59], although the
climatological temperature below which snowfall ex-
tremes intensify is lower than the simple theory pre-
dicts. The response of snowfall extremes is similar in
the subset of models that most realistically simulate
Arctic sea ice [59], the decline of which has been hy-
pothesized to affect midlatitude weather extremes [19].
Regionalclimate-modelsimulationsexhibitlargefrac-
tionaldecreasesinmaximumwinterdailysnowfallover
much of western Europe, but little change or increases
inotherpartsofEuropethatareclimatologicallycolder
[88]. As in the simple theory and in global climate-
model simulations, there is a strong link in regional
simulations[88]anddownscaledglobalsimulations[52]
betweenthe changesinsnowfallextremesandthe local
climatological temperature in the control climate.
Inst. 1h 3h 6h Daily
ytivitisneS
Inst. 1h 3h 6h Daily
Fig. 3 (a) The 99.99th percentile of precipitation for differ-
entdurations(instantaneous,1h,3h,6h,anddaily)insimula-
tionsofradiative-convectiveequilibriumwithacloud-system
resolving model at selected mean surface-air temperatures
as given in the legend. (b) The sensitivity of the 99.99th
percentile of precipitation to mean surface air temperature
changes for the same temperatures shown in (a). The natu-
ral logarithm of the 99.99th percentile of precipitation as a
functionofmeansurface-airtemperaturefrom10simulations
islinearlyinterpolated toauniformgridintemperature and
sensitivities (% K−1) are calculated as the change for a 3K
warming.
7 Duration of precipitation extremes
The impact of changes in precipitation extremes de-
pends on the duration of precipitation considered (i.e.,
the accumulation period). In a recent climate-model
study, intensity-duration-frequency curves were calcu-
latedforaccumulationperiodsfrom6hoursto10days,
andthe curveswerefoundto shiftupwardsinintensity
on a logarithmic scale in a relatively simple way as the
climate warms[35]. However,it is not clear that global
climate models can be relied on for subdaily extremes
because of the potential importance of convective pro-
cesses. Indeed, for regional simulations of midlatitudes
in summer,changing froma model with convectivepa-
rameterization to a CRM has been found to lead to
a marked improvement in the intensity distribution of
hourly precipitation [8] and to significantly alter the
simulated response of hourly precipitation extremes to
climate change [37].
8 Paul A. O’Gorman
Long-termobservationalrecordsofsubdaily precip- for durations from instantaneous to daily.4 Warming
itation are relatively sparse, which makes it difficult to shiftsthepercentilecurvesupwardsinintensityinFig.3a,
giveageneralassessmentoftrendsinsubdailyextremes but the rate at which they shift upwards varies with
[92].Manyrecentobservationalstudieshaveinsteadfo- duration and temperature. As shown in Fig. 3b, the
cussed on the relationship between short-duration pre- precipitation extremes follow Clausius-Clapeyron scal-
cipitation rates and the local surface temperature in ingatroughly6-7%K
fortemperaturesabove295K.
variability within the current climate. In the first of However, for temperatures below 295K the sensitivity
thesestudies,ahighresolutionrecordfromtheNether- varies widely depending on temperature and accumu-
lands was found to give a sensitivity of 7%K
for lation period in a manner that is not fully understood.
daily precipitation as compared to 14%K
for hourly Instantaneous precipitation extremes increase at close
precipitation over a range of temperatures [47]. Simi- todoubletheClausius-Clapeyronratefortemperatures
lar behavior was found in some but not all subsequent below 295K, and this has been shown to be due to in-
studiesindifferentregions[31,48,87,54,10];see[92]for creasesinprecipitationefficiencywithwarming,related
an in-depth discussion. Factors such as relative humid- in part to increases in hydrometeor fall speed as more
ity [31,48], large-scale dynamics and temperature gra- of the precipitation in the column changes from solid
dients [54], and transitions from stratiform to convec- to liquid [77]. Such changes in precipitation efficiency
tive precipitation [29,10] are thought to be important might be expected to occur for variability within a cli-
for the scaling of precipitation extremes with tempera- mate as well as for longer term climate change, but in
ture in the current climate, and some of these factors the simulations they depend strongly on the choice of
may have a different effect on hourly and daily precip- cloudmicrophysicsscheme,anditremainstobeseenif
itation. While the sensitivity of precipitation extremes they are relevant for observed precipitation extremes.
for long term climate change need not be the same as
for variability in a given climate [58,9], understanding
8 Conclusions and open questions
thesensitivityofsubdailyprecipitationextremesinthe
present-day climate is an important starting point.
Asdemonstratedinseveralobservationalstudies,there
IdealizedCRMstudiessuggestthatchangesinboth has been an overall intensification of daily precipita-
dynamics and precipitation efficiency could contribute tion extremes as a result of global warming, although
to the scaling of subdaily convective precipitation ex- theavailabledatahaslimitedgeographiccoverage,and
tremes with temperature. Convective precipitation ex- therearelargeregionalvariationsintheobservedtrends.
tremes have been found to increase with warming con- Much of the characterization of projected changes in
siderablyfasterthanimpliedbyClausius-Clapeyronscal- precipitationextremescomesfromclimate modelsthat
ing in some cases when a temperature increase is im- use parameterized moist convection, but these are not
posed that is constant in the vertical [79,7]. This is expected to be reliable for precipitation extremes that
not surprising because a vertically-uniform tempera- are primarily convective in nature (for example, in the
ture increase makes a moist atmosphere less statically tropics or for certain events in summer in the extrat-
stable and leads to faster updrafts [50], but it does ropics). As a result, simulations that use cloud-system
demonstrate that changes in the static stability asso- resolvingmodelsorsuperparameterizationsarebecom-
ciated with subdaily extreme precipitation events are ingincreasinglyimportanttoresearchinthisarea.Even
worthy of further study. In a related result, tempera- when convective dynamics are resolved, precipitation
ture changes in climate-change simulations were found extremesatshortdurationshavebeenfoundtobe sen-
to be close to constant in the vertical for high-CAPE sitive to the parameterization of cloud and precipita-
composites in the midlatitudes [50,7]. tionmicrophysics[77],andprogressinobservationsand
physical understanding remains equally important.
Asdiscussedinsection3,updraftsdobecomesome- Contributionsfromchangesinthermodynamics,dy-
what faster with warmingwhen lapse rates areallowed namics,andprecipitationefficiencyhaveallbeenfound
to equilibrate (rather than being imposed) in simula- tobeimportantforchangesinprecipitationextremesin
tions of RCE, although the dynamical contribution to at least some situations in modeling studies. The ther-
changesinprecipitationextremesisstillrelativelysmall modynamic contribution is the easiest to understand
[70,56,77].Nonetheless,largedeviationsfromClausius- andalwaysgivesanintensificationwithwarming.There
Clapeyron scaling have been found in a study of RCE
4 Percentiles are calculated including zero precipitation
because of changes in precipitation efficiency at mean
amounts,andthesimulationshave500mhorizontalgridspac-
surfacetemperaturesbelow295K[77].The99.99thper-
ingandusethecloudmicrophysicsschemereferredtoas“Lin-
centileofprecipitationfromthisstudyisshowninFig.3a hail”in[77].
Precipitation extremes underclimate change 9
issomebasicunderstandingofdynamicalcontributions and superparameterizedclimate models [12,5]. The in-
atthelarge-scalefromtheomegaequation(section4.1) fluenceofthese potentialdynamicalchangesonthe ag-
andalsoattheconvectivescaleinthecaseofRCE(sec- gregate statistics of tropical precipitation extremes re-
tions 3 and 7), but only a few studies have focussed on mains to be assessed.
the roleof mesoscaleconvectiveorganizationin precip-
itation extremes [72,79,55]. Conflict of interest statement
Theauthorstates thatthere isnoconflict of interest.
Precipitationextremesassociatedwithparticulardy-
namical regimes or particular precipitation types may
responddifferently to climate warming and are deserv- Acknowledgements Thanks to Martin Singh, Bill Boos,
Markus Donat, Lisa Alexander, and an anonymous referee
ingofspecialattention.Asdiscussedinsection5,recent
for helpful comments and to Justin Gillis for alerting me
idealized studies of orographic precipitation extremes
to some early papers. HadEX2 data were downloaded from
have found that fractional increases are larger on the www.metoffice.gov.uk/hadobs/hadex2/.NOAAMergedLand-
climatologicalleeward side than on the windward side, Ocean Surface Temperature (MLOST) (V3.5.4) data were
providedbytheNOAA/OAR/ESRL PSDfromtheirwebsite
andfurtherworkisneededtorelatethistomorerealis-
at www.esrl.noaa.gov/psd/. SSM/I (V6) data were provided
tic modeling studies and observations. Similarly, snow-
byRemoteSensingSystems(www.remss.com)andsponsored
fall extremes behave quite differently from rainfall ex- bytheNASAEarthScienceMEaSUREsDISCOVERProject.
tremesbecausetheytendtooccurnearanoptimaltem- IacknowledgetheWorldClimateResearchProgramme’sWork-
ing Group on Coupled Modelling, which is responsible for
peraturethatisunaffectedbyclimatewarming.Further
CMIP, and I thank the climate modeling groups for produc-
work is needed to understand the specific responses of
ingand making available their model output. For CMIP the
lake-effectandhigh-elevationsnowfallextremes,aswell U.S.DepartmentofEnergy’sProgramforClimateModelDi-
as changes in the frequency of hail and ice storms [14, agnosis and Intercomparison provides coordinating support
andleddevelopmentofsoftwareinfrastructureinpartnership
16].
withthe Global Organization forEarth SystemScience Por-
Characterizingthedependenceofchangesinprecip- tals.IamgratefulforsupportfromNSFgrantAGS-1148594
itation extremes on duration is of importance for im- andNASAgrantNNX-11AO92G.Thispaperwaspartlywrit-
ten while I was a visiting fellow at the Climate Change Re-
pacts, and this is particularly challenging for subdaily
search Centre of theUniversityof New South Wales.
durations.Much researchhasfocussedonprecipitation
accumulatedoverfixedtimeperiodsasdiscussedinsec-
tion 7. An alternative approach is to consider proper- References
ties of contiguous precipitation events that are defined
based on when non-zero precipitation begins and ends Recent papers of particular interest (published since
[68,71,10].Considerationoftheamountofprecipitation 2009) have been highlighted as:
inagivenevent(theeventdepth)maybeadvantageous * Of importance
because observed distributions of event depths exhibit ** Of major importance
a power law range [68,81] and thus their response to
climate change may be relatively simple to character-