]MQ.oib-q[
1v8201140/oib-q:viXra
Predicting Genetic Regulatory Response Using Classification
Manuel Middendorfa, Anshul Kundajeb,
Chris Wigginsc,d, Yoav Freundb,d,e,
Christina Leslieb,d,e
aDepartment of Physics, bDepartment of Computer Science,
cDepartment of Applied Mathematics,
dCenter for Computational Biology and Bioinformatics,
eCenter for Computational Learning Systems,
Columbia University, NY 10027, USA
Motivation: Studyinggeneregulatory mechanismsinsimplemodelorganismsthroughanalysis of
high-throughput genomic data has emerged as a central problem in computational biology. Most
approaches in the literature have focused either on finding a few strong regulatory patterns or on
learningdescriptivemodelsfromtrainingdata. However,theseapproachesarenotyetadequatefor
making accurate predictions about which genes will be up- or down-regulated in new or held-out
experiments. By introducing a predictive methodology for this problem, we can use powerful tools
from machine learning and assess thestatistical significance of our predictions.
Results: We present a novel classification-based method for learning to predict gene regulatory
response. Our approach is motivated by the hypothesis that in simple organisms such as Saccha-
romycescerevisiae,wecanlearnadecisionruleforpredictingwhetherageneisup-ordown-regulated
in aparticular experiment based on (1) thepresenceof bindingsite subsequences(“motifs”) in the
gene’s regulatory region and (2) the expression levels of regulators such as transcription factors
in the experiment (“parents”). Thus our learning task integrates two qualitatively different data
sources: genome-widecDNAmicroarraydataacrossmultipleperturbationandmutantexperiments
along with motif profile datafrom regulatory sequences. Weconvert theregression task of predict-
ingreal-valuedgeneexpressionmeasurementstoaclassification taskofpredicting+1and-1labels,
corresponding to up- and down-regulation beyond the levels of biological and measurement noise
in microarray measurements. The learning algorithm employed is boosting with a margin-based
generalization ofdecision trees,alternatingdecision trees. Thislarge-margin classifierissufficiently
flexible to allow complex logical functions, yet sufficiently simple to give insight into the combina-
torial mechanisms of gene regulation. We observe encouraging prediction accuracy on experiments
basedontheGaschS.cerevisiaedataset,andweshowthatwecanaccuratelypredictup-anddown-
regulationonheld-outexperiments. Wealsoshowhowtoextractsignificantregulators,motifs, and
motif-regulator pairs from the learned models for various stress responses. Our method thus pro-
videspredictivehypotheses,suggestsbiological experiments,andprovidesinterpretableinsightinto
thestructureof genetic regulatory networks.
Availability: The MLJava packageis available by request from theauthors.
Contact: cleslie@cs.columbia.edu
I. INTRODUCTION approaches, which try to discover structure in the
dataset as formalized by probabilistic models (often
graphicalmodelsorBayesiannetworks)[5,9,10,14,15];
Understanding underlying mechanisms of gene and linear network models, which hope to learn explicit
transcriptional regulation through analysis of high- parameterized models for pieces of the regulatory
throughputgenomic data – for example, gene expression network by fitting to data [2, 17]. These approaches
data from microarray experiments and regulatory are all useful exploratory tools in the sense that they
sequence data – has become one of the central problems allow the user to generate biological hypotheses about
in computational biology, particularly for simpler model transcriptional regulation that can then be tested in
organisms such as S. cerevisiae. Efforts to identify the lab. In general, however, these approaches are not
regulatory elements in non-coding DNA [1, 6], models yet adequate for making accurate predictions about
for investigating co-occurrence of regulatory motifs and which genes will be up- or down-regulated in new
combinatorial effects of regulatory molecules [11], and or held-out experiments. Therefore, it is difficult to
attempts to organize genes that appear to be subject to compare performance of different approaches or decide,
common regulatory control into “regulatory modules” based on cross-validation experiments, which approach
[7, 14] all define pieces of this complex problem. Most is likely to generate plausible hypotheses.
recent studies of transcriptional regulation can be
placed broadly in one of three categories: statistical Thegoalofourmethodistolearnapredictionfunction
approaches, whichaimtoidentify statisticallysignificant fortheregulatoryresponseofgenesunderdifferentexper-
regulatory patterns in a dataset [1, 7, 11]; probabilistic imentalconditions. Theinputstoourlearningalgorithm
are the gene-specific regulatory sequences – represented target (“child”) genes, as well as a model that can cap-
bythesetofbindingsitepatternstheycontain(“motifs”) ture combinatorial relationships among regulators; how-
– andthe experiment-specific expressionlevelsofregula- ever,ourmargin-basedtreesareverydifferentfromprob-
tors (“parents”). The output is a prediction of the ex- abilistic trees. Unlike in Segal et al. [14], we learn from
pression state of the regulated gene. Rather than trying both expressionand sequence data, so that the influence
topredictareal-valuedexpressionlevel,weformulatethe ofaregulatorismediatedthroughpresenceofregulatory
taskasabinaryclassificationproblem,thatis,wepredict element. We note that in separatework,Segal et al. [15]
onlywhetherthe geneis up-ordown-regulated. Thisre- presentaprobabilisticmodelforcombiningpromoterse-
ductionallowsustoexploitmodernandeffectiveclassifi- quence data and a large amount of expression data to
cationalgorithms. The learningalgorithmthatwe use is learn transcriptional modules on a genome-wide level in
boosting with a margin-based generalization of decision S.cerevisiae,buttheydonotdemonstratehowtousethis
treescalledalternatingdecisiontrees(ADTs). Boosting, learned model for predictions of regulatory response.
like support vector machines, is a large-margin classifi-
cationalgorithmthatperformswellforhigh-dimensional
problems. We evaluate the performance of our method II. LEARNING ALGORITHM
bymeasuringpredictionaccuracyonheld-outmicroarray
experiments, and we achieve very good classification re- A. Adaboost
sults in this setting. Moreover,we show thatthe learned
predictiontreescontaininformationthatisbothstatisti-
Adaboost is a general discriminative learning algo-
cally significant and biologically meaningful. These sig-
rithm invented by Freund and Schapire [12]. The ba-
nificantfeatures,whichareassociatedwithaccurategen-
sic idea of Adaboost is to repeatedly apply a simple
eralization rather than simply correlations in the train-
learning algorithm, called the weak or base learner, to
ing data, suggest regulators, motifs, and motif-regulator
different weightings of the same training set. In its
pairs that play an important role in gene transcriptional
simplest form, Adaboost is intended for binary predic-
regulation.
tion problems where the training set consists of pairs
Amongrecentstatisticalapproaches,themostsuccess- (x1,y1),(x2,y2),...,(x
correspondsto the fea-
fulrelatedapproachistheREDUCEalgorithmofBusse- tures of an example, and y ∈ {−1,+1} is the binary
maker et al. [1] for regulatory element discovery. Given label to be predicted. A weighting of the training exam-
gene expression measurements from a single microarray ples is an assignment of a non-negative real value w to
experimentandtheregulatorysequenceS g foreachgene each example (x i ,y i ).
g represented on the array, REDUCE proposes a linear
Oniterationtoftheboostingprocess,theweaklearner
model for the dependence of log gene expression ratio
is applied to the training set with a set of weights
E g on presence of regulatory subsequences (or “motifs”) w 1 t,...,w m t and produces a prediction rule h t that maps
E = C + F N , where N is a count of oc-
g µ∈Sg µ µg µg x to {0,1}. The requirement on the weak learner is for
currences ofPregulatory subsequence µ in sequence S g , h t (x) to have a small but significant correlation with
and the F µ are experiment-specific fit parameters. We the example labels y when measured using the current
generalize beyond the conditions of a single experiment weighting of the examples. Aftertheruleh isgenerated,
by considering pairs (motif g ,parent e ), where the parent theexampleweightsarechangedsothattheweakpredic-
variable represents over- or under-expression of a regu- tions h (x) and the labels y are decorrelated. The weak
lator(transcriptionfactor,signalingmolecule, orprotein learneristhencalledwiththenewweightsoverthetrain-
kinase)intheexperimente,ratherthanusingmotifinfor- ing examples and the process repeats. Finally, all of the
mation alone. Note, however, that we use classification weak prediction rules are combined into a single strong
rather than regressionas in REDUCE. rule using a weighted majority vote. One can prove that
Similar restriction of potential parents has been used iftherulesgeneratedintheiterationsareallslightlycor-
withsuccessintheprobabilisticmodelliterature,includ- related with the label, then the strong rule will have a
ing in the regression-based work of Segal et al. [14] for very high correlation with the label – in other words, it
partitioning target genes into regulatory modules for S. will predict the label very accurately.
cerevisiae. Here,eachmoduleisaprobabilisticregression Thewholeprocesscanbeseenasavariationalmethod
tree,whereinternalnodesofthetreecorrespondtostates in which an approximation F(x) is repeatedly changed
of regulators and eachleaf node prescribes a normal dis- by adding to it small corrections given by the weak pre-
tribution describing the expression of all the module’s diction functions. In Figure 1, we describe Adaboost in
genes given the regulator conditions. The authors pro- these terms. We shall refer to F(x) as the prediction
vide some statistical validation on new experiments by scoreinthe restofthe paper. The strongpredictionrule
establishing that selected module distributions do have learned by Adaboost is sign(F(x)).
non-random correlation with true expression; however, Asurprisingphenomenonassociatedwith Adaboostis
they do not focus on making accurate predictions of dif- that the test error of the strong rule (percentage of mis-
ferentialexpressionaswedohere. Inourwork,weretain takesmadeonnewexamples)oftencontinuestodecrease
the distinction between regulator (“parent”) genes and even after the training error (fraction of mistakes made
F0(x)≡0 We follow all of the dotted arrows that emanate from
for t=1...T predictionnodes, but we follow only one of the solid-line
wi t =exp(−yiFt−1(xi)) arrowsemanating froma splitter node, correspondingto
the answer (yes or no) to the condition stated in rectan-
Get ht from weak learner
gle. We sum the values in all the prediction nodes that
αt =ln (cid:18) P i: i h :h t t (x (x i i )= )= 1 1 ,y ,y i i = = − 1 1 w i i t(cid:19) we reach. This sum represents the prediction score F(x)
P above, and its sign is the prediction.
For example, suppose we had an individual for
which hdl=bad, b.press=0, pain=y, oldpeak=2,
FIG. 1: The Adaboost algorithm. weight=300,sex=m. Inthiscase,thepredictionnodes
thatwereachinthetreeare0.062,−0.626,0.425,−0.444,
−0.536,0.138,andsumminggivesascoreof−0.981,i.e.,
onthetrainingset)reacheszero. Thisbehaviorhasbeen averyconfidentdiagnosisthattheindividualhasaheart
relatedtotheconceptofa“margin”,whichissimplythe problem.
value yF(x) [13]. While yF(x)>0correspondsto a cor- The ADT in the figure was generated by Adaboost
rectprediction,yF(x)>a>0correspondstoaconfident from training data. In terms of Adaboost, each predic-
correctprediction,andtheconfidenceincreasesmonoton- tionnoderepresentsaweakpredictionrule,andatevery
icallywitha. Ourexperimentsinthispaperdemonstrate boosting iteration, a new splitter node together with its
thecorrelationbetweenlargemarginsandcorrectpredic- twopredictionnodesisintroduced. Thesplitternodecan
tions on the test set (see Results section). beattachedtoanypreviouspredictionnode,notonlyleaf
nodes. Each prediction node is associated with a weight
αthatcontributestothe predictionscoreofeveryexam-
B. Alternating Decision Trees ple reaching it. The weak hypothesis h(x) is 1 for every
example reaching the prediction node and 0 for all oth-
ers. The numberinfrontofthe conditionsinthe splitter
nodesofFigure2indicatestheiterationnumberonwhich
the node was added. In general,loweriteration numbers
indicatethatthedecisionruleismoreimportant. Weuse
this heuristictoanalyzethe ADTs andidentify the most
important factors in gene regulatory response.
C. ADTs for Predicting Regulatory Response
For the problem of predicting differential gene expres-
sion,we startwith a candidate setof motifs µ represent-
ing known or putative regulatory element sequence pat-
FIG. 2: An example ADT. terns and a candidate set of regulators or parents π. For
each (gene,experiment) example in our gene expression
dataset, we have two sources of feature information rel-
Adaboost is often used with a decision tree learning ative to the candidate motifs and candidate parent sets:
algorithms as the base learning algorithm. We use Ad- a vector N of motif counts of occurrences of patterns
aboost both to learn the decision rules constituting the µ in the regulatory sequence of gene g, and the vector
tree and to combine these rules through a weighted ma- π ∈{−1,0,1}of expressionstates for parent genes π in
jority vote. The form of the generated decision rules is the experimente. The data representationis depicted in
called an alternating decision tree (ADT) [3]. Figure 3.
We explain the structure of ADTs using the example Splitter nodes inour ADTs depend ondecisions based
given in Figure 2, reproduced from Freund & Mason [3]. on (motif,parent) pairs. However,instead of splitting on
Theproblemdomainisheartdiseasediagnosticsandthe real-valued thresholds of parent expression and integer-
goalistopredictwhetheranindividualishealthyorsick valued motif count thresholds, we consider only whether
based on 13 different indicators. The tree consists of al- a motif µ is present or not, and only whether a parent
ternatinglevelsofovals(prediction nodes)andrectangles π is over-expressed(or under-expressed) in the example.
(splitter nodes). The numbers within the ovals define Thus, splitter nodes make boolean decisions based on
contributions to the prediction score. In this example, conditions such as “motif µ is present and regulator π
positive contributions are evidence of a healthy heart, is over-expressed (or under-expressed)”. Paths in the
negative contributions are evidence of a heart problem. learned ADT correspond to conjunctions (AND opera-
To evaluate the prediction for a particular individual we tions) of these boolean (motif,parent) conditions. Full
startatthe topoval(0.062)andfollowthe arrowsdown. details on selection of the candidate motifs and regula-
Due to computational limitations on the number of
(motif,parent)featureswecoulduseintraining,weselect
smaller subsets of regulators based on the following se-
lection criteria. We use 13 high-variance regulators that
had a standard deviation (in expression over all experi-
ments) above a cutoff of 1.2. The second subset consists
ofthe9globalregulatorsthatarepresentintheLeeetal.
[8] studies but absent in the candidate list of Segalet al.
[14]. We also include 50 regulators that are found to be
top ranking regulators for the clusters identified in Se-
gal et al. The union of these three lists gives 53 unique
regulators.
Target set and label assignment: Wediscretizeex-
pression values of all genes into three levels representing
down-regulation (-1), no change (0) and up-regulation
(+1) using cutoffs based on the empirical noise distribu-
tion around the baseline (0) calculated from the three
replicate unstimulated (time=0) heat-shock experiments
FIG. 3: Representation of data for regulatory response
[4]. We observe that 95% of the samples in this dis-
prediction. Every (target gene,experiment) is assigned a label
of +1 (up-regulated, in red) or -1 (down-regulated, in green) and tribution had expression values between +1.3 and -1.3.
representedbythegene’svectorofmotifcounts(onlybinaryvalues Thus we use these cutoffs to decide what we define as
shown here) and the experiment’s vector of regulator expression significantly up-regulated (+1) and down-regulated (-1)
states.
beyond the levels of biologicaland experimental noise in
the microarraymeasurements.
Note that although we train only on those
tors and discretization into up and down states is given
(gene,experiment) pairs which discretize to up- or
in the Methods section.
down-regulated states, we test (make predictions) on
every example in a held-out experiment by thresholding
on predicted margins. That is, we predict baseline if
III. METHODS
a prediction has margin below threshold (see Results
section).
Dataset: We use the Gasch et al. [4] environmental
We reduce our target gene list to a set of 1411 genes
stress response dataset, consisting of cDNA microarray
which include 469 highly variant genes (standard devia-
experiments measuring genomic expression in S. cere-
tion > 1.2 in expression over all experiments) and 1250
visiae in response to diverse environmental transitions.
genesthat arepartofthe 17clusters identifiedby Gasch
There are a total of 6110 genes and 173 experiments in
et al. [4] using hierarchical clustering (eliminating over-
the dataset, with all measurements given as log expres-
2 laps).
sionvalues(fold-changewithrespecttounstimulatedref-
Software: We use the MLJavasoftwaredevelopedby
erence expression). We do not perform a zero mean and
Freund and Schapire, which implements the ADT learn-
unit variance normalization over experiments, since we
ing algorithm. We use the text-feature in MLJava to
mustretainthemeaningofthetruezero(nofoldchange).
take advantage ofthe sparse motif matrix and use mem-
Motif set: We obtain the 500 bp 5’ promoter se-
ory more efficiently.
quencesofallS.cerevisiae genesfromtheSaccharomyces
Genome Database (SGD). For each of these sequences,
we search for transcription factor (TF) binding sites us-
IV. RESULTS
ing the PATCH software licensed by TRANSFAC [16].
The PATCH tool uses a library of known and putative
TF binding sites, some of which are represented by po- A. Cross-Validation Experiments
sition specific scoring matrices and some by consensus
patterns, from the TRANSFAC Professional database. We first perform cross-validation experiments to eval-
A total of 354 binding sites are used after pruning to uate classificationperformance on held-out experiments.
remove redundant and rare sites. We divide the set of 173 microarrayexperiments into 10
Parent set: We compile different sets of candidate folds, grouping replicate experiments together to avoid
regulators to study the performance and dependence of bias, and perform 10-fold cross-validation experiments
ourmethodonthesetofregulators. Werestrictourselves using boosting with ADTs on all 1411 target genes.
toasupersetof475regulators(consistingoftranscription We trainthe ADTs for 400boosting iterations,during
factors, signaling molecules and protein kinases), 466 of mostofwhichtest-lossdecreasescontinuously. Weobtain
which are used in Segal et al. [14] and 9 generic (global) an accuracy of 88.5% on up- and down-regulated exam-
regulators obtained from Lee et al. [8]. ples averaged over 10 folds (test loss of 11.5%), showing
that predicting regulatory response is indeed possible in PredictedBins
our framework. Down Baseline Up
Down 16.5% 8.9% 1.5%
To assess the difficulty of the classification task, we
TrueBins Baseline 9.3% 32.4% 6.3%
also compare to a baseline method, k-nearest neighbor
Up 2.8% 9.9% 12.0%
classification (kNN), where each test example is classi-
fied by a vote of its k nearest neighbors in the train-
ing set. For a distance function, we use a weighted sum TABLE I: Confusion Matrix: Truth and predictions for all
o m f E | u |2 cl + id w ean ||p dist − an p ces ||2 d , (( w g h 1, e e re 1) m ,(g2 r , e e p 2 r ) e ) s 2 en = ts w t m he ||m ve g c 1 to − r g b e a n se e l s in i e n l t e h v e els h . eld E -o x u a t m e p x le p s er a im re en b t i s n , n i e n d clu by din a g ssi t g h n o i s n e g e a xp t r h es r s e e s d ho a ld t
ene g and p
represents the parent
a=±0.5toexpressionandpredictionscores.
expressionvectorinexperimente. Wetryvariousweight
ratios 10−3 < (w /w ) < 103 and values of k < 20,
B. Extracting features for biological interpretation
and we use both binary and integer representations of
the motif data. We obtain minimum test-loss of 34.4%
at k=17 for binary motif counts and 31.3% at k=19 for We describe below several approaches for extracting
integer motif counts, both for weight-ratios of 1, giving important features from the learned ADT models, and
much poorer performance than boosting with ADTs. wesuggestwaystorelatethese featuresto the biologyof
gene regulation.
Since ADTs output a real-valued prediction score
Extracting significant features: Features at nodes
F(x)= T α h (x),whoseabsolutevaluemeasuresthe
t=1 t t intheADTconsistofmotif-parentpairs. Werankmotifs,
confidenPce of the classification,we canpredict a baseline
parents and motif-parent pairs by three different meth-
label by thresholding on this score, that is, we predict
ods: by the boosting iteration in which the feature first
examples to be up- or down-regulated if F(x) > a or
occurs (iteration score), by the total number of occur-
F(x)<−arespectively,andto be baseline if |F(x)|<a,
rences of the feature in the final tree (abundance score),
where a > 0. Figure 4 shows expression values versus
and by the absolute prediction score associated to the
feature (prediction score). Ranking scores are averaged
overallten folds(see supplementarywebsite fordetailed
results). Note that presence of a strong feature does not
necessarily imply a direct binding relationship between
parent and motif. Such a pair could represent an indi-
rect regulatory relationship (for example, a kinase and
the binding site of the transcription factor that it phos-
phorylates) or some other kind of predictive correlation,
for example, co-occurrence of the true binding site with
the motif corresponding to the feature.
The top ranking motif based on iteration score was
the STRE element of MSN2/MSN4, which is known to
be a regulatory element for a significant number of gen-
eral stress response target genes [4]. The other high
scoring motifs include HSF1 (heat-shock), RAP1 (heat-
shockandosmolarity),TBP(TATAbindingsite),ADR1
(glycerol metabolism and osmolarity), MIG1 (glucose
FIG. 4: Scatter plot of true expression values versus pre- metabolismandcarbonsourcebasedstress),REB1(Pol-
diction scores F(x) . The scatter plot shows a high correlation I transcription termination activity), GAL4 (galactose
between prediction scores (x-axis) and true log expression values
metabolism), YAP1 (peroxide stress) and GCN4 (amino
(y-axis)forgenes onheld-outexperiments.
acid biosynthesis and starvation response) binding sites,
all of which are known to be active in various kinds of
prediction scores for all examples (up, down, and base- stress responses.
line) from the held-out experiments using 10-fold cross- Of the 53 candidate regulators, 37 appear in the
validation. The plot shows a significant correlation be- ADTs ofthe ten folds. The top-rankingregulator,based
tween expression and prediction, reminiscent of the ac- on both iteration score and abundance score, is USV1
tual regression task. (The correlation coefficient is .74 (YPL230W);thisregulatorwasfoundbySegaletal.[14]
for +1 and -1 examples in the test set and .59 for all as the top-ranking regulator in 11 of their 50 regulatory
examples. While this correlation would not be consid- modules. Other top ranking regulators (see Table IVB)
eredhighfora regressionproblem,itis significantinour include PPT1, TPK1 (SRA3), XBP1 and GCN20. It is
current setting.) Assigning thresholds to expression and interesting to note that while the presence and absence
predictionvaluesbinningtheexamplesintoup,downand ofbindingsitesofsomeveryimportantstressfactorslike
baseline we obtain the confusion matrix in Table I. MSN2andHSF1(heatshockfactor)areidentifiedassig-
nificantfeatures(highmotifiterationscore)intheADTs, 10folds heat-shock heat-shock H2O2
their mRNA expression levels do not seem to be very w/oUSV1
predictive. HSF1 does not appear as a parent in any USV1 USV1 SRA3 USV1
of the ADTs, and MSN2 gets low abundance and itera- XBP1 XBP1 XBP1 XBP1
tionscoresasaparent,despite its importanceasastress SRA3 SRA3 PPT1 SRA3
response regulator. Similar results are observed in the PPT1 PPT1 DAL80 YAP1
modules of Segal et al. [14], where HSF1 is not found GIS1 GIS1 GAC1 PPT1
in any of the regulation programs and MSN2 is found YGL099W SLT2 GIS1 FAR1
in 3 of the 50 regulation programs but with low signif- GAC1 GIP2 SLT2 YGL099W
icance. If we examine the expression profiles of HSF1, GCN20 GAC1 WTM1 SLT2
MSN2, USV1 and PPT1, we find that the mRNA levels MTH1 DAL80 SRD1 GAC1
of MSN2 and HSF1 have quite small fluctuations (rarely HAP4 SRD1 GAT1 MTH1
greater than 2 fold change) and fall mostly within the YGL096W GAT1 GIP2 GIS1
baseline state, while the expression levels of USV1 or
PPT1showmuchlargervariationovermanyexperiments
(see Figure 5). It is knownthat MSN2 is regulatedpost- TABLE II: Top scoring regulators: Topscoringregulatorsfor
the 10 fold cross-validation experiment and three special setups.
translationallybyTPK1,whichisidentifiedasanimpor-
For additional results on extracted features, refer to the supple-
tantparentintheADTsandisfoundassociatedwiththe
mentarywebsite.
MSN2 binding site as a motif-parent pair. Thus in this
case, where the activity of a regulator is itself regulated
post-transcriptionally, we see a clear advantage of using
motif data along with mRNA expression data. C. Biological Validation Experiments
We designed 5 different training and test sets of se-
lected microarray experiments based on observations of
similarityanddifferencesbetweenstressesbyGaschetal.
[4], andweusedtheseexperimentsto studythe response
to specific types of stress in our framework. We present
results for 3 of these studies below (see supplementary
website for the other 2 experiments). By comparative
analysis of the trees learnedfrom these sets, we find and
validate regulatorsthat are associatedto regulationpro-
grams activated by different stresses.
Heat-shock and osmolarity stress response: In
the first study, we trained on heat-shock, osmolarity,
heat-shock knockouts, over-expression, amino-acid star-
vation experiments, and we tested on stationary phase,
simultaneous heat-shock and hypo-osmolarity experi-
ments.
FIG. 5: Comparison of expression profiles (173 experi-
We observe a low test loss of 9.3%, supporting the
ments) of USV1, MSN2, HSF1 and PPT1. The mRNA
expression levels of USV1 and PPT1 are informative, with about hypothesis that pathwaysinvolvedin heat-shock and os-
50%and35%ofexperiments(respectively)showingover2foldex- molarity stress appear to be independent and the joint
pressionchangeoverwildtype. TheespressionlevelsforMSN2and response to both stresses can be predicted easily [4]. We
HSF1 fall mostly in the baseline state, with only about 6% and
also confirm that the regulatory response for stationary
5%ofexperiments(respectively)showingatleast2foldexpression
change. While MSN2 and HSF1 are not identified as high scor- phase (test set) is very similar to that of heat-shock
ing parents in the learned trees, their binding sites occur as high (training set) [4]. The high scoring parents are USV1,
scoringmotifs. XBP1, TPK1, PPT1, GIS1, GAC1 and SLT2. The con-
nection of osmolarity response to the HOG and other
MAPkinasepathwaysiswellknown,anditisinteresting
tonotethatmostoftheseregulatorsareinfactsignaling
molecules. Also, the osmolarity response is strongly re-
“In silico” knock-outs: By removing a candidate lated to glycerol metabolism and transport and hence
from the regulator list and retraining the ADT, we can closely associated with gluconeogenesis and glucose
evaluate whether test loss significantly decreases with metabolismpathways. WefindthebindingsitesofCAT8
omission of the parent and identify other weaker regu- (gluconeogensis), GAL4 (galactose metabolism), MIG1
lators that are also correlatedwith the labels. We inves- (glucose metabolism), GCN4 (regulator of HOG path-
tigate in silico knock-outs in the biologically-motivated wayandaminoacidmetabolism), HSF1(heat-shockfac-
experiments described below. tor), CHA4 (amino acid catabolism), MET31 (methion-
ine biosynthesis), RAP1 and MSN2/MSN4 to have high nibus and the SaccharomycesGenome Database (SGD).
iteration scores; these regulators are all related to the At the same time, we hope to increase the number of
stress conditions in the training set. parents to include the complete putative list of about
USV1 “in silico” knockout: Using the same train 500 regulators, in order to identify the possible roles of
and test microarrays as in the heat-shock/osmolarity additionalregulatoryproteins. Sinceweareusing(motif,
setup, we perform a second study by removing one of parent) feature pairs, increasing the number of parents
the strongregulators,USV1, from the parentset andre- increasesthe feature space and memory requirementsby
trainingtheADT.Wegetaminorbutsignificantincrease amultiplicative factor. Two promisingdirections forim-
in test error from 9.3% to 11%. Regarding structural provement are (i) using data structures more appropri-
changes in the ADT, we observe that the overall hierar- ate for our pairwise interaction features and (ii) using
chy of the features does not change significantly: TPK1, weighted sampling to reduce the size of the memory re-
XBP1, PPT1 and GIS1 remain the highest scoring par- quired for the training data.
ents. We also find that 305 target genes change predic- Another potential advance would be a more careful
tion labels. GO annotation enrichment analysis of these treatment of the raw data. In these preliminary exper-
target genes reveal the terms cell wall organization and iments, we used a simple noise model based on wild-
biogenesis,heat-shock protein activity, galactose,acetyl- type replicates, and we were able to learn to predict
CoA and chitin metabolism and tRNA processing and large up- or down-regulation response using thresholds
cell-growth. These matchmanyofthe terms enrichedby based on this model. However, while log expression ra-
analyzing GO annotations of genes that changed signif- tio data (perturbation/wild type) gives a natural input
icantly in a microarray experiment by Segal et al. [14] variable for our analysis, better signal to noise is likely
with stationary phase induced in a USV1 knockout. to be achievedby taking into accountthe excitation lev-
Pleiotropic response to diamide: For the third els separately. In particular, using an intensity-sensitive
study, we trained on heat-shock, heat-shock knockouts, noise model could allow us to establish more meaningful
over-expression,H2O2wild-typeandmutant,menadione, thresholds for more of the genes. A more complicated
DTT experiments, and we tested on diamide experi- issue is the fact that we do not use baseline expression
ments. examples for training, and therefore we restrict to the
Gasch et al. [4] consider the diamide response to be a subsetofgenesthatshowvariationacrossstressresponse
composite of responses to the experiments in the train- experiments for our training and test sets. Ideally, how-
ing set. We observe a moderate test loss of 16%, sug- ever, we would like to predict regulatory response for all
gesting that this pleiotropic response is more complex genes(including non-respondinggenes),whichwilllikely
than the simpler additive responses to heat-shock and mean changing the formulation of the learning task so
osmolarity. We observe the emergence of an important that we include baseline examples in training.
motif-parent feature: YAP1 is directly associated with Afurtherrefinementwouldbetotreatparentandchild
its ARE-binding site (Y$TRX2) as a high scoring regu- excitation levels as continuous rather than binary quan-
lator that is absent in the ADTs of both previous stud- tities. Similarly, the number of motifs in the regulatory
ies. This finding is consistent with known biology, since region, rather than merely their presence/absence, and
YAP1 plays a specific role in peroxide and superoxide thespatialrelationshipbetweenthemcouldbetakeninto
response (present in the training set) [4]. We also find account. While these extensions could potentially yield
the PDR3 (menadione-drug response) binding site to be much more realistic models, they require substantial al-
a high scoring motif. gorithmic changes and should be done carefully so as to
avoid overfitting.
Whileweshowedhowtoextractsignificantmotifs,reg-
V. DISCUSSION
ulators, and motif-regulator pairs from the ADTs, fur-
ther work is needed to obtain more detailed information
While encouraged by the performance of our method, from these predictive models. It is plausible that the
webelievefurtherworkislikelytoyieldmuchmorecom- trees contain information about combinatorial relation-
prehensive and accurate models of the regulatory net- shipsbetweenregulatorsorbetweenregulatoryelements,
works of yeast and other simple organisms. but it is not clear how to disambiguate independent ef-
One main direction for improvementis to increase the fects from combinatorial ones. One possible approach
computational efficiency of our software so that we can could be to rank collections of two or more features oc-
scale up both the size of the training set and the feature curring in paths in the ADTs and check whether motifs
space. Since the Gasch dataset that we used here only in over-represented paths tend to co-occur in regulatory
contains experiments for environmental stress response, regions, giving evidence of combinatorial relationships.
many other regulatory pathways are likely not activated Another approach is to examine more carefully the con-
and therefore cannot be modeled by analysis of this tributions ofdifferentfeatures to the predictionscorefor
datasetalone. Weplantopursuemoreextensivecompu- various target genes. While our learning method does
tationalexperimentsonotherdiverseyeastdatasets,such not yield a descriptive network model that can be easily
asthoseavailablethroughNCBI’sGene ExpressionOm- visualized,webelievethatthepredictivemodelapproach
enables new possibilities for analysis and understanding GM36277. CL and CW are supported by NIH grant
of gene regulation. LM07276-02, and CL is supported by an Award in In-
formatics from the PhRMA Foundation.
VI. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
AKissupportedbyNSFEEC-00-88001. CWandMM
are partially supported by NSF ECS-0332479 and NIH
[1] H. J. Bussemaker, et al. (2001). ‘Regulatory element pp. 215–224.
detection using correlation with expression’. Nature Ge- [10] D.Pe’er,etal.(2002). ‘AFastandRobustMethodtoIn-
netics 27:167–171. ferandCharacterizeandActiveRegulatorSetforMolec-
[2] P.D’Haeseleer,etal.(1999). ‘LinearmodelingofmRNA ular Pathways’. Proc. of the Tenth International Conf.
expression levels during CNS development and injury’. onIntelligentSystemsforMolecularBiologypp.258–267.
Pac. Symp. Biocomp. pp.41–52. [11] Y. Pilpel, et al. (2001). ‘Identifyingregulatory networks
[3] Y.Freund&L.Mason (1999). ‘The alternatingdecision by combinatorial analysis of promoter elements’. Nature
tree learning algorithm’. Proc. of the Sixteenth Interna- Genetics 2:153–159.
tional Conf. on Machine Learning pp. 124–133. [12] R. E. Schapire (2002). ‘The boosting approach to ma-
[4] A.P.Gasch,etal.(2000). ‘Genomicexpressionprograms chine learning: An overview’. In MSRI Workshop on
in the response of yeast cells to environmental changes’. Nonlinear Estimation and Classification.
Mol. Biol. Cell 11:4241–4257. [13] R. E. Schapire, et al. (1998). ‘Boosting the margin: A
[5] A.J. Hartemink,et al. (2001). ‘Using Graphical Models newexplanationfortheeffectivenessofvotingmethods’.
and Genomic Expression Data to Statistically validate The Annals of Statistics 26(5):1651–1686.
Models of Genetic Regulatory Networks’. Pac. Symp. [14] E. Segal, et al. (2003a). ‘Module Networks: Identifying
Biocomp. pp.422–33. Regulatory Modules and their Condition Specific Reg-
[6] J. D. Hughes, et al. (2000). ‘Computational identifica- ulators from Gene Expression Data’. Nature Genetics
tion of cis-regulatory elements associated with groupsof 34(2):166–176.
functionally related genes in Saccharomyces cerevisiae’. [15] E.Segal,etal.(2003b).‘Genome-wideDiscoveryofTran-
J. Mol. Biol. 296(5):1205–14. scriptional Modules from DNA Sequence and Gene Ex-
[7] J.Ihmels,etal.(2002). ‘Revealingmodularorganization pression’. Bioinformatics 19:273–282.
in the yeast transcriptional network’. Nature Genetics [16] E.Wingender,etal.(2000). ‘TRANSFAC:anintegrated
31:370–377. system for gene expression regulation’. Nucleic Acids
[8] T.I.Lee,etal.(2002). ‘TranscriptionalRegulatoryNet- Research 28:316–319.
works in Saccharomyces cerevisiae’. Science 298:799– [17] M. Yeung, et al. (2002). ‘Reverse engineering gene net-
804. works using singular valuedecomposition and robust re-
[9] D. Pe’er, et al. (2001). ‘Inferring subnetworks from per- gression’. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 99:6163–8.
turbed expression profiles’. Proc. of the Ninth Interna-
tionalConf.onIntelligentSystemsforMolecularBiology