Under consideration for publication in Theory and Practice of Logic Programming 1
Predicate Logic as a Modeling Language:
Modeling and Solving some Machine Learning and
Data Mining Problems with
MAURICE BRUYNOOGHE, HENDRIK BLOCKEEL, BART BOGAERTS,
BROES DE CAT, STEF DE POOTER, JOACHIM JANSEN,
ANTHONY LABARRE, JAN RAMON, MARC DENECKER,
Department of Computer Science, KU Leuven
SICCO VERWER
Radboud Universiteit Nijmegen, Institute for Computing and Information Sciences
(e-mail: firstname.secondname@cs.kuleuven.be, siccoverwer@gmail.com)
submitted March 22, 2013; revised Februari 3, 2014; accepted March 6, 2014
This paper provides a gentle introduction to problem solving with the IDP3 system.
The core of IDP3 is a finite model generator that supports first order logic enriched
with types, inductive definitions, aggregates and partial functions. It offers its users a
modeling language that is a slight extension of predicate logic and allows them to solve
a wide range of search problems. Apart from a small introductory example, applications
are selected from problems that arose within machine learning and data mining research.
These research areas have recently shown a strong interest in declarative modeling and
constraint solving as opposed to algorithmic approaches. The paper illustrates that the
IDP3 system can be a valuable tool for researchers with such an interest.
The first problem is in the domain of stemmatology, a domain of philology concerned
with the relationship between surviving variant versions of text. The second problem is
about a somewhat related problem within biology where phylogenetic trees are used to
represent the evolution of species. The third and final problem concerns the classical
problem of learning a minimal automaton consistent with a given set of strings. For this
last problem, we show that the performance of our solution comes very close to that
of a state-of-the art solution. For each of these applications, we analyze the problem,
illustrate the development of a logic-based model and explore how alternatives can affect
the performance.
KEYWORDS: Knowledge representation and reasoning, declarative modeling, logic pro-
gramming,knowledgebasesystems,FO(·),IDPsystem,stemmatology,phylogenetictree,
deterministic finite state automaton.
1 Introduction
In his seminal paper, Kowalski (1974) proposed to use first order predicate logic
(FO)asaprogramminglanguage.Hearguedthatitispossibletousedeductionfor
2v3886.9031:viXra
2 Bruynooghe et al.
computation by associating a procedural interpretation to the Horn clause subset
of first-order logic. These ideas found their incarnation in the language Prolog.
Whereas Prolog uses deduction as inference method, other inference methods
exist. Most prominent is model generation as used in propositional SAT solvers.
Also the inference method of Constraint Programming can be considered as model
generation; indeed, its solvers attempt to assign values to variables while satisfying
a set of constraints. The last decades have witnessed tremendous progress in solver
technologyforConstraintProgramming(CP)andSATsolving.InCP,thisprogress
isatthebasisofashiftfromConstraintProgrammingtoConstraintModeling1.No-
torious examples are Essence (Frisch et al. 2008) and Zinc (Marriott et al. 2008).
Within logic programming, the introduction of stable semantics (Gelfond and Lifs-
chitz1988)eventuallyledtotheAnswerSetProgramming(ASP)paradigm(Brewka
et al. 2011) that, similar to SAT, uses model generation instead of deduction for
inference. Many ASP-based systems exist. Examples are DLV (Leone et al. 2002),
clasp (Gebser et al. 2007) and Smodels (Syrjänen and Niemelä 2001).
Allthisprogressraisesthequestionwhatisthestatusoflogicasamodelinglan-
guage.SATisrestrictedtopropositionallogic.Itcanbeconsideredastheassembler
languageformodeling.Indeed,therearemanyexamplesofprogramsthatgenerate
SATencodingstoobtainstate-of-the-artsolversforvariousclassesofproblems.One
can find examples in the areas of planning and of generating deterministic finite
automata,tonamejustafew.However,SATisnotsuitedasalanguagefordevelop-
ing models. For what concerns ASP, it is an expressive high level language but it is
notbasedonpredicatelogic.Today,manyintricaciesofstablemodelsemanticsare
hidden in high level ASP constructs such as constraints and choice rules; however,
its two forms of negation (“not” and strong negation) (Brewka et al. 2011) clearly
distinguish it from first-order logic; the deviation from first-order-logic semantics
could be an obstacle for newcomers.
Historically,predicatelogicwasalwaysviewedasaveryexpressivemodelinglan-
guage. This is remarkable given that anyone who used it for modeling a practical
domainwillhaveexperienceditsinconvenienceinexpressingcertaincommonpropo-
sitions.Aclearweaknessisinexpressinginductivelydefinableconceptssuchasthe
transitive closure of a binary relation. Another deficiency is in expressing bounds
on the cardinality or the sum of sets. Practical modeling languages in Constraint
ProgrammingorASPthereforesupportsomeofthesepropositions.WhileASPcan
express inductive definitions, it is built on radically different foundations than FO.
A more conservative solution that preserves FO’s foundations is to extend it with
suitable language constructs. For instance, it was argued in several works, for ex-
amplebyDeneckerandTernovska(2008)andDeneckerandVennekens(2014),that
a rule set formalism under an extension of the well-founded semantics (Van Gelder
et al. 1991) is a natural formalism to express the most common forms of inductive
1 Inthispaper,weusethewordmodelintwodifferentmeanings.Firstly,amodelisastructure
thatsatisfiesthetheory,asin“modelgeneration”.Secondly,amodelistheresultofmodelinga
problemdomain.Itisatheoryinlogic,aformalspecificationoftheproblemdomain.Itshould
beclearfromthecontextwhatisintended.
Predicate Logic as a Modeling Language 3
definitions. Such a formalism can be integrated with FO in a conceptually clean
way. The resulting logic was named FO(ID) by Denecker and Ternovska (2008).
ThelinkbetweenFO(ID)andASPwasrecentlystudiedbyDeneckeretal.(2012).
Below, we use the notation FO(·) to denote the family of extensions of first-order
logic.
In this paper, we explore the use of FO(·)IDP3, the instance of the FO(·) fam-
ily that is supported by IDP3, the current version of the IDP Knowledge Base
System (De Pooter et al. 2011). FO(·)IDP3 extends first-order logic with induc-
tive definitions, partial functions, types and aggregates. The IDP system supports
model generation and model expansion (Mitchell and Ternovska 2005; Wittocx
et al. 2013) as inference methods and is one of the fastest such systems (Calimeri
et al. 2011). Particular to the modeling language used here is the combination of
a purely declarative modeling language with a procedural language that handles
the interaction with the outside world. Indeed, in contrast to Prolog, the control of
the search can be left to the solver and the user can concentrate on modeling. As
we will illustrate in the paper, that does not mean that any correct model will do;
when performance matters, models have to be designed with care.
As for the organization of the paper, we start Section 2 with recalling the FO(·)
familyofextensionsofpredicatelogic.Next,weintroducetheFO(·)IDP3 instanceof
FO(·) and the IDP knowledge base system that supports FO(·)IDP3 as a modeling
language. The section continues with the shortest path problem as an illustrative
example. After describing a very basic model, it explores how alternative models
affect the performance of the underlying solver.
The other sections explore the use of the IDP system for solving some real-
worldproblemsencounteredinthedomainofmachinelearninganddataminingby
someoftheauthors. Researchersinthis domainhavebecomeincreasingly awareof
the fact that data analysis problems come in many different variants, which do not
alwaysfitthestandardalgorithmswell.Itisinfeasibletodevelopalgorithmsforeach
specific variant, but recently it has been shown that some standard data mining
problems, as well as their variants, can be modeled as constraint problems, and
solvedbygeneral-purposesolverswithperformancecomparabletothatofdedicated
algorithms (Guns et al. 2011). Our discussion on the use of IDP for three different
tasks adds support for the claim that declarative modeling may have an important
role to play in machine learning and data mining.
The first task, addressed in Section 3 is in the domain of a stemmatology, a part
of philology that studies the relationship between surviving variant versions of a
text. A stemma is a family tree that shows how different copies of the same text
relate to each other. These copies —manuscripts— are not identical, but evolve.
Manuscripts often do not have a single parent, different parts can be copied from
different parents, so a stemma is in fact a directed acyclic graph. A typical task
is to analyze the plausibility of a stemma hypothesis. For this task, the philologist
collects datasets describing features of the text. The values of a feature represent
variantreadingsofafragmentofthetext.Acommonassumptionisthatthestemma
has, for each variant, a unique manuscript that is the source of the variant. The
feature value is unknown for some manuscripts, and the question is whether these
4 Bruynooghe et al.
unknown values can be assigned such that there is indeed a unique source for each
feature value. In working out this task, we also illustrate how the procedural side
of FO(·)IDP3 allows the user to organize a complete workflow.
The second task (Section 4), although in the very different domain of biology, is
somewhat related to the previous one as it is concerned with phylogenetic trees.
Phylogeny is an area in which many problems arise. Several problems have been
tackled by means of Answer Set Programming, see Erdem (2011) for an overview.
Hereweaddressanewprobleminthisarea.Phylogenetictreeshaveintheirleavesa
set of current species and the tree represents the evolutionary relationship between
them.Oftenthereareseveralequallyplausibleevolutionaryexplanationsandhence
different phylogenetic trees. The question addressed here is: what is the minimal
supergraph that represents each of the individual trees. What makes the problem
difficultisthatthecorrespondencebetweentheinternalnodesofthedifferenttrees
isunknownandhastobeguessed.Differentguessesresultindifferentsupergraphs.
In Section 5, we study the well-known problem of learning a minimal determin-
istic finite state automaton (DFA) that is consistent with a given set of accepted
and rejected strings. This is a classical machine learning task for which compe-
titions are organized. A state-of-the-art method (Heule and Verwer 2010; Heule
and Verwer 2012), winner of the 2010 Stamina competition (Stamina 2010), solves
it by a problem-specific program that iteratively creates a SAT encoding and ap-
plies a SAT-solver for an increasing number of states until a model is found. Here
we explore to what extent a high level FO(·) formalization can compete with a
laboriously constructed encoding as a propositional SAT problem.
ThesethreeproblemscanbeabstractedasgraphproblemsandareNP-complete.
Solving them inherently involves search; heuristics are needed to guide the search
towards solutions. Developing an algorithm in a procedural language is time con-
suming, error-prone and challenging. The use of a declarative modeling language
liberates the programmer from the task and allows him to devote more time to the
proper formalization. Moreover, the default heuristics of the underlying solvers are
often sufficient to obtain adequate solutions.
In Section 6, we reflect on our achievements and discuss where there is potential
for further improvement. Some of the material in this paper is based on work of
Blockeel et al. (2012) and, for stemmatology, on work of Andrews et al. (2012).
2 FO(·) and the IDP system
First-orderlogichasalongtraditionandawellunderstoodsemanticsbutalsosome
limitations with regard to its expressiveness, which makes it not so well suited as
a language for knowledge representation. The most notorious problem is that it
cannot naturally express transitive closures such as “x is reachable from y if either
x and y are connected or there exists a z such that x and z are connected and x is
reachable from z”. Note that Prolog programmers can cope with transitive closure
and that the least Herbrand interpretation captures its meaning; actually, in the
first years of logic programming, many Prolog programmers did not realize it was
an issue in the knowledge representation community; at the same time, many in
Predicate Logic as a Modeling Language 5
thelattercommunitywereignorantaboutProlog’sexpressiveness.Intheknowledge
representationcommunity,therearetwowaystoworkaroundthelimitation.Onthe
one hand, one can introduce knowledge representation languages with a semantics
different from first-order logic; on the other hand, one can enhance first-order logic
with additional constructs. The former approach is taken by the ASP community;
the latter approach has been advocated in (Denecker and Ternovska 2008) where
first-orderlogicwasextendedwith(notnecessarilymonotone)inductivedefinitions.
Itwasarguedthatthisextensionresultedinaverynaturalandexpressivelanguage
whose meaning was captured by a generalization of the well-founded semantics
introduced by Van Gelder et al. (1991). This extension was named FO(ID) and
later work used the notation FO(·) for a family of languages extending first-order
logic.
TheFOextensionusedasmodelinglanguagethroughoutthispaperincludesnot
only inductive definitions, but also partial functions, types and aggregates. It is
the extension supported by the IDP3 version of the IDP Knowledge Base System
that was for the first time described by De Pooter et al. (2011)2. We denote this
extension as FO(·)IDP3.
Functions,ofwhichconstantsareaspecialcase,areveryconvenientinmodeling.
They are used in all the modeling examples of the paper. While n-ary functions
can be considered as syntactic sugar for predicates with n+1 arguments, the use
of functions makes models more concise and readable. Indeed, when functions are
represented as predicates, the functional dependency between the input arguments
and the result needs to be represented as a separate constraint. Partial functions
giveextraflexibilitytothemodeler.Anexamplecanbefoundinthemodeloffinite
state automata in Section 5 where a state doesn’t need a transition for all symbols
in the automaton’s input alphabet.
In almost all applications, the universe is not uniform but contains different
types. Relations are typed. Quantification is “naturally” typed, namely, we quan-
tify over objects of a type. It is not difficult to make typing explicit in untyped
predicate logic. Yet, it requires an extra discipline of the user to make the types in
her quantifications and of her relations and functions explicit. By introducing an
explicit type system, even a simple many-sorted type system, and a type checking
and inference system (to discover type clashes and to guess the types of variables
and/orparameters),theoriesbecomemorecompactandgraceful.Moreover,anum-
berofbugscanbedetected:syntacticerrorsinvariablenames,swappedormissing
arguments, unintended reuse of variables, etc. This is common wisdom. Indeed,
well-typed theories go wrong less often (Milner 1978). The type system of IDP3 is
not needed from a computational point of view, but for above-mentioned reasons,
we often find it convenient.
Aggregates are another extension that contribute to the readability and con-
ciseness of models. Consider for example the constraint expressing the functional
dependency. One needs to express that there is exactly one value (or in the case
2 TheexamplesusedthroughoutthepapermakeuseofIDPversion3.2.0.
6 Bruynooghe et al.
of a partial function at most one value) for each combination of input arguments.
The availability of aggregates makes it a lot more convenient to express such con-
straints. A study about the semantics of aggregates in definitions, including the
case of recursion, has been made by Pelov et al. (2007).
2.1 The logical components of an FO(·)IDP3 model
In this section we introduce the basic notions of an FO(·)IDP3 model. We restrict
ourselves to what is needed to understand the examples later on in the paper.
An FO(·)IDP3 model consists of a number of logical components, namely vocab-
ularies, structures, terms, and theories. A vocabulary declares the symbols to be
used3. A structure is used to specify the domain and the data; it can be viewed as
a sort of database, it provides a partial (three-valued) interpretation of the sym-
bols in the vocabulary. In the context of optimization problems, a term component
declares the numerical cost term to be optimized. A theory consists of FO formulas
and definitions. A definition is a set of rules of the form ∀x¯ : P(x¯) ← ϕ(x¯). where
ϕ is an FO(·)IDP3 formula4. An FO(·)IDP3 formula differs from FO formulas in two
ways. Firstly, FO(·)IDP3 is a many-sorted logic: every variable has an associated
type and every type an associated domain. Moreover, it is order-sorted: types can
be subtypes of others. Secondly, besides the standard terms in FO, FO(·)IDP3 for-
mulas can also have aggregate terms: functions over a set of domain elements and
associated numeric values which map to the sum, product, cardinality, maximum
or minimum value of the set.
We write M |= T to denote that structure M satisfies theory T. With xM,
we denote the interpretation of x under M, where x can be a formula or a term.
Without going in full details, M satisfies T when (i) every FO formula F of T
is satisfied in M (FM is true) and (ii) every definition of T is satisfied in M. A
structure M satisfies a definition D when the well-founded model construction on
D(VanGelderetal.1991)thatstartsfromO,therestrictionofM tothepredicates
not defined in D, results in M. See De Cat et al. (2014) for more details.
2.2 The IDP3 system
The IDP3 system (De Pooter et al. 2011) is a Knowledge Base System (KBS)
that intends to offer the user a range of inference methods such as model expan-
sion, optimization, verification, symmetry breaking and grounding and to make
use of different state of the art technologies including SAT, SAT Modulo Theo-
ries (Nieuwenhuis et al. 2006), Constraint Programming and various technologies
from Logic Programming.
In this paper, we make use of the inference methods model expansion, satisfia-
bility checking and model minimization. The most important inference method is
model expansion discussed by Mitchell and Ternovska (2005) and further extended
3 ContrarytoPrologandASP,thefirstcharacterofasymbolhasnobearingonitskind.
4 DefinitionshavealotincommonwithpurePrologrules.
Predicate Logic as a Modeling Language 7
by Wittocx et al. (2013). The idea of model expansion is to extend a partial struc-
ture (an interpretation) into a full structure that satisfies all constraints specified
by the FO(·)IDP3 model. More formally, the task of model expansion is, given a
vocabulary V, a theory T over V and a partial structure S over V (at least inter-
preting all types), to find a structure M that satisfies T and expands S, i.e., M
is a model of the theory and the input structure S is a subset of M. In the IDP3
system, this task is executed by modelexpand(T,S). The result of the modelexpand
procedure is a list of models of T that expand S. If the option nbmodels is set to
a value n different from 0, IDP3 will stop searching for more models once it has
found n models.
Satisfiabilitycheckingisrelatedtomodelexpansion.Callingsat(T,S)intheIDP3
system will return true if and only if modelexpand(T,S) would have returned at
least one model. However, since we are not interested in the actual models, some
optimizations can be done to speed up this inference.
Incaseofmodelminimization,alsoanumericalcosttermtisgiven.Thetaskisto
find a model M of T that expands S such that, for all other models M’ expanding
S, tM ≤ tM(cid:48). Model minimization is activated by minimize(T,S,t) with t referring
to the term component defining the term.
The IDP3 system allows users to specify FO(·)IDP3 problem descriptions. The
basic overall structure of the logical components is as in the following schema.
vocabulary V { ... } theory T: V { ... }
term t: V { ... } structure S: V { ... }
This schema defines a vocabulary V which is then used as a context in the theory
T, the term t and the structure S. In general, several vocabularies can be defined,
even extending other vocabularies.
We use IDP syntax in the examples throughout the paper. Each IDP operator
has an associated logical operator, the main (non-obvious) operators being: &(∧),
A distinguishing feature of FO(·)IDP3 models is that they not only consist of
logical components but also have one or more procedural components. These pro-
cedural components consist of procedural code that can perform actions. Actions
include the execution of an inference method on a particular logical theory, but
also the presentation of results to the user. Procedures allow to glue together a
sequence of actions in a process that performs a task for the user. The convention
is that the user’s task is performed by invoking the procedure main(). Such a task
can start with procedural code to prepare one or more structures from input files
or databases, can continue with performing a number of inference task on combi-
nations of theories with structures and can end with presenting the results to the
user.Theprocedurallanguagehastobeaflexibleandextensiblescriptinglanguage
thatoffersasmoothintegrationwiththeC++solversoftheIDPsystem.TheIDP
system (De Pooter et al. 2011) makes use of the Lua (Ierusalimschy et al. 1996)
scripting language for this purpose. It allows us to treat the various logical compo-
nents of an FO(·)IDP3 theory as objects that can be manipulated from within the
procedures.
8 Bruynooghe et al.
More information on the IDP system and in particular its IDP3 version is given
//dtai.cs.kuleuven.be/krr/software/idp3.
2.3 An example: The shortest path problem
As an illustration, we model the shortest path problem (Listing 1). The vocabulary
consistsofasingletype,twoconstantsandthreepredicates.Thestructurespecifies
the given graph: the interpretation of the type node (the domain elements A, B,
C, and D) and of the predicate edge(node,node) (the domain atoms edge(A,B),
edge(B,C), edge(C,D), and edge(A,D)), as well as the constants from (the do-
main element A) and to (the domain element D) which identify the begin- and
endpoint of the path searched for. The predicate edgeOnPath(node,node) is used
to represent the edges that participate in a shortest path. It provides the base case
of the transitive relation reaches(node,node) which is defined in the theory com-
ponent. Definitions are given between “{” and “}”. Note that we use the most basic
definition for the transitive closure: we join the reaches relation with itself.
Besides this inductive (recursive) definition, the theory also specifies the con-
straintsexpressingthattheedgeOnPath/2atomsincludedinamodelofthetheory
indeed compose a simple path from from to to. The first constraint, a univer-
sally quantified implication, ensures that edgeOnPath/2 atoms are indeed edge/2
atoms. This constraint explicitly mentions the type of the quantified variables;
however, this is optional; these types can be inferred from the type declarations
of the predicates of the formula. The types of the quantified variables are omit-
ted in the following constraints. The second constraint, a simple fact, imposes that
reaches/2 includes the pair (from,to). The third constraint, a conjunction of
negated formulas, states that the edgeOnPath/2 atoms should neither include an
edgearrivinginfromnoranedgeleaving to.Thefourthconstraintisauniversally
quantified conjunction of two cardinality constraints; it expresses that every node
has less than 2 incoming edges and less than 2 outgoing edges (i.e., that the path
is simple). The notation ?<2 y : edgeOnPath(y,x) means that there are strictly
less than 2 y’s that have an edge to x in the path. This is syntactic sugar for the
aggregate#{ y : edgeOnPath(y,x)} < 2.Thisaggregateisamoreconciseformu-
lation of the FO constraint ! y1 y2 : edgeOnPath(y1,x) & edgeOnPath(y2,x)
=> y1=y2. Finally, the last constraint, another universally quantified implication,
states that the endpoints of selected edges are reachable from from (i.e., that no
edges are selected that do not contribute to the path).
ThetermcomponentofthemodeldefinesthetermlengthOfPathasanaggregate
expression counting the number of tuples in the edgeOnPath relation of a model of
the theory. Minimizing this term ensures that the path described in a model of the
theory is indeed a shortest path.
The procedure component shows Lua code invoking the model minimization task
and printing the result. The Lua code treats the logical components as first-class
citizens and uses them as parameters in the method call activating the solver. The
annotation [1] directs the solver to return at most one solution.
Predicate Logic as a Modeling Language 9
Listing 1. Calling main() solves the shortest path problem for the given data.
vocabulary sp_voc {
from,to: node
edge(node,node)
edgeOnPath(node,node)
reaches(node,node)
theory sp_theory1 : sp_voc {
{! x y : reaches(x,y) <− edgeOnPath(x,y).
! x y z : reaches(x,y) <− reaches(x,z) & reaches(z,y).}
! x[node] y[node] : edgeOnPath(x,y) => edge(x,y). // (1)
reaches(from,to). // (2)
∼(? x : edgeOnPath(x,from)) & ∼(? x : edgeOnPath(to,x)).//(3)
! x : (?<2 y : edgeOnPath(y,x)) &
(?<2 y : edgeOnPath(x,y)). // (4)
! x y : edgeOnPath(x,y) => reaches(from,y). // (5)
structure sp_struct : sp_voc {
node = {A..D} // shorthand for A,B,C,D
edge = {A,B; B,C; C,D; A,D} // ‘;’ separated list of tuples
term lengthOfPath : sp_voc { #{ x y : edgeOnPath(x,y) } }
procedure main() {
/∗ Search a minimal model ∗/
sol = minimize(sp_theory1,sp_struct ,lengthOfPath)[1]
/∗ If no result is returned , no models exist ∗/
if (sol == nil)
then print("No models exist.\n")
else print(sol)
The IDP3 system performs model expansion and model minimization by first
reducing the problem to extended CNF, using the grounder GidL (Wittocx et al.
2010) and subsequently calling the solver MiniSAT(ID) (Mariën et al. 2008). The
grounding process can be fine-tuned using options for symmetry breaking (De-
vriendt et al. 2012), grounding with bounds (Wittocx et al. 2010), lazy grounding
(DeCatetal.2012),etc.ThesolverisanextensionofMiniSat(EénandSörensson
2003)withsupportforaggregateexpressions,inductivedefinitionsandbranch-and-
bound optimization. Recently, MiniSAT(ID) was extended to offer support for
finite domain constraints, using the propagation techniques described in (Schulte
and Stuckey 2008) or, alternatively, interfacing with the Gecode Constraint Pro-
gramming engine.
10 Bruynooghe et al.
Fig.1. Differentgroundingandtotalrunningtimesforsp_theory1,sp_theory2and
sp_theory3. Experiments are performed on graphs with an increasing number of
nodes but a constant edge density. The vertical bar shows the grounding time, the
part above the vertical bar is the solving time.
2.4 Exploring the space of models for the shortest path problem
The above is a correct IDP3 model that provides a declarative solution to the
problem at hand. However, if performance matters, or the instances are that large
that the grounding cannot fit in memory, then other models can be preferable.
In the long run, perhaps an optimizer can transform a simple model in a model
for which model generation has a better performance, but, with the current state
of affairs, it is up to the user to explore the design space and to look for better
performing models. We do so in this section for the shortest path problem.
Listing 2. Another definition for reaches.
theory sp_theory2 : sp_voc {
{ reaches(x,y) <− edgeOnPath(x,y).
reaches(x,y) <− edgeOnPath(x,z) & reaches(z,y). }
/∗ ... constraints as in sp_theory1 ... ∗/
Prolog programmers would never define the reaches/2 predicate as in theory
sp_theory1 of Listing 1 but rather as in theory sp_theory2 of Listing 2. Indeed,
apartfromtheriskofenteringaninfiniteloop,reaches(x,z)canhavemanymore
Predicate Logic as a Modeling Language 11
solutions than edgeOnPath(x,z) (which is bounded by the number of edges) and
hence, the search space for Prolog’s proof procedure can be substantially larger5.
WhilemodelgenerationcannotloopintheIDPsystem,thesearchspaceargument
remains valid. Comparing the runtime of both systems (see Figure 1) reveals that
theheuristicsoftheunderlyingSATsolverdonotcompensateforthelargersearch
space and that the version of Listing 2 is substantially faster6. However, there is
anotherfactorcontributingforthedifferencebetweenbothversions.Figure1splits
runtime in grounding time (the vertical bar) and solving time (above the bar). For
larger problems, one can observe that the grounding also takes more time. The
explanation is the difference in grounding size (see Figure 2). The size difference
must be attributed to the grounding of the recursive reaches(x,z) rule. With n
nodes,therearen3 instancesoftherecursivereaches/2ruleinsp_theory1.Asfor
sp_theory2,itfollowsfromconstraint(1)thatedgeOnPath(x,z)isfalsewhenever
edges(x,z) is false, hence, with e the number of edges, the number of instances is
limited to e∗n, which is typically substantially smaller than n3.
Althoughtheperformancehasimprovedquiteabit,weseethatitisstillrapidly
increasingwiththesizeofthegraph.Moreover(seeFigure1)mostoftheruntimeis
groundingtime.Canwedobetter?Therecursivereaches/2rulehasthreevariables
and remains expensive. The grounding has n2 atoms reaches(n1,n2), expressing
whether n1 and n2 are connected while we are only interested in paths going from
from to to. Hence we should better use a unary reachable predicate and define
whichpointsarereachablefromfrom.Thenewversionsofthevocabularyandthe
theory are shown in Listing 3. The term and procedure parts are as in Listing 1.
Listing 3. A unary reachable relation instead of the binary reaches relation.
vocabulary sp_voc2 {
from,to: node
edge(node,node)
edgeOnPath(node,node)
reachable(node)
theory sp_theory3: sp_voc2 {
{ reachable(from).
reachable(y) <− edgeOnPath(x,y) & reachable(x). }
! x[node] y[node] : edgeOnPath(x,y) => edge(x,y). //(1)
reachable(to). //(2)
∼(? x : edgeOnPath(x,from)) & ∼(? x : edgeOnPath(to,x)).//(3)
! x : (?<2 y : edgeOnPath(y,x)) &
(?<2 y : edgeOnPath(x,y)). //(4)
! x y : edgeOnPath(x,y) => reachable(y). //(5)
5 Whenusingasystemwithtabling,theorderinthebodyoftherecursiveclauseisbetterinverted
(SwiftandWarren2012).
6 UsinganIntelR CoreTM i5-3550CPUat3.30GHzwith7.8GBRAMrunningUbuntuwiththe
IDP3defaultoptions.
12 Bruynooghe et al.
Fig. 2. Grounding size for sp_theory1, sp_theory2, sp_theory3 and sp_theory4. Ex-
periments are performed on graphs with an increasing number of nodes but a con-
stant edge density.
As Figure 1 shows, this modification results in a dramatic speed-up. Also the
grounding size (Figure 2) is substantially reduced.
Constraints (3) and (4) are cardinality constraints on the number of edges con-
nected to the same node that can participate in a path. They are redundant with
respect to the minimization of the lengthOfPath term. Indeed, paths of minimal
length satisfy both constraints. Dropping them, as in Listing 4, spoils the clarity
of the model; however, it further reduces the size of the grounding as can be seen
in Figure 2. The effect on the runtime is negligible for small graphs and rather
negative for larger ones as one can observe in Figure 3. The explanation is that the
removal of those constraints increases the search space. Indeed, partial solutions
violating constraints (3) and (4) are not immediately rejected. This causes a lot
more variance in the solving times.
Listing 4. Removing redundant constraints.
theory sp_theory4: sp_voc {
{ reachable(from).
reachable(y) <− reachable(x) & edgeOnPath(x,y). }
! x[node] y[node] : edgeOnPath(x,y) => edge(x,y). // (1)
reachable(to).
Predicate Logic as a Modeling Language 13
Fig.3. Differentgroundingandtotalrunningtimesforsp_theory3andsp_theory4.
Experiments are performed on graphs with an increasing number of nodes but a
constant edge density.
Theaboveexample,inwhichwesolvedaclassicalproblemwithIDP3,illustrates
thebasicfeaturesofFO(·)IDP3.ItshowsthatproblemsolvingwithIDP3isaquite
differentendeavorfromproblemsolvinginotherlanguages.Thisholdsnotonlyfor
procedural languages, but also for a declarative language such as Prolog. It also
shows the importance of exploring various models when performance and memory
use matters.
3 Stemmatology
Before the invention of the printing press, texts were copied manually by scribes.
This copying process was not perfect; scribes often modified texts, either acci-
dentally or intentionally. As a result the surviving copies of many old texts vary
significantly. No text written before the invention of the printing press, and even
uptotheendofthe18thcentury,whenthehabitofcirculatingtextsinmanuscript
form practically disappeared, can be read without a preliminary critical analysis of
its material witnesses. This is the purpose of stemmatology. The Oxford English
Dictionary defines the field as “the branch of study concerned with analyzing the
14 Bruynooghe et al.
relationship of surviving variant versions of a text to each other, especially so as to
reconstruct a lost original.”
A stemma is a kind of “family tree” of a tradition, a set of related manuscripts.
It indicates which manuscripts have been copied from which other manuscripts
(“parents”),andwhichmanuscriptistheoriginalsource.Itmayincludebothextant
(currentlyexistingandavailable)andnon-extant(“lost”)manuscripts.Thestemma
isnotnecessarilyatree:sometimesamanuscripthasbeencopiedpartiallyfromone
manuscript, and partially from another, in which case the manuscript has multiple
parents.
More formally, a stemma can be defined as a CRDAG, a Connected Directed
Acyclic Graph with a single Root (Andrews and Macé 2013). A dataset contains
the manuscripts from one tradition. Each manuscript is described by a fixed set of
featuresF ,...,F ,eachofwhichhasanominaldomainDom(F )(variantreadings
offeatureF ).Typically,afeaturereferstoaparticularlocationorsectioninatext,
though it can also be the spelling of a particular word, e.g., the dwelling of “Van
den Vos Reynaerde” can be spelled as Malpertuis, Malpertus, or Malpertuus.
The 19th century philologist Karl Lachmann was among the first to apply a
principled method for reconstructing stemmata from sets of manuscripts (Timpa-
naro2005).Nowadays,avarietyofmethodsexist.Manyareborrowedfrombiology,
whereasimilarproblem,reconstructionofphylogenetictrees,iswell-studied.How-
ever, these methods do not always fit the stemmatological context well. First, they
assumethatphylogeniesaretree-shaped,whilestemmataareDAGs7.Second,these
treescontainonlybifurcations,whilestemmatacanhavemultifurcations.Third,in
most methods, the trees are such that each extant copy is at a leaf of the tree,
whereas in stemmatology one extant copy may be an ancestor of another (and
hence should be an internal node). Fourth, stemmatologists often have additional
information, for instance about the time or place of origin of a manuscript, which
ideallyshouldbetakenintoaccount.Researchcontinuestodevelopnewalgorithms
better suited for the stemmatological context (Baret et al. 2006).
3.1 The task
Apartfromreconstructingstemmatafromdata,stemmatologistsarealsointerested
in other types of analyses, which may, for instance, use a known stemma or a
manually-constructed best-guess stemma as an input. These types of analysis can
be very diverse. The data mining tasks we address in this section belong to this
category.
The problem studied here assumes that a CRDAG representing a stemma of a
traditionisgiven,aswellasfeaturedataaboutthemanuscriptsfromthetradition.
More specifically, the data include a feature for each location where variation is
observed in the tradition represented by the stemma. For each extant manuscript
inthetradition,thefeaturedatadescribeitsvariantreading;thevariantreadingis
7 Some methods return phylogenetic networks, but these represent uncertainty about the real
tree,whichisdifferentfromclaimingthatthenetworkrepresentstheactualphylogeny.
Predicate Logic as a Modeling Language 15
unknown for the non-extant ones. For most features, it seems rather unlikely that
the same variant reading originated multiple times independently; i.e., it is reason-
abletoassumethereisoneancestorwherethevariantreadingoccurredforthefirst
time (the “source” of the variant). Therefore, we say that the feature is consistent
withthestemmaifitispossibletoindicateforeachvariantasinglemanuscriptthat
may have been the origin of that variant. Since for some manuscripts the value of
the feature is not known, checking consistency boils down to assigning a variant to
eachnodeintheCRDAGinsuchawaythat,foreachvariant,thenodeshavingthat
variant form a CRDAG themselves. Note that one can imagine exceptions to the
above, e.g., a new spelling of a word can be independently introduced in different
copies.
3.2 Consistency checking of a stemma is NP-complete
Welearnedaboutthisproblemthroughcontactswithresearchersinstemmatology.
One of them had developed an algorithm (implemented with a program of about
370 lines of Perl using a graph library as a back end) to solve the basic task, did
several iterations to handle yet uncovered cases and was still worried about the
completeness of their approach (does the algorithm always find a solution when a
solution exists?). The algorithm attempts not to make wrong decisions by initially
assigning several variant readings to the non-extant manuscripts and, in a second
phase, remove variant readings while preserving consistency. Once understood, the
problem was formalized as a graph problem and shown to be NP-complete by one
of the authors of this paper. In this formalization, the variant reading of a text is
represented as a color and checking a stemma is a color-connected problem.
Definition 1 (Color-connected)
Two nodes x and y in a colored CRDAG are color-connected if a node z exists (z
canbeoneofxandy)suchthatthereisadirectedpathfromz tox,andonefrom
z to y, and all nodes on these paths (including z, x, y) have the same color.
Given a partially colored CRDAG, the color-connected problem is to complete
the coloring such that every pair of nodes of the same color is color-connected.
AnillustrationisgiveninFigure4.Acandidatecoloringcanbecheckedinpoly-
nomial time, hence proving that the color-connected problem is NP-hard implies it
is NP-complete.
The color-connected problem is NP-hard.
The proof is by showing a polynomial reduction from SAT to color-connectedness.
There exists a polynomial reduction from a CNF formula to one with all clauses
eitherpositive(allliteralsarepositive)ornegative(allliteralsarenegative).Indeed,
replace all occurrences of a negative literals ¬x by a new positive literals notx and
add, for every such notx literal the clauses x∨notx and ¬x∨¬notx.
DAG coloring &
16 Bruynooghe et al.
r r y b r r y
Fig. 4. Left: a partial labeling showing for a given feature which manuscripts have
which variant readings/colors. Right: a complete extension of that labeling where
each variant reading is a CRDAG. Because such an extension exists, the feature is
consistent with the stemma.
So, we assume without loss of generality a CNF formula T consisting of positive
clausesT+ andnegativeclausesT−.Weconstructacolor-connectedproblemwhose
solutions correspond to the models of T. Let T+ = C+ ∧ C+ ∧ ... ∧ C+ and
T− = C− ∧ C− ∧ ... ∧ C− with C+,...,C+ positive clauses and C−,...,C+
1 2 n 1 m 1 n
negative clauses. Let V be the set of propositional variables in T.
Now we construct a DAG G consisting of the nodes V(G) = r ∪ A ∪ B ∪ V
where A = {a,a ,a ,...,a } (a stands for clause C+; a is an extra node) and
B = {b,b ,b ,...,b } (b stands for clause C−; b is an extra node). The directed
edges are given by E(G) = {(v,a )|i ∈ [1..m],v ∈ C+}∪{(v,b )|i ∈ [1..n],v ∈
C−}∪{(a,v)|v ∈ V}∪{(b,v)|v ∈ V ∪{(r,a),(r,b)} . Next we color r, a and all
nodes a black and b and all nodes b white. We obtain a partially colored CRDAG
(SeeFigure5foranexample).Moreover,asolutiontothecolor-connectedproblem
encodes a solution to the original SAT problem. Indeed, each a node, representing
a positive clause, is connected with at least one black variable. Hence, making all
black variables true satisfies all positive clauses. Also, each b node, representing a
negative clause, is connected with at least one white variable. Hence making the
whitevariablesfalsesatisfiesallnegativeclauses.Itfollowsthatthecolor-connected
problem is NP-hard.
The problem being NP-complete, it is unlikely it can be solved by a procedural
programwithoutsearch.Theproofsuggeststheproblembecomeshardwhennodes
can have multiple parents. This situation is not dealt with (and therefore usually
abstracted away) in traditional stemmatological methods. However, it does occur
inthedatasetsweanalyzed.Constructingsmallexampleswhereseveralnodeshave
multiple parents, we quickly obtained an example for which the procedural code
erroneously claimed no connected coloring exists. So the worries of the developer
about the completeness of the code were grounded.
Predicate Logic as a Modeling Language 17
a a a a a a b b b b
1 2 3 4 5 6 1 2 3 4
Fig. 5. A partially colored CRDAG constructed from a CNF theory T. The black
a nodesrepresentthepositiveclauses,thewhiteb nodesthenegativeclauses.The
grey nodes represent the propositional variables; they are linked to the clauses in
which they participate and have to be colored.
3.3 An FO(·)IDP3 Solution
A first FO(·)IDP3 solution used a binary relation SameVariant for representing
that two manuscripts have the same variant reading and imposed two constraints:
(i) transitivity of SameVariant relation, (ii) manuscripts with the same variant
reading have a common ancestor with that variant reading and are connected to
that ancestor through manuscripts with that same variant reading. This resulted
in a working version that could serve as a golden standard for the procedural code
but was much slower than the latter.
As we already noticed in the shortest path problem, modeling transitive closures
results in large grounding sizes and runtime. Hence, a major improvement can be
expected when that can be avoided. Representing the variant reading as a function
from manuscripts to variants allowed us to drop the transitivity constraint. The
finalimprovement,resultingintheprogrambelow,camefromlearningmoreabout
the procedural code: it checks for connectedness by following a path to the original
sourcemanuscriptofthevariantreadingandchecksthatthereisasinglesuchsource
for the variant reading. Expressing the latter as a single constraint resulted in a
versionthatturnedouttobefasterthantheincompleteproceduralalgorithm.The
IDP3 model is shown in Listing 5 and explained below. We also show most of the
procedural code, so that the reader can see how a number of satisfiability-checking
tasks can be embedded in a single process.
Listing 5. Checking the consistency between stemma and features.
procedure main() {
process("besoin")
process("parzival")
process("florilegium")
process("sermon158")
18 Bruynooghe et al.
process("heinrichi")
vocabulary V {
type Manuscript
type Variant
CopiedBy(Manuscript ,Manuscript)
VariantReading(Manuscript): Variant
vocabulary Vtask {
extern vocabulary V
SourceOf(Variant): Manuscript
theory Ttask : Vtask {
! x : (x ∼= SourceOf(VariantReading(x))) =>
? y : CopiedBy(y,x) & VariantReading(y) = VariantReading(x).
/∗ −−−−− Check consistency between feature and stemma −−−−−−−− ∗/
procedure check(feature) {
setvocabulary(feature ,Vtask)
return sat(Ttask,feature)
procedure process(tradition) {
io.write("Processing ",tradition ,".\n")
local path = "data/"
local stemmafilename = path.. tradition ..".dot"
local featurefilename = path.. tradition ..". json"
processFiles(stemmafilename ,featurefilename)
procedure processFiles(stemmafilename ,featurefilename) {
local stemma,nbnodes,nbedges = readStemma(stemmafilename)
io.write("Stemma has ",nbnodes," nodes and
",nbedges , " edges.\n")
local nbp,nbs,time = processFeatures(stemma,featurefilename)
io.write("Found ",nbp," positive out of ",nbs," groupings ")
io.write("in ",time," sec.\n")
procedure readStemma(stemmafilename) {
/∗ 19 lines of lua code ∗/
procedure processFeatures(stemma,featurefilename) {
/∗ 23 lines of lua code
a loop iterating over the features ,
−− compute feature as stemma extended with
the feature specific data
−− call check(feature)
−− process the results
finally , return the overall results ∗/
Predicate Logic as a Modeling Language 19
The logical model is described in the “Knowledge base” section of the code. The
vocabulary has been split in two parts. The vocabulary V is used to represent the
input data: the stemma and the feature. It introduces the types Manuscript and
Variant, the binary relation CopiedBy representing the parent-child pairs in the
given structure of the stemma and the function VariantReading representing the
known data about variant readings of manuscripts. The vocabulary Vtask extends
V with the task specific vocabulary. Only one extra function is needed namely
sourceOf which maps a variant reading to the manuscript that is the source of
thatvariantreading.ThetheoryTtaskconsistsofasingleconstraint;itstatesthat
a manuscript that is not the source of its own variant reading must have a parent
with the same variant reading.
The remainder is procedural code. The procedure main iterates over all tradi-
tions to be analyzed and calls the procedure process for each of those. The latter
procedure uses concatenation to construct two filenames from the name of the
tradition and passes these file names to the processFiles procedure; the “.dot”
file contains the stemma data; the “.json” file the feature data. The readStemma
procedure (code omitted) returns the input structure describing the stemma as
well as the number of manuscripts (nodes) and parent-child pairs (edges). The
processFeatures procedure (code omitted) iterates over the features in the file.
For each feature, it constructs a feature structure by extending the stemma struc-
ture with the feature specific data. It then calls the check procedure. This pro-
cedure extends the feature structure with the symbols from the Vtask vocabulary
(setvocabulary(feature,Vtask))andthenchecksthecolor-connectednessofthe
feature(sat(Ttask,feature)).Theyes/noresultisreturnedtotheprocessFiles
procedure which collects and returns the global results: number of consistent (pos-
itive) features, total number of features and time. The processFiles procedure
prints these global data and returns to main.
Ascanbeseeninthemain()procedure,weusedthecodetoperformconsistency
checking for the features of 5 traditions; two of them, Sermon 158 and Florilegium
arerealtraditions,withstemmatathathavebeenconstructedaccordingtocurrent
philological best practice; the other three are artificial traditions, produced under
test conditions by volunteers for the purposes of empirical research into stemmato-
logical methods. We received the data from Tara Andrews. A website where such
tion about the stemma we used is given in Table 1.
TheIDPprogramdeterminesconsistencyforallfeaturesanddatasetsinamatter
of seconds8:
Processing besoin.
Stemma has 13 nodes and 13 edges.
8 Using an IntelR CoreTM2 Duo CPU at 3.00GHz with 3.7 GB of RAM running Ubuntu with
the IDP3 options stdoptions.groundwithbounds = false (disabling bounded grounding) and
stdoptions.liftedunitpropagation=false(disablingliftedunitpropagation).
20 Bruynooghe et al.
Table 1. The five traditions used in this work.
Name # manu- # parent-child # features # variant readings
scripts pairs maximum average
Notre Besoin 13 13 44 5 2,18
Parzival 21 20 122 6 2,59
Florilegium 22 21 547 5 2,19
Sermon 158 34 33 270 3 2,12
Heinrichi 48 51 1042 17 4,84
Found 26 positive out of 44 groupings in 0 sec.
Processing parzival.
Stemma has 21 nodes and 20 edges.
Found 45 positive out of 122 groupings in 1 sec.
Processing florilegium.
Stemma has 22 nodes and 21 edges.
Found 431 positive out of 547 groupings in 2 sec.
Processing sermon158.
Stemma has 34 nodes and 33 edges.
Found 64 positive out of 270 groupings in 2 sec.
Processing heinrichi.
Stemma has 48 nodes and 51 edges.
Found 1 positive out of 1042 groupings in 12 sec.
Our largest benchmark is the heinrichi data set (Roos and Heikkilä 2009). This
stemma about old Finnish texts includes 48 manuscripts, 51 copiedBy tuples and
information about 1042 features. Processing all features takes 12 seconds with the
IDP system while it took 25 seconds with the original procedural code.
One can observe that rather few features are consistent with the stemma. This
raises the question what is the minimal number of sources needed to explain the
data. To solve that inference task, it suffices to replace the vocabulary extension
Vtaskandthetheory Ttaskintheknowledgebaseandtointroducethetermtobe
minimized.Ascoreprocedure,CheckisreplacedbyminSourcesandtheprocessing
of results has to be adjusted. The most relevant new parts are shown in Listing 6.
The IsSource predicate is defined as manuscripts that do not have a parent with
the same variant reading.
Listing 6. Minimize the number of sources.
vocabulary Vms {
extern vocabulary V
IsSource(Manuscript)
theory Tms : Vms {
{! x : IsSource(x) <− ∼? y : CopiedBy(y,x) &
VariantReading(y) = VariantReading(x).}
term NbOfSources : Vms {
#{ x : IsSource(x) }
Predicate Logic as a Modeling Language 21
procedure minSources(feature) {
setvocabulary(feature ,Vms)
return minimize(Tms,feature ,NbOfSources)[1]
Althoughthisisaminimizationproblem,processingthetraditionsisstillamatter
of seconds, except for the larger Heinrichi dataset which now requires about 5
minutes to process its 1042 features.
Other variations are of interest to the researchers. One variation, mentioned by
Andrews et al. (2012), considers the possibility that the scribe has copied from an
olderancestorthanthedirectparent,thusreintroducingavariant.Playingwiththe
relative penalty of introducing a new variant versus reverting to an older variant,
onecanobtainvariousexplanationsofinteresttothestemmatologist.Allthesecan
be achieved with modifying a handful of lines in the model. Interesting about the
abovevariantisthatitusesapredicateIndirectAncestorthatisdefinedinterms
of the stemma data, so it can be computed once and reused when processing each
of the features. As illustrated in Listing 7, the tight integration of the knowledge
base with the procedural code makes this very easy9. The procedure readStemma,
which constructs the stemma structure from the inputfile, is extended with the
call modelexpand(T,stemma)[1]. The resulting model is the stemma structure ex-
tended with the true IndirectAncestor atoms. This structure, together with the
other outputs of readStemma, is returned to the procedure processFiles which
uses it to handle the features one by one.
Listing7. Materializingadefinitiononceandusingthematerializationmanytimes.
vocabulary V {
/∗ ... as in Listing 5 ... ∗/
IndirectAncestor(Manuscript ,Manuscript)
theory T : V {
{! x y : IndirectAncestor(x,y) <−
? z : CopiedBy(x,z) & IndirectAncestor(z,y).
! x y : IndirectAncestor(x,y) <−
? z : CopiedBy(x,z) & CopiedBy(z,y).}
procedure readStemma(stemmafilename) {
local stemma = newstructure(V,"stemma")
/∗ ... reading the stemma data ... ∗/
return modelexpand(T,stemma)[1] , #nodes, #edges
9 WithamorerecentversionofIDP3,theusercanleavethisoptimizationtothesystem(Jansen
etal.2013).
22 Bruynooghe et al.
4 Minimum common supergraphs of partially labeled trees
Phylogenetic trees, extensively surveyed by Felsenstein (2004), are the traditional
tool for representing the evolution of a given set of species. However, there exist
situations in which a tree representation is inadequate. One reason is the presence
ofevolutionaryeventsthatcannotbedisplayedbyatree:genesmaybeduplicated,
transferred or lost, and recombination events (i.e., the breaking of a DNA strand
followed by its reinsertion into a different DNA molecule) as well as hybridization
events (i.e., the combination of genetic material from several species) are known
to occur. A second reason is that even when evolution is indeed tree-like, there
are cases in which a relatively large number of tree topologies are “equally good”
according to the chosen criterion, and that not enough information is available to
discriminate between those trees. One solution that has been proposed to address
the latter issue is the use of consensus trees, where the idea is to find a tree that
representsacompromisebetweenthegiventopologies.Anotherapproach,thefocus
of this section, consists in building a network that is compatible with all topologies
of interest. A somewhat loose description of the variant we are interested in, which
willbestatedinamoreformalwaybelow,istofindthesmallestgraphthatcontains
agivensetofevolutionarytrees.Formoreinformationaboutphylogeneticnetworks,
see the recent book by Huson et al. (2010) and the online, up-to-date annotated
bibliography maintained by Gambette (2010).
4.1 The problem
Thestudiedproblemisabouttheevolutionofafixedsetofmspecies.Theinputis
a set of phylogenetic trees, each tree showing a plausible relationship between the
m species. All trees have n (> m) nodes, m of them are labeled with the name of
the species (typically, in the leaves, but also internal nodes can be labeled). Given
n−m extra names, the labeling of each tree can be extended into a full labeling.
Now, we can consider the union of these full labelings: a network with m labeled
nodesandedgeswhichareinducedbythebijectionsbetweenthefullylabeledtrees
and the network. Obviously, the number of edges of the network depends on the
chosen full labelings of the trees. The task is to find a network with a minimum
numberofedges.Below,weformulatetheproblemasaslightlymoregeneralgraph
problem where we do not fix the size of the initial labeling.
Definition 2 (Common supergraph of partially labeled n-graphs)
Given is a set N of n names and a set of graphs {G ,G ,...,G } where each
graph G = (V,E ,L ) has n vertices (the set V), edges connecting pairs of ver-
tices (the set E ) and where some of the vertices are labeled by names (an injec-
tive partial function L : V → N). A graph (N,EN) is a common supergraph of
{G ,G ,...,G } if there exists, for each i, a bijection L(cid:48) : V → N that extends
L and such that {v,w} ∈ EN iff there exists an i such that {v(cid:48),w(cid:48)} ∈ E and
A common supergraph (N,EN) is a minimum common supergraph if no other
common supergraph (N,EN(cid:48)) exists for which |EN(cid:48)|<|EN|.
Predicate Logic as a Modeling Language 23
Note that every labeling function L(cid:48) induces an injection E → EN, hence the
name common supergraph. Figure 6 shows two partially labeled 7-graphs, along
with two of their common supergraphs. G is not a minimum common supergraph
since it has more edges than G ; G is a minimum common supergraph since T
and T are not isomorphic and G has only one more edge than each of T and T .
1 3 1 3 1 3 1
T1 T2 G1 G2
Fig. 6. Two 7-graphs, T and T , and two of their common supergraphs. G is a
minimum common supergraph.
Now, we can consider the following decision problem: Given a set of partially
labeled n-graphs, can the labelings be completed such that the n-graphs have a
common supergraph with at most k edges? Labarre and Verwer (2014) prove that
this problem is NP-hard, even if the n-graphs are trees with all leaves labeled.
4.2 An FO(·)IDP3 solution
Listing 8 shows a simple model inspired by (Labarre and Verwer 2014). It makes
use of three types, tree, vertex, and name. The latter two types have the same
number of elements in a correct input structure. The structure of the given trees
is described by the ternary predicate edge (the first argument refers to the tree to
which the edge belongs), the structure of the common supergraph (over the names
themselves) by the predicate arc. The labeling is described by the function label
from the nodes of the given trees to the names. It is partially given in the input
structureanditiscompletedduringmodelexpansion.Theconstraintinthetheory,
stating that, for each name nm and each tree t, there exists exactly one node nd
(denoted? 1 nd)suchthatitslabelisnm,ensuresthatthelabelingisbijective.The
arc atoms can be defined as the pairs of names induced by the labels on the nodes
of an edge of the tree (the definition in the theory). However, as the minimization
isonthenumberof arcatomsinamodel,somecareisrequired.Oneshouldensure
either that arc is a symmetric relation or that there is at most one arc atom for
each pair of names. The latter approach is taken as it gives a somewhat smaller
grounding.Itisachievedbyexploitingthetotalorderwhichexistsovereachdomain
(the tests label(t,x) < label(t,y)).
Listing 8. Modeling cs-plt in FO(·)IDP3.
vocabulary CsPltVoc {
type vertex
24 Bruynooghe et al.
type name // Isomorphic to vertex
edge(tree ,node,node) // trees , given in input structure
arc(name,name) // the induced network
label(tree ,node): name // the labeling ,
// partially given in the input structure
theory CsPltTheory : CsPltVoc {
{ // induced network; arc is anti−symmetric
! t x y : arc(label(t,x),label(t,y)) <− edge(t,x,y) &
label(t,x) < label(t,y).
! t x y : arc(label(t,x),label(t,y)) <− edge(t,y,x) &
label(t,x) < label(t,y).
! t nm : ?1 nd : label(t,nd) = nm. // label is bijective
term SizeOfSupergraph : CsPltVoc { #{ x y : arc(x,y) } }
procedure main() {
print(minimize(CsPltTheory,CsPltStructure ,SizeOfSupergraph)[1])
The rules of the arc definition in this solution each have have two occurrences
of the terms label(t,x) and label(t,y). The current grounder naively associates a
distinct symbol with each occurrence, which boils down to grounding a clause of
the following form:
Listing 9. One of the arc rules after initial processing by the grounder.
! t x y lx1 lx2 ly1 ly2 : arc(lx1 ,ly1) <− lx1=label(t,x) &
ly1=label(t,y) & lx2=label(t,x) & ly2=label(t,y) &
edge(t,x,y) & lx2 < ly2.
This approach creates extra variables and very large groundings. To avoid this
behavior, on can rewrite the definition as:
Listing 10. Better performing definition of arc.
{ // induced network
! t x y lx ly : arc(lx ,ly) <− lx=label(t,x) & ly=label(t,y) &
edge(t,x,y) & lx < ly.
! t x y lx ly : arc(lx ,ly) <− lx=label(t,x) & ly=label(t,y) &
edge(t,y,x) & lx < ly.
While the formulation is less elegant, the effect on the size of the grounding and
the solving time is dramatic; e.g., the grounding is reduced from 620798 to 6024
propositional clauses and the solving time from 144s to 8s on a problem with 5
trees of 8 vertices and 4 initial labels.
One can explore several other variations. As mentioned above, one could use a
symmetric arc relation. Also, as the arc definition is free of recursion, one could
replace it with the two implications of the completion. Then, exploiting the min-
imization on the number of arc atoms, one could drop the only-if part of the
completion. The effect on solving time of all these variations is rather marginal.
Predicate Logic as a Modeling Language 25
#initial exact greedy
#trees #nodes labels #edges #edges
5 55 5 130 131.25
5 60 10 128 132.75
5 75 25 207.75* 184.75
10 55 5 183.75* 154.50
10 60 10 177.75* 154.75
10 75 25 270.00* 269.25
20 55 5 241.50* 171.75
20 60 10 232.00* 152.25
20 75 25 346.25* 279.00
Table2. Randomlygeneratedinstancesoftheminimumcommonsubgraphproblem
solved with a time bound of 2000s. Sizes of MCS (average over four runs) for exact
and greedy approach. *: approximate solution due to time out.
4.3 An approximate solution
The solving time is exponential in the number of nodes and, if several trees are
involved,theprogrambecomesimpracticalonreal-worldproblems,evenifthebest
solution found so far is returned when some time budget is exceeded. However, the
versatility of the IDP system allowed us to experiment with various strategies for
greedily searching an approximate solution. This led to the following quite natural
solution that performed very well, with respect to both running time and quality
of the solution.
1. Find a minimum common supergraph (MCS) for every pair of trees.
2. Pick an MCS with minimum size (say G) and remove the two trees that are
the input for G.
3. Find an MCS between G and every remaining tree.
4. ReplaceG10 byanMCSwithminimumsize,removethetreethatistheinput
for this MCS and go back to step 3 if any tree remains.
Steps1and3ofthissimpleprocedureareperformedbyIDP3usingamodelvery
similartothatofListing8(seeLabarreandVerwer(2014)fortheactualmodel)11.
This greedy approach works very well. Indeed, for large instances and a fixed time
budget,theexactmethodrunsoutoftimeandreturnsasuboptimalsolutionwhile
the greedy method completes and returns a solution that, although suboptimal,
is typically much smaller. Table 2 shows some experimental results on randomly
generated data with various parameters. A timeout was set to 2000s12 and average
number of edges were recorded over four runs for each instance for both the exact
and the greedy method.
10 Thisway,theMCSisassembledbyeachtimeincorporatingoneadditionaloriginaltree.
11 The whole method can be implemented as an IDP3 procedure; however, the scripts had been
implementedbeforetheLuainterfacewasavailable.
12 UsinganIntelR CoreTM i7CPU870at2.93GHzwith8GBofRAMrunningUbuntu;default
settingsforIDP3.
26 Bruynooghe et al.
5 Learning deterministic finite state automata
A third task is about learning a deterministic finite state automaton (DFA). The
goal is to find a (non-unique) smallest DFA that is consistent with a given set of
positive and negative examples. It is one of the best studied problems in grammat-
ical inference (de la Higuera 2005), has many application areas, and is known to
be NP-complete (Gold 1978). Interestingly, one of the first algorithms proposed to
solve this problem was based on a translation to constraint programming (Bier-
mann and Feldman 1972). Much later, translations of this problem to graph col-
oring (Coste and Nicolas 1997; Costa Florêncio and Verwer 2012) and satisfiabil-
ity (Grinchtein et al. 2006; Heule and Verwer 2010) were proposed. Although the
DFA learning problem is typically tackled using greedy approaches (de la Higuera
2005),HeuleandVerwer(2012)recentlywonthe2010StaminaDFAlearningcom-
petition(Stamina2010)byanimprovedtranslationtoaSATproblemandrunning
an off-the-shelf SAT solver. Here we explore to what extent an FO(·)IDP3 formal-
ization can compete with this competition winner.
5.1 The problem
Adeterministic finite state automaton (DFA)isadirectedgraphconsistingofaset
ofstates Q(nodes)andlabeledtransitions T (directededges).Therootisthestart
stateandanystateiseitheranaccepting orarejecting state.Ineachstate,thereis
exactlyonetransitionforeachsymbol.ADFAdefinesalanguage,thesetofstrings
itaccepts.Itcanbeusedtogenerate orverify sequencesofsymbols(strings)using
aprocesscalledDFAcomputation.Whenverifyingstrings,thesymbolsoftheinput
string determine a path through the graph. When the final state is an accepting
state, the string is accepted, otherwise it is rejected.
Given a pair of finite sets of positive example strings S+ and negative example
strings S−, (the input sample), the goal of DFA identification (or learning) is to
find a (non-unique) smallest DFA A that is consistent with S = {S+,S−}, i.e.,
every string in S+ is accepted, and every string in S− is rejected by A. Typically,
the size of a DFA is measured by |Q|, the number of states it contains.
Most DFA learning algorithms are based on the method of state-merging. This
method first constructs a tree-shaped automaton called the augmented prefix tree
acceptor (APTA). As can be seen in Figure 7, the APTA accepts the positive
examples and rejects the negative ones. Other strings either end up in a non-final
state or cannot be processed due to a missing transition. The APTA automaton
can be completed to obtain a DFA with the same number of states by (arbitrarily)
labelingthenon-finalstatesandaddingthemissingtransitions.Whenallnon-final
states are labeled as reject and all extra transitions target a reject state with no
path to an accepting state, this DFA accepts only the positive examples.
A smaller DFA, accepting more strings, can be constructed by state-merging
on the APTA. Merging states under the constraints that the automaton remains
deterministic (at most one transition/label in each state) and that accepting and
rejecting states cannot be merged preserves consistency with the input sample.
Predicate Logic as a Modeling Language 27
b b accepting
Fig. 7. An augmented prefix tree acceptor (APTA) for S = (S+ =
{a,abaa,bb},S− = {abb,b}). The start state (annotated with incoming arrow) is
the root of the APTA.
State-merging increases the number of strings accepted by the automaton, and
hencegeneralizesthelanguageacceptedbytheDFAthatcompletestheautomaton.
States of the final automatonare thusequivalence classes of states of theAPTA.
Callingthestatesofthefinalautomatoncolors,theproblembecomesthatoffinding
a coloring of the states of the APTA that is consistent with the input sample.
Following Coste and Nicolas (1997), Heule and Verwer (2010) take this approach.
They formulate constraints expressing which pairs of states are incompatible, and
abstract the problem as a graph. The nodes of this graph are the states of the
APTA and the edges are the incompatible pairs. The decision problem, whether
there exists an automaton with k states, becomes a graph coloring problem for k
colors. They use a clever SAT encoding to solve this decision problem and embed
it in a workflow to solve the minimization problem. For really large problems,
the SAT formulation becomes too big (hundreds of colors, resulting in over 100
millionclauses)tobehandledbyaSATsolver(HeuleandVerwer2010).Toreduce
the problem size, they used a greedy heuristic procedural method based on state-
merging. Every merge performed by this method reduces the size of the APTA
andthereforealsothesizeoftheencoding.Inaddition,thispreprocessingidentifies
a clique of pairwise incompatible states in the APTA. For states in this clique,
the colors can be fixed in advance. The effect is to break the symmetries between
these colors and thus to further reduce the size of the problem. The preprocessing
also deduces that certain state/color combinations cannot result in a solution. A
preprocessedprobleminstanceisthenextendedwithasetofSATclausesandisthe
input for the SAT solver. The SAT clauses express the constraints of the problem
and are generated from the instance.
5.2 An FO(·)IDP3 solution
Ourgoalisnottosetupthecompleteworkflowdescribedabove,buttocomparethe
performanceofthenativeSATencodingofHeuleandVerwer(2010)andHeuleand
Verwer (2012) with the performance of an FO(·)IDP3 model on the same problem
instances as obtained after the preprocessing. Our FO(·)IDP3 model for solving a
single instance is shown in Listing 11.
Listing 11. Modeling DFA in FO(·)IDP3.
vocabulary dfaVoc {
28 Bruynooghe et al.
type state // states used in APTA
type label // symbols triggering transitions
type color // available states for resulting automaton
partial trans(state ,label ): state // transitions of APTA
acc(state) // accepting states of APTA
rej(state) // rejecting states of APTA
colorOf(state): color // fixed in input for colors in clique
// the resulting automaton:
partial colorTrans(color ,label ): color // transitions of DFA
accColor(color) // accepting states
theory dfaTheory : dfaVoc {
! x : acc(x) => accColor(colorOf(x)).
! x : rej(x) => ∼accColor(colorOf(x)).
// trans induces colorTrans:
! x l z: trans(x,l)=z =>
! i j : colorOf(x)=i & colorOf(z)=j => colorTrans(i ,l)=j.
procedure main() {
print(modelexpand(dfaTheory,instance )[1])
The types state, label, the function trans, and the predicates acc and rej
describethegiveninputsamples(andhencetheAPTA).Notethattransispartial
asitisonlydefinedforthetransitionspresentintheinputsample.Thestatesofthe
resulting automaton are elements of the type color. Its transitions are described
by the function colorTrans. This function is also declared as a partial function.
To obtain a complete DFA, the function colorTrans has to be extended with the
missing transitions. Which one is assigned does not matter as it does not affect
the processing of the strings in the input sample (though it has an effect on the
language that is accepted). The function colorOf maps the states of the APTA
on the states (colors) of the DFA. The predicate accColor describes the accepting
states of the resulting automaton.
ThetheoryexpressestwoconstraintsonaccColor:acceptingstatesoftheAPTA
must and rejecting states cannot be mapped to an accepting state of the DFA.
A third constraint states that each transition in the APTA induces a transition
(between colors) in the DFA.
The input structure, which is omitted, not only completely defines the types
color,stateandlabelbutalsotheAPTA.ThatimpliesthattheIDP3grounder
has complete knowledge about the relations accept and reject and the function
trans. Hence, for example, the grounder only grounds the formula
colorTrans(colorOf(x),l)=colorOf(z)fortuples(x,l,z)forwhich trans(x,l)=zistrue
in the input structure. Further, the input structure also contains the partial infor-
mationaboutcolorOfandcolorTransthathasbeenderivedbythepreprocessing.
Themainprocedureassumesthattheinputstructureisnamedinstance;itcalls
the solver to search for a model and prints it.
The above model is a very natural formulation of the problem and corresponds
quite closely to a “decompilation” of the SAT clauses expressing the constraints
Predicate Logic as a Modeling Language 29
of the problem (Table 1 in both Heule and Verwer (2010) and Heule and Verwer
(2012)). The most noticeable difference is in a redundant constraint which can be
decompiled into:
Listing 12. Redundant constraint
!v l w: trans(w,l)=v =>
!j: colorTrans(colorOf(w),l)=j => colorOf(v)=j.
This formula can be derived from the last formula in our theory together with the
fact that colorOf is a total function.
InFO(·)IDP3 itisverystraightforwardtoextendthemodelwithatermcounting
thenumberofcolorsusedandtominimizethatnumber.ThismakesourFO(·)IDP3
method very similar to the optimization method used by Heule and Verwer (2010;
Heule and Verwer (2012). IDP, however, has several advantages over an encoding
constructed by hand. For instance, variants of the model such as minimizing the
numberoftransitionsintheDFAinsteadofthenumberofstatesareverystraight-
forward to obtain, but would require a major reengineering of the SAT encoding.
ThishaspracticalvalueasdifferentapplicationdomainsofDFApreferdifferentop-
timization criteria. Furthermore, it is much easier to introduce bugs in handmade
encodings than in the few lines of IDP code. In fact, by analyzing and comparing
the results of IDP and the handmade encoding, we discovered some subtle bugs in
the handmade translation that caused an incorrect answer in rare occasions.
5.3 Experiments
We compared the performance of our model with that of the SAT encoding, de-
noted DFASAT, for 100 tough problems (the DFA is restricted to have only 5
states on top of those in the initial clique) from the 2010 Stamina DFA learning
competition (Stamina 2010).13
Figure8comparesthesolvingtimeofDFASATwiththatoftwoFO(·)IDP3 mod-
els.ThefirstoneisasshowninListing11(IDP);thesecondoneextendsthemodel
withtheredundantconstraintofListing12(IDP+RED).Onecanobservethatthe
redundant constraint improves the performance of the IDP3 system and that the
performance comes quite close to that of DFASAT. Still, DFASAT can solve more
problems than IDP+RED (69 vs. 59). We also have to add that the dedicated pre-
processingthatgeneratestheSATinstancesrequiresonaverage5secondswhilethe
groundingtakessubstantiallymoretime.FortheIDPversion,itisonaverage124s;
forID+RED,theaverageis168s.Theresultsreportedherearesubstantiallybetter
than those reported in (Blockeel et al. 2012). By analyzing these earlier results, we
unraveled that the large performance gap was due to our grounding being three
times the size of the SAT encoding. This was caused by the introduction of un-
needed auxiliary predicates (so called Tseitins) during the grounding. The problem
13 Using an IntelR CoreTM i5-2500 CPU at 3.30GHz with 7.7 GB of RAM Running Ubuntu.
Memoryusewaslimitedto4GB,timeto5000seconds.IDP3wasranwithstandardoptions.
30 Bruynooghe et al.
Fig. 8. Solving time for the SAT encoding (DFASAT), for the FO(·)IDP3 model
of Listing 11 (IDP) and for that model extended with the redundant constraint
of Listing 12 (IDP+RED). Times are monotonically increasing, so the order of
probleminstancesisdifferentforeachsystem.Timeoutissetat5000s.69problems
are solved by DFASAT, 59 by IDP and IDP+RED.
was repaired in a new version of the grounder. As mentioned before, our detailed
analysis also revealed subtle bugs in the dedicated preprocessing which generates
the SAT encodings for DFASAT. Thus, using an IDP implementation of a hard
problem such as DFA learning and comparing it to a fast competition winning
SATtranslationwasnotonlyusefulforimprovingIDP,butalsoforimprovingthe
competition winner.
It is very encouraging to observe that the performance of a tiny and compre-
hensible predicate logic model comes very close to that of an ingeniously-tuned
SAT-encoding that is a key component of a competition winner.
6 Conclusion
In this paper, we presented the IDP3 system from a user’s perspective. We in-
troduced the various components of an FO(·)IDP3 model and illustrated their use
in a model for the shortest path problem. We also showed models for some prob-
lems encountered by researchers in data mining and machine learning. In a first
problem from stemmatology, FO(·)IDP3 models proved to be of invaluable help
Predicate Logic as a Modeling Language 31
for researchers trying to cope with stemma that go beyond tree structures (An-
drews et al. 2012). We obtained a model that not only correctly handles arbitrary
directed acyclic graphs, but also achieved better performance than the original
(incomplete) procedural code. In the second problem, about phylogenetic trees,
FO(·)IDP3 models helped researchers to explore approximate solutions for an NP-
hard problem (Labarre and Verwer 2014). The third problem we modeled is the
classical problem of learning a deterministic finite state automaton. We compared
an FO(·)IDP3 model with a state of the art SAT encoding of the problem. Here
we found that the performance of an IDP3 solution comes pretty close to that of
a highly tuned SAT encoding. These applications illustrate that FO(·)IDP3 models
are a valuable alternative for dedicated procedural code when novel data needs to
beanalyzedandexplored.Interestingly,inbothproblemswherewecomparedwith
an existing solution (stemmatology and DFA learning), we uncovered some bugs
in those solutions. It is fair to add that we also uncovered some cases where the
grounder of the IDP3 system performed a suboptimal job. In the minimum com-
mon supergraph application we found it deals poorly with multiple occurrences of
the same term in a formula; in the DFA application we found that it introduced
unneeded auxiliary symbols. While the latter problem has already been solved, the
former is, at the time of writing, still on the todo list of the implementation team.
Our work is a further indication that the IDP3 system is coming of age. It was
already known from the ASP-competitions that it compares pretty well with ASP
systems in terms of performance (Denecker et al. 2009; Calimeri et al. 2011). In
contrast to ASP, which relies on the stable semantics (Gelfond and Lifschitz 1988),
it is based on first-order logic. The informal semantics of FO’s connectives and of
thenovellanguageconstructsisclearandeasytounderstand.Thisprobablymakes
iteasierfornewcomerstostartmodeling.Forexample,theauthorsoftheminimum
commonsupergraphproblem(LabarreandVerwer2014)wereneitherfamiliarwith
Prolog nor with FO(·)IDP3 and hardly needed any help from the IDP team. The
coreofanFO(·)IDP3 modelconsistsontheonehandofformulasinfirst-orderlogic,
whichactasconstraints,andontheotherhandofdefinitions,whichareclosetothe
rules of traditional logic programs. Given interpretations for open predicates (the
predicates that are not defined in the theory), the definitions determine a unique
model through the well-founded semantics (Van Gelder et al. 1991). The search
results in an interpretation of the open predicates and hence a model of the theory
that is consistent with the constraints. What distinguishes FO(·) from traditional
logicprogrammingistheuseofnon-Herbrandinterpretationsandcorrespondingly,
the lack of constructor functions. This often leads to a simpler data representation
and gives rise to elegant model formulations. On the other hand, there are cases
where the rich data structures that arise in Herbrand interpretations (compound
terms,lists,trees,...)areusefultooandthesecurrentlycannoteasilybemodeledin
IDP3.AnotherdistinctionisthattheIDPframeworkoffersotherformsofinference,
most notably model expansion and model minimization. A feature of the IDP3
systemistheintegrationofproceduresinFO(·)IDP3 models(DePooteretal.2011)
and the clean separation between declarative and procedural components. As we
32 Bruynooghe et al.
illustrated in the stemmatology application, this allows a user to develop a whole
workflow in an FO(·)IDP3 model.
The logic of FO(·)IDP3 extends predicate logic with inductive definitions, types,
arithmetic, aggregates and partial functions. Of these, inductive definitions is the
most fundamental one. The basis of the language is predicate logic. In fact, in
manyapplications,theextensionsonlyserveformakingmodelsmorereadable.For
example, the aggregates (in the form of quantifications ?<2) in the shortest path
problem are directly translatable to FO and the (non-recursive) definition in the
minimum common supergraph problem is equivalent with its completion. Hence,
three out of the four problems we describe in this text are in fact solved with pure
predicate logic models.
Our work on applications taught us also a few things about good models. In
all problems we solved in this paper, a class of objects is separated in equivalence
classes.(Intheshortestpathproblemthereistheclassofedgesparticipatinginthe
path, and the class of other edges). It is tempting to represent these equivalence
classes by the transitive closure of some relation. However, the transitive closure of
a binary relation is expensive. It gives rise to large groundings and this, together
with the cost of checking for unfounded sets, results in poor performance. Binary
transitive closures arise naturally during modeling but they are better avoided in
the IDP3 system. In the shortest path problem our first solution had a binary
transitive reaches relation. It required some creative tinkering and awareness that
binary transitive closures are harmful to make the switch to the solution we pre-
sented. Replacing it with the unary reachable relation had a major impact on
efficiency. Also our first solution to the stemmatology problem had a transitive
closure. Here, transitive closure could be avoided altogether. It was a major step
forwardinefficiencytoreplaceitbyacoloringfunctionforthenodesinthestemma
graph.Theothertwoproblemsalsousefunctions(labelandcolorOfrespectively)
whose range defines membership in an equivalence class.
The preference of a unary transitive relation over a binary one is an illustration
of another general principle: less variables is better in rules and constraints. One
should try to break up complex rules and constraints in simpler ones requiring less
variablesandexplorewhetheronecandowithpredicatesandfunctionshavingless
arguments. Another important point is that one should not be satisfied with a first
correct model. Often, major improvements are possible, as we illustrated in several
of our applications.
The IDP3 system is an evolving research system and further improvements are
on the way. A lot of ongoing work aims at making the performance less dependent
on clever modeling. One recent feature is symmetry breaking. Predicate level sym-
metry detection and dynamic symmetry breaking (during search) automatically
exploit symmetries present in the problem (Devriendt et al. 2012) (symmetry is
present in the DFA problem: permuting the colors gives another solution; however
it was broken in an ad-hoc way in the SAT encoding and hence also in the input
structure of our instances). One recent feature is to avoid complete proposionaliza-
tion during grounding. On one hand by keeping function terms in the grounding
(De Cat et al. 2013), on the other hand through lazy, demand driven grounding
Predicate Logic as a Modeling Language 33
during search (De Cat et al. 2012; De Cat et al. 2014). Another feature is the de-
tection of functional dependencies and their use to reduce the arity of predicates
(De Cat and Bruynooghe 2013).
Acknowledgements
CarolineMacéandTaraAndrewsintroducedsomeoftheauthorstostemmatology
andprovidedthedatasets;Taraalsoexplainedtheworkingoftheproceduralcode.
ThisworkwassupportedbyResearchFoundation-Flanders(FWO-Vlaanderen)
and by the Research Council of KU Leuven (GOA/08/008 and GOA 13/010).