Predictability of IL-28B-polymorphism on protease-inhibitor-based
triple-therapy in chronic HCV-genotype-1 patients:
A meta-analysis
Nicolae-Catalin Mechie, Christian Röver, Silke Cameron, Ahmad Amanzada
Nicolae-Catalin Mechie, Silke Cameron, Ahmad Amanzada,
Department of Gastroenterology and Endocrinology, University Medical
Center Goettingen, Georg-August-University, 37075 Goettingen, Germany
Christian Röver, Department of Medical Statistics, University Medical
Center Goettingen, Georg-August-University, 37073 Goettingen, Germany
AIM: To investigate the predictability of interleukin-28B single nucleotide
polymorphism rs12979860 with respect to sustained virological response
(SVR) in chronically hepatitis C virus (HCV) genotype-1 patients treated
with a protease-inhibitor and pegylated interferon- (Peg-INF- ) based
triple-therapy.
METHODS: We searched PubMed, the Cochrane Library and Web of
Knowledge for studies regarding the interleukin 28B (IL-28B)-genotype and
protease-inhibitor based triple-therapy. Ten studies with 2707 patients
were included into this meta-analysis. We used regression methods in
order to investigate determinants of SVR.
RESULTS: IL-28B-CC-genotype patients achieved higher SVR rates (odds
5.34, CI: 3.81-7.49) than IL-28B-non-CC-genotype patients (1.88, CI: 1.43-
2.48) receiving triple-therapy. The line of therapy (treatment-naïve or
-experienced for Peg-INF- ) did not affect the predictive value of IL-28B (P
= 0.1). IL-28B-CC-genotype patients treated with protease inhibitor-based
triple-therapy consisting of Boceprevir, Simeprevir, Telaprevir or Vaniprevir
showed odds of 1.86, 9.77, 4.51 and 0.89, respectively. The odds for CC
genotype patients treated with Faldaprevir cannot be quantified, as only a
single study with a 100% SVR rate was available.
CONCLUSION: IL-28B-SNP predicts the outcome for chronic HCV
genotype-1 patients receiving protease inhibitor-based triple-therapy. The
predictive value varies between the different protease inhibitors.
Key words: Hepatitis C virus; Direct antiviral agents; Interleukin 28B;
Sustained virological response; Meta-analysis
Core tip: Hepatitis C is a world health problem and represents a dynamic
field of research for new therapeutic options. Recently direct antiviral
agents such as protease inhibitors have been developed which, in addition
to pegylated interferon- and Ribavirin, obtain higher sustained virological
response (SVR) rates. Of note, costs are higher and side effects are more
common. The data regarding the predictive value of Interleukin 28B (IL-
28B) are controversial. This meta-analysis was conducted on 2707 patients
treated with different protease inhibitors. Its aim was to clarify the
predictive value of IL-28B on SVR in protease inhibitor-based triple-
therapy, allowing the possibility of personalized treatment.
Mechie NC, Röver C, Cameron S, Amanzada A. Predictability of IL-28B-
polymorphism on protease-inhibitor-based triple-therapy in chronic HCV-
genotype-1 patients: A meta-analysis. World J Hepatol 2014; In press
INTRODUCTION
Hepatitis C virus (HCV) is a global health Problem. According to the World
Health Organization, approximately 150 million people are chronically
infected with HCV, and it is estimated that more than 350 thousand are
dying each year[1]. HCV is responsible in Europe and North America for
50% of liver cirrhosis and 25% of hepatocellular carcinoma[2-4].
HCV has 7 genotypes (1 to 7) and approximately 100 subtypes[5].
Genotype 1, which is the most common HCV genotype in Western
countries, has the worst prognosis and response to antiviral treatment in
comparison to other genotypes[6-8].
In the last years the standard therapy (Standard of care, SOC) for HCV
consisted of pegylated Interferon- (Peg-IFN- ) and Ribavirin (RBV)[9].
Recently, several direct antiviral agents (DAA) were developed, such as
the protease inhibitors (PI) Boceprevir (BOC), Telaprevir (TVR), Vaniprevir
(VNP), Faldaprevir (FLP) and Simeprevir (SMP)[10-13]. In pivotal studies,
patients treated with BOC or TVR and Peg-IFN- /RBV achieved significantly
higher sustained virological response (SVR) rates compared to standard
therapy[11-14]. These new treatment options bring new hopes for chronically
HCV infected patients but they have more side effects and higher costs[10].
Treatment predictors are important tools for the management of therapy
in patients with chronic HCV infection. For the current standard treatment
with Peg-IFN- /RBV in patients with chronic HCV infection, HCV genotypes
2 and 3, low baseline viral load, ethnicity, younger age, low  -GT levels,
low  -GT/ALT level, absence of advanced fibrosis/cirrhosis, and absence of
steatosis in the liver have been identified as independent pretreatment
predictors of a SVR[15,16].
After initiation of treatment, rapid virological response (RVR,
undetectable HCV-RNA at week 4 of therapy) is the best predictor of SVR
independent of HCV genotype[16]. Recently, several genome-wide
association studies showed that a single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP)
within the interleukin 28B (IL-28B) gene is significantly associated with
treatment outcome under standard treatment in chronically HCV
genotype-1 infected patients[17-19]. IL-28B rs12979860 is the most
investigated allele of IL-28B in Europe and North America. The data about
the predictive value of IL-28B-genotype in HCV genotype-1 and triple-
therapy are inconsistent. In the studies with VNP, IL-28B-genotype had no
predictive value for the treatment[13,20]. In the studies by Poordad et al[21],
Fried et al[22], Bronowicki et al[23], Sulkowski et al[24] and Akuta et al[25], IL-
28B-CC-genotype had a favorable prognosis. In the study by Flamm et al[26]
for Boceprevir, genotype IL-28B-TT had a favorable prognosis and by
Jacobson et al[27] and Pol et al[28], IL-28B-genotype had a limited influence
on SVR. However, more information about the predictability of IL-28B-
genotype would allow physicians to individualize antiviral HCV therapy.
Therefore, we conducted this meta-analysis to investigate the predictive
value of IL-28B rs12979860 (CC vs CT + TT) allele for SVR in chronically
HCV genotype-1 infected patients treated with a triple-therapy regimen
consisting of a DAA (BOC, TVR VNP, FLP or SMP) and Peg-IFN- /RBV.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
We searched in PubMed, Web of Knowledge and the Cochrane Library
databases, for relevant articles (full text and meeting abstracts) up to
January 2014 regarding the following the next key words: “Boceprevir”
or/and “SCH503034”, “Telaprevir” or/and ”VX-950”, “Ciluprevir” or/and
“BILN 2061”, “Simeprevir” or/and ”TMC435”, “Danoprevir” or/and
“R7227”, “Vaniprevir” (“MK-7009”), “MK-5172”, “Faldaprevir”
(“BI201335”), “Narlaprevir” (“SCH900518”), “Asunaprevir” (“BMS-
650032”), “PHX1766”, “GS-9256”, “GS-9451”, “ABT450”, “IDX320”, “ACH-
1625”. All these DAAs were used as search words in order to avoid missing
studies which have determined IL-28B polymorphism for a triple therapy.
Because a large number of patient samples were retrospectively tested for
IL-28B genotype and some of these results were only presented in
meetings, we have decided to include also the meeting abstracts in our
meta-analysis. In order to identify relevant studies, the references of the
articles included were manually searched. We did not find any other
articles that corresponded to our inclusion criteria. The studies search was
performed using manual search for Cochrane Library and EndNote X7 for
PubMed and Web of Knowledge databases.
The inclusion criteria were: studies with human subjects, more than 18
years of age, HCV genotype-1 patients, treatment with triple-therapy (IFN
therapy-naïve and –experienced) with determined IL-28B genetic
polymorphism for rs12979860 allele. Only articles in English were
included. The exclusion criteria were: HCV/HIV or HCV/HBV co-infection,
liver transplantation recipients, pediatric studies and IL-28B genetic
polymorphism other than rs12979860. SVR was defined as undetectable
HCV-RNA 24 wk after end of treatment.
The studies were reviewed independently by two authors (NCM and AA).
All differences were resolved by consensus among these two authors. Our
analysis was based on the original published data. For consistency we
refrained from contacting the authors of the individual studies. From the
studies, the following data were extracted: First author, year of
publication, type of patients (IFN therapy-naïve or -experienced), total
number of patients, the number of patients with determined IL-28B-
genotype, type of DAA, IL-28B genetic polymorphism.
The statistical analysis was performed by CR. We used logistic regression
to model the chance of a SVR and investigate potential influential factors.
In a logistic regression, binary outcome data are modeled based on the
odds of events (here: SVR). As is usual regression, the odds are then
formulated as a function of (potential) explanatory variables. Random
effects were included in order to accommodate heterogeneity between
studies[29]. As the available data allow to fit a multitude of plausible
variations of regression models to the data, we approached the model
selection problem via Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC)[30], which allows
to compare and select models based on a single adequacy measure. All
analyses were performed using the R software (www.r-project.org) and the
lme4 package.
Literature search
Four thousand three hundred and thirty-seven studies were initially
identified on the bases of DAAs. After removing duplicate citations, the
remaining 1522 studies were searched for data regarding IL-28B
polymorphism and qualified for abstract review. Among the remaining
studies, 1454 studies had no data regarding IL-28B and were excluded.
The rest 68 studies were selected for a “full paper review“. Among these
remaining 68 studies, five of them were reviews. Four of them included
only interferon-free therapy. There were three meta-analyses which were
excluded. Five studies described only SOC therapy. Another 41 studies and
meeting abstracts, including preliminary and subgroup analysis from large
trials data, rs8099917 IL-28B allele and non-human studies, had to be
excluded (Figure 1).
This meta-analysis is based on the following 10 studies: 7 full text
studies and 3 meeting abstracts with a total of 2707 IL-28B patients. The
studies of Akuta et al[25], Bronowicki et al[23], Jacobson et al[27] and Pol et
al[28] investigated the interaction between IL-28B genotype and SVR in
patients receiving TVR based triple-therapy. The study from Akuta et al[25]
had no patients with IL-28B genotype receiving SOC. The studies of Flamm
et al[26] and Poordad et al[21] analyzed the BOC based triple-therapy. VNP
was used as DAA in the studies of Lawitz et al[20] and Manns et al[13]. For
SMP and FLP only one study could be included for each of them (Fried et
al[22] and Sulkowski et al[24]; Table 1).
Comparison of dual and triple therapy
Figure 2 illustrates the estimated odds and associated confidence intervals
of a SVR, contrasting dual and triple therapy, and CC and non-CC
genotypes. When using conventional dual therapy, the odds for SVR are
around 0.34 for non-CC genotype (corresponding to P 25% probability),
which increases to 1.98 (P = 66%) for CC genotype. For triple therapy the
odds are more favorable, 1.88 (P=65%) for non-CC and 5.34 (P = 84%) for
CC genotype. The interaction effect between genotype and type of therapy
is significant (P = 0.00126), i.e., the odds ratio between genotypes differs
between therapy types (and vice versa). According to the BIC, this model,
including a treatment indicator (double vs triple), a genotype effect and
their interaction fits the data best models that we investigated. In addition
including subsets of the above variables or use a treatment indicator are
also differentiating between different types of DAA.
Comparison of individual DAA types
In addition to the results that came out as best-fitting according to the BIC,
we also analyzed the analogous results where protease inhibitor-based
triple-therapy is broken down into individual subtypes (DAAs). Comparing
this model and the previous one (including interactions in both cases) in
an ANOVA, the difference between DAAs actually is significant (P =
0.0013). The resulting estimates are illustrated in Figure 3. Among the
different DAA types, the estimated odds for SVR tend to be larger than for
double therapy and greater for CC than for non-CC genotype. The only two
exceptions were VNP, where SVRs for both genotypes appeared to be of
the same order of magnitude and FLP, where the CC-odds could not be
quantified. For FLP, our data originate from a single study with a 100% SVR
rate (22 out of 22 patients) for CC genotype; so all we can say is that the
evidence is supports effectiveness of FLP in CC genotype patients.
Otherwise, for the CC genotype, the greatest odds for SVR are estimated
for SMP (OR 14.71, corresponding to P = 94%), whilst for non-CC
genotypes, the greatest odds are estimated for VNP (OR 3.28, P=77%). As
in the previous model, the interaction effect between treatment type and
genotype was significant (P < 0.001).
Effect of patient type (IFN- -treatment-naïve vs IFN- -
experienced)
Consideration of the patient type (IFN- -treatment-naïve patients vs
patients having previously experienced IFN- treatment) in the regression
model did not improve the model fit. Even in the best-fitting model among
the ones including a patient-type effect, the patient type regarding
previously IFN- therapy was not significant (P = 0.1).
DISCUSSION
The main results of this meta-analysis are: I) IL28B-CC-genotype patients
receiving protease inhibitor-based triple-therapy have a higher SVR rate
than the IL-28B-non-CC-genotype patients with the same treatment type,
II) considering sub-types of DAAs, the effect appears to be present for
BOC, FLP, SMP and TLP, but possibly not for VNP; III) IL-28B-CC-genotype
patients have higher SVR rates both, in IFN-naïve and IFN experienced.
Genome-wide association studies in 2009 showed that different
polymorphisms in the region of IL-28B are associated with SVR in patients
chronically infected with HCV genotype-1, treated with Peg-INF- and
RBV[17-19]. The IL-28B gene is located on the 19 chromosome. The molecular
and immunological mechanism of the IL-28B influence on SVR remains
unclear[17-19]. Lately a dinucleotide polymorphism ss469415590 (TT/ G)
was described to be a better genetic predictor, as IL-28B (INF- 3) for HCV
clearance in chronically HCV genotype-1 infected patients treated with
SOC[31-33] Moreover, only the  G of this dinucleotide polymorphism creates
.
a novel type III interferon protein, IFN- 4. Absence of IFN- 4 protein is thus
supposed to favor resolution of HCV infection[31,33].
The determination of IL-28B rs12979860 genotype can help to shorten
the therapy duration. Genotyping of IL-28B polymorphisms can further be
used to improve patient compliance, to remain on treatment in spite of
side effects and to defer treatment in patients with low likelihood of
response[34]. The American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases
suggests IL-28B polymorphism as a robust predictive marker for treatment
decision with Peg-INF- /RBV or in combination with DAA. Testing is useful if
it impacts the treatment decision of either patient or physician. Also in
studies with interferon-free therapy regimens IL-28B-CC-polymorphism
was associated with better early viral kinetics and higher reduction of viral
RNA[35]. Other interferon-free treatment regimens replicated these findings
for IL-28B genotypes[36].
Recently, a pangenotypic polymerase inhibitor named sofosbuvir was
approved in the United States of America and Europe for the treatment of
chronically HCV-infected patients. In selected patients sofosbuvir achieves
an SVR rate of approximately 90%. However, a 24-wk therapy with
sofosbuvir and ribavirin costs about US$ 169000[37]. Cost-effectiveness
analysis show that there is no need to treat patients with IL-28B-CC allelic
variation with sofosbuvir urgently because they do not necessarily benefit
from such a therapy referring to the SVR rate[38]. Nevertheless, regarding
the economic aspects the second-generation protease inhibitors will not be
cheaper. For this reason, we need more information about predictive
factors in order to detect the individuals who benefit most from an
antiviral treatment with polymerase inhibitors. Through the use of
predictive factors it will be possible to achieve the highest rate for SVR and
the least side effects as well as reducing the cost significantly. Certainly,
the IL-28B polymorphisms will play a major role in the future.
Our analyzes showed that IL-28B-CC patients could be treated with a
protease inhibitors, either with FLP or SMP. Patients with IL-28B-CC who
were treated with either FLP or SMP showed a SVR rate of 100% or 94%,
respectively. Therefore, patients with IL-28B-CC genotype could be treated
preferably with either FLP or SMP and the IL-28B-non-CC genotypes could
be treated preferably with either the polymerase inhibitor sofosbuvir or
with a combination of polymerase and protease inhibitors in case of an
interferon-intolerance[37].
The difference between the IL-28B SNP predictive effect in triple and
dual therapy is significant, suggesting that the effect of IL-28B on the odds
of a SVR is smaller for triple-therapy than for dual-therapy.
Regarding BOC, the individual studies initially had contradictory results.
The study conducted by Flamm et al[26] showed that for the IL-28B-TT
rs12979860 genotype BOC had a favorable prognosis. However this study
had a smaller number of participants than the SPRINT2 and RESPOND2
trials. Poordad, et al[21] analyzed the data from these studies and showed
that IL-28B-CC rs12979860 genotype patients were more likely to achieve
a SVR. Our analysis showed that in the case of the patients treated with
BOC the CC-genotype has a favorable prognosis.
For FLP and SMP, we could only include one study each, with a relatively
small number of participants. For FLP, the odds for the CC genotype could
not be quantified, due to the fact that our data originate from a single
study with 100% SVR rate, indicating a strong beneficial effect.
In the case of SMP, the IL-28B-CC-genotype has the second best odds
among all DAAs, but with a large CI because of the limited number of
patients that were included in the study. Therefore, future studies with
these DAAs are needed to confirm these results. Our meta-analysis
showed that SMP based triple therapy is more likely to produce SVR in CC-
genotype patients; therefore we recommend IL-28B genotyping before
initiation of this treatment.
The studies by Pol et al[28] and Jacobson et al[27] showed that IL-28B-
genotype has a limited and non-significant predictive value for a SVR
regarding the triple-therapy with TVR. Both of them are analyses of the
data from larger trials (Pol et al[28] from REALIZE and Jacobson et al[27] from
ADVANCE US) stipulating that TVR based triple-therapy increase the SVR
rate through all IL-28B genotypes, especially for the IL-28B-non-CC
genotype patients. In our analysis TVR based regimes included a larger
number of studies (n = 4). The results were significantly favorable for IL-
28B-CC-genotype patients. This result can be explained by the fact that
Akuta et al[25] studied the predictive value of IL-28B-genotype only in Asian
patients infected with genotype 1B, with higher SVR rates while the other
studies included wider ranges of ethnicities.
IL-28B SNP has a predictive role for both, IFN-naïve and IFN-previously
treated patients. For the SOC-double therapy this meta-analysis did not
show evidence for a difference in treatment effect between patient types.
The strong points of our meta-analysis is the large number of patients (n
= 2707), the included studies were randomized, controlled studies and the
inclusion of various number of DAA types (n = 5). The limitations of our
meta-analysis are the relatively small number of studies for some DAAs
types (SMP, FLP), even though both, full text and meeting abstracts were
included into the search. Another limitation to our study could be the
absence of information on the influence of baseline viral loads on SVR and
race in correlation with the IL-28B SNP. No long-term data are available
yet. Furthermore, this meta-analysis reflects the methodological problems
of the included studies.
In conclusion, the IL-28B allelic variation has a predictive value in the
protease inhibitor-based triple-therapy of chronically HCV genotype-1
infected patients and it differs among DAA types. However, the effect on
the odds of a SVR is smaller than the one regarding IL-28B and SOC. We
recommend IL-28B genotyping also in the case of SMP-based triple
therapy. VNP based regime was the only triple therapy which was not
associated with higher SVR rates for IL-28B-CC-genotype patients.
Furthermore, prospective studies need to be conducted for the
understanding of IL-28B-genotype predictive role in HCV triple-therapy.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We would like to thank Dr. Imke Hoell for the revision of the manuscript.
Background
Hepatitis C is a world health problem and represents a dynamic field of
research for new therapeutic options. The interleukin-28B (IL-28B) single
nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) is a predictor of sustained virological
response for hepatitis C genotype-1 patients treated with pegylated-
Interferon- and ribavirin as the standard of care. Recently, direct antiviral
agents have been developed which, in addition to the standard of care,
obtain higher sustained virological response rates, but with higher costs
and side effects.
Research frontiers
IL-28B is a solid genetic predictor in the therapy of hepatitis C patients
treated with interferon and ribavirin. In the era of new therapeutic options
for hepatitis C, the current research hotspot is to evaluate the predictive
value of IL-28B in different protease inhibitor-based triple-therapies.
Innovations and breakthroughs
This meta-analysis demonstrates that IL-28B has a predictive value on
protease inhibitor-based triple-therapy. This predictability differs among
protease inhibitors.
Applications
This study suggests that IL-28B could be used as a genetic predictive
factor for antiviral response in hepatitis C genotype 1 patients treated with
protease inhibitor-based triple-therapy.
Terminology
Direct antiviral agents such as protease inhibitors are newly developed
drugs against hepatitis C. In combination with Interferon and Ribavirin
they constitute the triple therapy for hepatitis C. SNP within the
interleukin 28B gene as a genetic marker is associated with sustained
virological response in the treatment of hepatitis C.