Predicting Preference Flips in Commerce Search
Samuel Ieong Samuel.Ieong@microsoft.com
Nina Mishra ninam@microsoft.com
Microsoft Research, Mountain View, CA 94043
Or Sheffet osheffet@cs.cmu.edu
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213
Abstract interpreting user behavior in click logs, the dominant
view is that a user either prefers one item to another
Traditional approaches to ranking in web
or vice versa, but not both. Even in the ranking pro-
search follow the paradigm of rank-by-score:
cess, a learned function f takes a query and an item
a learned function gives each query-URL
and produces a score. This score induces an absolute
combination an absolute score and URLs
ordering between any two items.
are ranked according to this score. This
paradigmensuresthatifthescoreofoneURL In the context of consumer behavior, preference be-
isbetterthananotherthenonewillalwaysbe tweentwoitemsisoftendependentontheotheritems
ranked higher than the other. Scoring con- that are shown. In a seminal paper, Amos Tversky
tradicts prior work in behavioral economics showed that user preference between alternatives is
that preference between items depends not relative and comparative: when presented with items
only on the items but also on the presented A and B alone, users may prefer A to B, but when
alternatives. Thus, for the same query, pref- presented with a third alternative C, users may flip
erence between items A and B may depend their preference to B over A (Tversky, 1972). We
on the presence or absence of item C. We have found similar examples in the search logs from
propose a new model of ranking, the Ran- a commerce search engine (refer to Figure 1). (One
domShopperModel,thatallowsandexplains exampleofacommercesearchengineisAmazon.) For
such behavior. In this model, each feature is the search query “paper shredders”, when shown A, a
viewed as a Markov chain over the items to $20seven-sheetcapacityshredder,vs.B,a$50eleven-
be ranked, and the goal is to find a weight- sheet capacity shredder, users typically prefer A to B.
ingofthefeaturesthatbestreflectstheirim- Onerationaleforthispreferenceisthatmostuserspre-
portance. We show that our model can be fersaving$30attheexpenseofsmallersheetcapacity.
learned under the empirical risk minimiza- However,whenC,a$9512-sheetcapacityshredder,is
tionframework,andgiveanefficientlearning shown, users flip their preference to B over A. The
algorithm. Experiments on commerce search presence of C causes a change in preference possibly
logs demonstrate that our algorithm outper- becauseashredderthatcanshredelevensheetsfor$50
forms scoring-based approaches including re- looks like a bargain compared to one that can shred
gression and listwise ranking. twelve sheets for $95. This is not a one-off example.
We find that about 25% of commerce queries have a
1. Introduction productC whereusersclickAmorethanB intheab-
senceofC,andB morethanAinitspresence(details
Inwebsearch,anitem’srelevancetoaqueryisusually
of experiment omitted).
absolute (Freund et al., 2003; Joachims, 2002; Burges
et al., 2005; 2006; Cao et al., 2007; Dou et al., 2008; Such behavior violates a well-known axiom in social
Crammer&Singer,2001). Indeed,rankingalgorithms choice called independence of irrelevant alternatives:
assume the existence of a training set of (cid:104)query, item(cid:105) thepreferencebetweentwochoicesshouldbeindepen-
pairsthathavebeenlabeledinsuchanabsolutesense, dent of context (Arrow, 1950). In this paper, we show
e.g.,Perfect,Excellent,Good,FairorBad. Further,in thatviolationofIIAisquitesensibleandevenexplain-
able. As everyday folklore examples, people often or-
AppearinginProceedingsofthe29th InternationalConfer- der the second most expensive dish of a menu or the
enceonMachineLearning,Edinburgh,Scotland,UK,2012. second cheapest wine on the list.
Copyright 2012 by the author(s)/owner(s).
Predicting Preference Flips in Commerce Search
We propose a new model of ranking, called the Ran- Product Price Sheet Capacity
dom Shopper Model (RSM) that allows and explains
context-dependentuserpreferences. RSM’smainnov-
elty is in viewing features as Markov chains instead of
numericscores. Productsaremodeledasverticesona (a) ProductSpecifications
directed graph, and the weight of an edge denotes the
0.6 0.35 0.25 0.4
probability that a user transitions from one product A 0.4 B 0.2 C 0.25 0.35 0.6
A 0.35 B 0.45 C
to another. Intuitively, the weight from u to v reflects 0.45 0.35
0.4 0.2 0.4
how much better v isthan u accordingto thisfeature.
(b) Pricetopology (c) Sheetcapacitytopology
For example, if the feature is “lower price”, then with
Figure 1. The three vertices denote paper shredders with
high probability users will transition to cheaper prod-
specificationsgivenin(a). Weshowatopologyfor“price”
ucts,withlowerprobabilityuserswillkeeptoproducts
in (b) and for “sheet capacity” in (c). Note that roles of
of similar price, and with even lower probability users
AandC arereversedforthetwotopologies,sinceAisthe
will move to more expensive products.
cheapestandC hasthehighestcapacity. Theweightofthe
feature “sheet capacity” is 0.4 and of “price” is 0.6. This
RSMhasaweightingoftheseMarkovchainsthatcap-
allows RSM to predict the flip in preference of A over B.
tureshowimportanteachMarkovchainisinthemind
ofanaverageuser. Ourhypotheticalshopperstartsat
racy. We give context-dependent features to existing
a product and repeatedly transitions between items,
learning algorithms and show that RSM outperforms
where in every step she randomly picks one Markov
these approaches. Our experiment, detailed in Sec-
chain according to how important it is and moves to
tion 5, suggests that RSM is better able to predict
a new product using this chain. In this paper, we give
preference flips in commerce search.
algorithms for learning these weights.
2. The Random Shopper Model
TheadvantageofRSMisthatitranksincontext. The
preference between two products is not absolute and
The Random Shopper Model (RSM) attempts to
maychangedependingontheotherproducts. Markov
model the decision process of a user who chooses
processes have the property that the process induced
among a set of items by their features. Under RSM,
on a subset of items can be very different from the
each feature is viewed as a weighted directed graph
originalprocessoverallitems. Forthepapershredder
called a topology (or a transition matrix in the alge-
example, Figure 1 demonstrates how RSM recreates
braic context). A vertex denotes an item and an edge
the flip between A and B in the presence of C. Rank-
a preference relation. The weight of a directed edge
ing functions that assume feature values are absolute
corresponds to the probability that a user transitions
scores are inherently incapable of reconstructing such
fromoneproducttotheother. Forexample, afeature
flips. While RSM does not fully capture the shopping
could be “lower price” (Figure 1(b)). The transition
process of a user, we believe it constitutes a step to-
probabilityfromutovincreasesasvgetscheapercom-
wards better user modeling beyond scoring products.
pared to u. In addition, there exists a set of weights
Contributions To our knowledge, RSM is the first overthesefeatures. Ahypotheticaluserstartswithan
learning model where the input features are Markov item and repeatedly performs the following: she picks
chains. Webelieveitisagoodmodelwhenusersmake a feature at random proportional to its weight, and
alargenumberofpairwisecomparisons,suchasonline transitionsfromthecurrentitemtoanotheraccording
shopping. Onthetheoreticalfront,weshowthatRSM to the probabilities given by the feature.
fitsintotheEmpiricalRiskMinimizationframework—
Formally, we denote the ith topology as T(i), and the
given sufficiently many iid samples, one can learn a
weightofeachfeaturebyw∗(i). Theweightsw∗(i)are
hypothesis with bounded error with high probability.
non negative and sum to 1. (Throughout the paper,
Weestablishaformalboundonthesamplecomplexity
all weights and vectors we mention satisfy these two
inSection3. Next, wepresentagenerallearningalgo-
conditions, unless stated otherwise.) We hypothesize
rithm for RSM. Our algorithm is iterative and draws
that a user follows a random walk according to the
upon the work of Haviv and Van Der Heyden (1984)
combined topology P(w∗) = (cid:80)k w∗(i)T(i), where
thatboundsthechangesinstationarydistributiondue i=1
the weighted sum is computed over the topologies in-
to changes in the transition matrix. The algorithm is
terpreted as transition matrices. The stationary dis-
presented in Section 4.
tribution of this walk determines the final ranked or-
WeconductanempiricalevaluationofRSMusingdata der. This model can be interpreted as viewing users
obtained from a commerce search engine. We cre- as shoppers who go back and forth among items, con-
ate a challenging test set consisting only of pairs of stantly seeking one that is better than the item they
preference flips. The test set is such that context- currently consider. Ranking is therefore done accord-
oblivious algorithms cannot achieve over 50% accu- ingtowheremoreshoppersarelikelytobeinthelimit.
Predicting Preference Flips in Commerce Search
In our model each query-context pair has k topolo- Formally, we denote D as some distribution over
gies uniquely associated with it, whereas the weights {q,C,u},andassumetheexistenceofsomeoraclethat
w∗(i) remain fixed throughout all samples. This cor- given q and C, provides the learner with the k topolo-
respondstousersapplyingthesameconsiderationsfor gies. We also denote by S our training data of m iid
price,size,reviewsetc. fordifferentsetsofTVsforthe samples from D.
samequery. Thisissimilartostandardmachinelearn-
Problem2.1. TheRandomShopperProblemis((cid:15),δ)-
ing scenarios where each sample has its own features
learnable if there exists an algorithm that for any D,
(Markov chains in our case) while the target hypothe-
getsmiidexamplesfromD,andoutputsweightsw s.t.
sis stays fixed throughout.
for any q,C, the weights w induce the stationary dis-
To ensure that the combined topology converges to a tribution p[q,C] of the topology (cid:80) i w(i)T[q,C](i), and
single stationary distribution, we make the common we have that w.p. ≥1−δ
assumption of an “all random” topology – with prob- (cid:104) (cid:105)
ability λ the shopper transitions into a random item. err D (w)≡E (q,C,u)∼D |p u [q,C]−p∗ u [q,C]| ≤(cid:15) (1)
Weassumeλisaconstant,fixedthroughoutthepaper.
Tosimplifynotation,wewillhenceforthdropC,treat-
This assumption plays an important role in Section 3.
ing each query-context combination as its own query.
Given a collection of products to rank for a query, We may also drop q when the context is clear.
rankingproceedsasfollows. We(1)restrictthetopolo-
Observe that Problem 2.1 is more general than what
gies to the products in the collection, (2) renormalize
is traditionally required of ranking algorithms. Typ-
the weights so that outgoing probabilities from each
ically, one requires that if the target ranking notice-
vertex form a probability distribution, (3) weight the
ably prefers u to v, then the hypothesis outputted
restrictedtopologiesaccordingtotheirimportance,(4)
should also rank u above v. In our setting such a re-
compute the stationary distribution of the resulting
quirement translates to correctly ranking u above v if
random walk, and (5) order the products according to
this probability distribution.1 p∗ u [q]>p∗ v [q]+ΓforsomegivenΓ. AsolutiontoProb-
lem2.1for(cid:15)=Γ/2impliesasolutiontothetraditional
We now demonstrate that RSM ranks in context. Re- ranking problem. Thus, we focus on Problem 2.1.
call the paper shredder example. In Figure 1, we ex-
hibit two topologies, one for price, and one for sheet 3. Sample Complexity
capacity. For the same set of weights (0.6 for price
We now consider learning under RSM. First, we show
and 0.4 for sheet capacity) A is preferable to B in the
that the learning problem fits in the Empirical Risk
absence of C, but B is preferable to A in the presence
Minimization framework—with sufficiently many iid
of C.
examples, a hypothesis with small error on the sam-
The Learning Problem The focus of our work is ple will be a hypothesis with small error on the true
on learning the weights of the features in the proper distributionwithhighprobability. Formally, weshow:
learning setting. We assume that the features, i.e.,
Theorem3.1. LetDbeanydistributionoverproblem
the topologies, are given. Designing these topologies
instances {q,u}. Fix any desired (cid:15),δ > 0. Let S be a
requires domain knowledge and may be difficult for
sample of size m = O(k log( k )) drawn iid from D.
certain domains – just as creating features is chal- (cid:15)2 λ(cid:15)δ
Define the true error err (w) of a hypothesis w using
lenging for machine learning. We leave it as an in- D
Eq. (1) and sample error err (w) as
teresting direction for future work. Each example is S
composed of a query q, a context C (set of prod- err S (w)=E (q,u)∈RS (cid:2) (cid:12) (cid:12)p u [q]−p∗ u [q] (cid:12) (cid:12) (cid:3) .
ucts shown to the user), k topologies for this con-
then with probability ≥1−δ, for every w, we have
text: T[q,C](1),...,T[q,C](k), and a particular prod-
uct u ∈ C. In the training set, each example is la- |err (w)−err (w)|<(cid:15) .
beledbyp∗[q,C]thestationarydistributionofuunder
the topolo u gy (cid:80) w∗(i)T[q,C](i). Our goal is to learn To prove Theorem 3.1, we consider a discretization of
i the hypothesis space into a (k −1)-dimensional sim-
weights w for these topologies that best approximates
plex, where two adjacent points differ by at most (cid:15) in
w∗, namely, s.t. the difference in two labels produced
any coordinate. We show next that on this (cid:15)-grid, the
by w and by w∗ is smaller than some given threshold
point wˆ closest to w∗ yields a stationary distribution
(cid:15). We believe that the problem of learning under a
that differs from the “true” one by at most (cid:15)(cid:48).
feature space of topologies is important and of inde-
pendent interest. Lemma 3.2 (Main Lemma). Fix (cid:15) > 0. For any w∗
and wˆ, it holds that |pˆ [q]−p∗[q]|≤k(cid:15)/λ .
1Thisdistributionisdifferentfromaweightedcombina-
Usingthislemma,wesketchtheProoftoTheorem3.1.
tionofthestationarydistributionofeachofthetopologies;
Proof sketch for Theorem 3.1. Set (cid:15)(cid:48) = (cid:15)λ/3k. Using
thelatterproblemcanbelearnedusingexistingalgorithms.
theunionboundandtheHoeffdingboundonasample
Predicting Preference Flips in Commerce Search
of m = O(k log( k )) iid examples taken from D, we Proof. Byconstruction,foranydistributionx,xTM =
can show th (cid:15)2 at all λ o (cid:15)δ f the (k−1)1/(cid:15)(cid:48) hypotheses on the λvT. Hence, (p−p∗)TM = 0T. Note that both p and
p∗ are distributions but their difference is not. Now
(cid:15)(cid:48)-grid have roughly the same true error and sample
consider the LHS of the above equation.
error, i.e., w.p. ≥1−δ, all w on the (cid:15)(cid:48)-grid have
Fix any w in the simplex, and denote wˆ as its clos- =(p−p∗)TP(w∗)+pT∆
est grid point. Lemma 3.2 gives that both |err (w)−
As a corollary, if k is a small constant, there exists a
polynomialtimealgorithmfortheRSMlearningprob- If (cid:80) (P(w∗) − M)i converges, it is equal to
lem by brute force enumeration of the ((cid:15)λ/3k)-grid. [I−(P(w∗)−M)]−1. Multiplying both sides of the
We now prove Lemma 3.2. In what follows, we refer equation with this term concludes the proof.
to vectors with non-negative entries that sum to one WenowconstructasuitableM tousewithClaim3.5.
simply as distributions. We start by recalling the defi- Let M = λJ, where J is the n×n all-1-matrix. This
nitionofthelimitingandthefundamentalmatrixfrom corresponds to a random restart with probability λ.
Markov chain theory. Consider Q∗ = P(w∗)−M. As each row of Q∗ sums
Definition 3.3 (LimitingMatrix). For Markov chain up to (1−λ), we have (cid:107)Q∗(cid:107) ∞ < 1, and so the sum
P with stationary distribution p, the limiting matrix (cid:80) (Q∗)i converges. This yields
P∞ =lim Pi =1 pT .
Corollary 3.6. (cid:107)p−p∗(cid:107) ≤ (cid:107)∆(cid:107)∞
The matrix P∞ represents the result of an “infinite” ∞ λ
traversal over the transition matrix P. It takes in one Proof. ObservethatinEq.(3),multiplicationisonthe
step any distribution to the stationary distribution. left, whereas operator norms of matrices are defined
Definition 3.4 (Fundamental matrix). For Markov for the right. So we bound the norm of the transpose,
chain P, the fundamental matrix is defined as using the fact that for every matrix (cid:107)A(cid:107) ∞ =(cid:107)AT(cid:107) 1 .
Z =[I−(P −P∞)]−1 . (cid:107)p−p∗(cid:107) ≤(cid:107)p−p∗(cid:107) ≤(cid:107)( (cid:80) (Q∗)i)T(cid:107) (cid:107)∆T(cid:107) (cid:107)p(cid:107)
∞ 1 i≥0 1 1 1
Recallthatforageometricserieswith|x|<1, (cid:80)∞ i≥0 xi ≤ (cid:80) i ((cid:107)(Q∗)(cid:107) ∞ )i(cid:107)∆(cid:107) ∞ ·1= 1− (cid:107)∆ (1 (cid:107) − ∞ λ)
convergesto(1−x)−1. Likewise,for(cid:107)P−P∞(cid:107) <1,
∞ Corollary3.6provesLemma3.2immediately,sincefor
Z =I+(P −P∞)+(P −P∞)2+... . wˆ, the closest grid point to w∗, we have that (cid:107)∆(cid:107) ∞ ≤
Hence, one can bound the norm of Z by
4. The RSM Algorithm
(cid:107)Z(cid:107) ≤ (cid:80) (cid:107)P −P∞(cid:107)i =1/(1−(cid:107)P −P∞(cid:107) ) .
Previously, we have shown that as a corollary to The-
Furtherdetailsonthepropertiesofthesematricescan orem 3.1, one can solve the RSM learning problem by
be found in Ch. 4 of (Kemeny & Snell, 1969). bruteforceenumerationforsmallk intheory. Inprac-
Now consider the stationary distributions p and p∗ of tice, as borne out by our experience in Section 5, the
theMarkovChainsP(w)andP(w∗). Let∆bethedif- learning problem can be solved much faster using the
ference P(w)−P(w∗). Let Z(w∗) be the fundamental iterative algorithm described in Figure 2.
matrix of P(w∗). It has been shown in (Schweitzer, The overall strategy of the algorithm is as follows:
1968) and (Haviv & Van Der Heyden, 1984) that given a target stationary distribution p∗, at each it-
eration of the algorithm, we make small changes to
the current weights ws such that the difference be-
tween the stationary distributions p∗ and ps becomes
We generalize their results as follows.
smaller. The key to understanding our algorithm is
Claim 3.5. For any distribution v and a scalar the derivation of the objective function Eq. (4).
λ > 0, let M be the outer-product λ1vT. Then, if
(cid:80) (P(w∗)−M)i converges, Let w∗ be the weights such that p∗ corresponds to the
i≥0 stationary distribution of the transition matrix P∗ =
(p−p∗)T =pT∆ (cid:16) (cid:80) (P(w∗)−M)i (cid:17) . P(w∗). At iteration s, with weights ws, the algorithm
i≥0 computes the transition matrix P(ws), the stationary
Predicting Preference Flips in Commerce Search
1. Set w0 arbitrary. Set s=0.
2. For each query q: compute Gs[q] = (cid:80) ws(i)T[q](i), its stationary distribution ps[q], and its fundamental matrix
3. Solve the following convex optimization problem:
(cid:34) (cid:35)2
(cid:0) (cid:1)
4. If (cid:107)x(cid:107)≤(cid:15) then halt. Otherwise set ws+1 =ws+x, s=s+1 and repeat from 2.
Figure 2. The RSM Algorithm
distribution ps, the limiting matrix P∞(ws), and the by both algorithms were very close. Also, we found
fundamental matrix Z(ws). From Eq. (2), that performances are better if we minimize the pair-
(p∗−ps)T =(p∗)T[P∗−P(ws)]Z(ws) wise difference between two items according to p∗ and
ps. Thisrequiresachangeintheoptimizationroutine.
Full details are omitted due to space limitations.
Recall that T(i) denote the i-th topology. Let xs(i)= 5. Experiments on Commerce Data
w∗(i)−ws(i). In(Schweitzer,1968),itwasshownthat
(I−[P∗−P(ws)]Z(ws)) is invertible. Hence, rear- Overview Our goal is to evaluate how well one can
ranging the preceeding, we can show that (p∗−ps)T predictflipsinusers’preferencesduetochangingcon-
texts. We focus on flip prediction as this is a hard
problem that no previous algorithms in the ranking
=(ps)T (cid:104)(cid:88) xs(i)T(i)Z(ws) (cid:105) · (cid:104)(cid:88)(cid:16)(cid:88) xs(i)T(i)Z(ws) (cid:17)n(cid:105) literature can solve. Each row of our dataset consists
ofaquery,acontext(thetopfiveproductsshown),and
(cid:104)(cid:88)(cid:16)(cid:88)
(cid:17)n(cid:105) t
.
n≥1 i in flips in preferences of the population and not of the
The difference in the u-th coordinate, p∗−ps, equals individual. The task for the algorithms is to predict
u u the CTRs given query and context. A row is treated
(cid:104)(cid:88)(cid:16)(cid:88) (cid:17)n(cid:105) as five problem instances, one for each product.
n≥1 i To measure performance on flip prediction, we care-
fully construct the dataset to be composed of pairs of
where e is the indicating vector of coordinate u. If
onecansolvetheaboveinclosedform,thenw∗ canbe rowswhereeachrowinthepairhasthesamequerybut
a different context, and for which there are two prod-
found in one step. Unfortunately, there does not exist
uctsAandBwhereAispreferredtoBinoneandBto
an explicit formula for the roots of Eq. (5). Thus, we
A in the other. The algorithms are evaluated on their
approximate the RHS by the first term of the sum,
ability to predict preference flips. In other words, we
(cid:104)(cid:88)
e measure their performance on predicting the relative
u u u CTRsbetweenthesetwoproducts. Notethatthisisa
particularly challenging test because it is loaded with
This is a good approximation when xs(i) is small, as
“contradictions”. Anyalgorithmthatproducesanab-
thesumwillbedominatedbythelinearterm. Infact,
solute score for a query-product pair will be correct
if (cid:107)xs(cid:107) < α , we can show that
∞ kn on one instance and wrong on the other, and cannot
achieve an accuracy of >50%.
(cid:12) (cid:88) (cid:16) (cid:17)(cid:12) α2
(cid:12) u u u (cid:12) 1−α Dataset We obtain queries and clicks from a com-
i merce search engine from 08/2010 to 02/2011. We
To sum up, we apply iterative gradient ascent, where focus on queries related to TVs and digital cameras
in iteration s, we compute xs s.t. (cid:107)xs(cid:107) ≤η for some as these are major categories of consumer products
small constant η and s.t. xs minimizes the above dif- where users carefully examine product attributes. We
ference, and set the new weights ws+1 = ws + xs. groupthedatabyqueryandcontext,wherecontextis
As a sanity check, we ran experiments over synthetic defined as the top five products shown for the query.
data,applyingboththeRSMalgorithmandthebrute- We believe this is a reasonable definition as the top
force algorithm which uses (cid:15)-grid. The weights found five products are typically visible to the users without
Predicting Preference Flips in Commerce Search
scrolling. For each query and context, we count the taskoflearningCTRisrelatedtoregression. Another
number of clicks by all users on the five products. baseline is Listwise Ranking. We select it as the algo-
rithm trains on lists of choices instead of pairs. In the
Next, we examine all products surfaced for a query
classical setting, LR assumes each query is associated
across all contexts. For each pair of products A and
with a set of URLs with their relevance labels. In our
B, we look for the existence of two contexts where in
case, relevance is approximated by CTR. The LR al-
one A is clicked more often than B and in another
gorithmdependsoncertainparameters. Weselectthe
B more often than A. We consider a context only if
parameters to maximize performance on a validation
therearemorethanfivetotalclicks,andthedifference
set sampled from the training data.
in clicks between A and B is at least two. This is
donetoreduceourexposuretospuriousclicks. Ifthere Metrics We measure performance by the fraction
are multiple such contexts, we select the two where of flips in preferences an algorithm correctly predicts
the preferences expressed are the strongest, i.e., the in the test set. Recall that for each pair of rows of
differences in CTRs between A and B are the largest. data, there are two products A and B where prefer-
Such pairs of instances are added to our dataset. For ences are flipped depending on context. We compare
each run of our experiment, the dataset is randomly the predicted CTR for these two products under the
split into 80% training and 20% test data. We ensure two contexts, and count the number of times the pre-
that paired rows are not split between training and dicted CTR agrees with the preference. Under this
test. metric, random guessing will have a performance of
50%. Also, any context-oblivious approach that as-
Features ThefeaturesusedinthisstudyareBrand,
signs the same score to a query-product pair will have
Price, Diagonal Size/Megapixel (depending on TV or
a performance of 50%.
camera), Number of Reviews, Average Rating, BM25
and Position of the product in the result set. We se- Note that for this experiment, we cannot apply tra-
lect these features as they are visible to users on the ditional IR metrics such as MAP, MRR, or NDCG.
result page (with the exception of BM25, which mea- These metrics rely on relevance labels assigned to
sureshowcloselyaproducttitlematchesaquery, and query-product pairs. Assigning context-oblivious rel-
hence is quite “visible” too). All features are numeric evance labels to query-product pairs is not consistent
exceptforBrand,whichwemanuallymaptotherange with the fact that preference is context dependent.
of {−1,0,+1}. Reputable brands, such as Samsung
andSony,receivealabelof+1,whileunknownbrands 0.62
0.60 received a label of −1, and others 0.
For RSM, we convert each feature into a weighted di-
graph with self-loops as follows. For each feature, the 0.52
n = 5 products in the context are ordered by fea- 0.50
ture value, and assigned a rank from 1 to n where 0.48
high-ranked products are more desired (e.g., cheaper, LR LS RSM
better brands, more highly rated). The edge weight
from product i to j is set to [n+rank(j)−rank(i)]
and then normalized so that the weights of outgoing
edges from each product sum to 1. We choose this
encoding as it is simple, scale-invariant and most im-
portantly relative—it depends on all products shown
and not on the actual numeric values. This method of
constructingtopologiesdiffersfromtheonedetailedin
Section 2. This is because position bias ranks exactly
five items. To avoid the imbalance of n = 5 products
for the position bias topology while having extremely
large n for other topologies, we construct all topolo-
gies with five products. The question of how best to
encode a feature as a Markov chain is an interesting
future research direction.
Baseline Our baseline consists of two algorithms:
Least Squares (LS) and Listwise Ranking (LR) (Cao
etal.,2007). TheobjectiveofLSistolearnaweighted
combination of features that best predicts the CTR.
Learning such a hyperplane is a natural choice as our
secnereferP
Figure 3. Prediction Accuracy of Different Algorithms
Results The prediction accuracies of each method
averaged over 100 random training-test splits are re-
ported in Figure 3. The solid line at 0.5 in the chart
represents the performance of random guessing. The
standard deviation of each method is shown in error
bars. Despite the overlapping error bars, the differ-
encesinperformanceamongallthreemethodsaresta-
tisticallysignificantunderapairedt-test,withp-value
<10−5. Thepairingisdonebyhavingallthreemeth-
ods evaluated on the same training-test split. In our
experiments, wesetλ=0.15. Ourresultsarenotsen-
sitive to the choice of λ, from 56.8% with λ = 0.01
to 57.9% with λ = 0.3. In our experiments, train-
ing time was – RSM: 14s, Listwise:1.3s, LS: 5ms; and
ranking time was – RSM: 0.02ms, Listwise: 0.001ms,
LS: 0.001ms.
Note that both LR and LS have accuracy >0.5. This
is because the Position feature varies depending on
Predicting Preference Flips in Commerce Search
where a product is shown. Both LR and LS assigns acontext-dependentway,i.e.,eachqueryisassociated
a negative weight to this feature, predicting that a with multiple lists of items. However, it still outputs
productrankedhigherintheresultsetismorelikelyto a single value per query-item pair. Xiong et al (2012)
beclicked,confirmingtheimportanceofpositionbias. observed that the click-through rate (CTR) of an ad
While all methods had access to the same features, is often dependent on the other ads shown alongside,
RSM significantly outperforms both LR and LS. Our and introduce a context-dependent learning scenario.
novel view of a feature as a Markov Chain, as well as Theydiscussalgorithmsforlearningwhichadasearch
our better modeling of the learning problem, are key engine should surface in response to a query, and pro-
to this improved performance. poseonethatlearnsfromalistofadsratherthanone.
Discussion The experiments have several limita- BehavioralEconomics: Thefoundationofourwork
tions. First, clicks are a noisy signal for measuring isbuiltontheobservationthatpeople’spreferencesare
preferences. A click could be due to sheer curiosity or often influenced by context. Some prototypical exam-
even a mistake. We try to mitigate this problem by plesarepresentedin(Ariely,2008). Theeffectofcon-
requiring a minimum number of clicks. A better sig- textonpreferenceshasbeenstudiedsystematicallyby
nal may be user purchases. Second, all queries are Tversky. Tversky and Simonson (1993) demonstrated
grouped together for learning. It may be that de- thatpreferencesbetweentwooptionsoftendependson
pending on the nature of the query, the weights on other options present. As a consequence, there is no
the features are different. For example, users who is- globalrankingfunctionthatwillbeconsistentwiththe
sue [32” LCD TV] may behave differently than those choicesifoneignoresthecontext,whichmotivatesour
that issue [widescreen TV]. Finally, many important presentwork. Tversky(1972)proposedachoicemodel
features may be missing, e.g., was the product shown called elimination by aspects (EBA). Under EBA, a
withaphoto. Findingimportantandrelevantfeatures decision maker chooses among options by sets of as-
remains an ongoing challenge. pects. An example aspect could be {price < $100}.
The decision maker chooses an option by picking an
In summary, we showed that under a careful setup,
aspect and eliminating all choices that do not satisfy
beyondstatisticaldoubt,RSMoutperformstwostrong
theaspect, andrepeatinguntilsheisleftwithasingle
baselines. Our proof of concept provides real evidence
option. In our model, rather than eliminate options,
that RSM is a model deserving additional study and
wetransitionfromaninferioroptiontoasuperiorone
experimentation.
along the selected aspect. This process can be viewed
6. Related Work as a “softening” of the hard decisions made by EBA.
PageRank: Our work can be viewed as a general-
Learning to Rank: Manytechniqueshavebeenpro-
ization of PageRank (Brin & Page, 1998). Whereas
posed for the problem of learning to rank, including
PageRank postulates that users randomly surf from
boosting(Cohenetal.,1999;Freundetal.,2003),gra-
one webpage to another via a hyperlink, our model
dient descent (Burges et al., 2005; 2006), and large-
postulatesthatusersrandomlypickatopologyaccord-
margin classifiers (Joachims, 2002); see Liu (2009) for
ingtosomedistribution, andtransitionfromoneitem
arecentsurvey. Typically,theglobalorderingisgiven
to another based on the selected topology. The distri-
bysomescoringfunctionlearnedfromdata. Ourwork
bution over topologies is learned from data such that
hastwoimportantdifferences. First,weareinterested
the stationary distribution closely approximates ob-
in learning an ordering that depends on the set of
servedclickprobabilities. Theproblemoflearningthe
items shown to the user, i.e., the context. It is cru-
weightstoarandomwalkhasrecentlybeenconsidered
cial that the method generalize to previously unseen
byBackstromandLeskovec(2011). Inthatpaper,the
contexts. We do so by learning how the ordering de-
authors study how to assign weights to the edges of a
pends on context. Second, our work treats features as
given topology so as to approximate a target station-
topologies over items, whereas most past work deals
ary distribution. In our problem, topologies and their
withstandardnumericfeatures. Oneexceptiontofea-
associatededgeweightsaregivenasinput, andweare
tureasscoresisCohenetal(1999),wherefeaturesare
interestedinlearningtheweightsofeachtopologyun-
viewed as acyclic graphs. Their generalization allows
dertheaforementionedrandomwalk. Inthecontextof
two items to be incomparable. Our work takes the
learning, Girolami and Kaban (2004) learn a model of
generalization further, allowing each feature to be an
random walks by finding a small set of Markov chains
arbitrary graph, possibly containing cycles.
that explain a large collection of transition sequences
ListwiseRanking(Caoetal.,2007)learnsfromalistof (they also assume the chains themselves come from
items, andnotfrompairsofitems. Itwasproposedas some probabilistic model).
atechniquetoimprovecomputationalefficiency. Even
Rank Aggregation: The problem of using rank ag-
though the paper states that each query is associated
gregation in web search was studied by Dwork et
with a unique list of items, one can view the work in
Predicting Preference Flips in Commerce Search
al (2001). Their goal is to aggregate different search References
results into one ranking that is close to all of the in-
Agrawal, R., Rantzau, R., and Terzi, E. Context-sensitive
putrankings,whereproximityismeasuredbyKendall ranking. In SIGMOD, pp. 383–394, 2006.
tau distance or Spearman footrule (see (Dwork et al.,
Ariely, D. Predictably Irrational. HarperCollins, 2008.
2001) for definitions). Our goal differs in that we seek
to rankresults differently depending onthe context of Arrow, K. A difficulty in the concept of social welfare.
Journal of Political Economy, 58(4):328–346, 1950.
the other results shown.
Backstrom,L.andLeskovec,J. Supervisedrandomwalks:
Using Context to Order: In the database setting, Predicting and recommending links in social networks.
Agrawal et al (2006) consider the problem of rank- In WSDM, 2011.
ing selected tuples in a context-dependent manner.
Brin, S. and Page, L. The anatomy of a large-scale hy-
Eachcontextisaconjunctionofattributesoverarela- pertextual Web search engine. Computer Networks and
tional table. A collection of preferences is assumed to ISDN Systems, 30(1–7):107–117, 1998.
be given per context, where each preference is of the Burges, C., Shaked, T., Renshaw, E., Lazier, A., Deeds,
form attribute value x is preferred to attribute value M., Hamilton, N., and Hullender, G. Learning to rank
y in context Z. Given a select predicate query, their using gradient descent. In ICML, pp. 89–96, 2005.
methodfindsarankingoftuplesthatmaximallyagrees Burges, C., Ragno, R., and Le, Q. V. Learning to rank
with the contextual preferences. Our work differs in with nonsmooth cost functions. In NIPS, pp. 193–200,
thatwedefinethecontexttobethesetofitemsshown 2006.
to the user. Further, our model supports generaliza- Cao,Z.,Qin,T.,Liu,T.,Tsai,M.,andLi,H. Learningto
tion to contexts, i.e., sets of items, that have not been rank: from pairwise approach to listwise approach. In
ICML, pp. 129–136, 2007.
seen in the input preferences.
Cohen,W.,Schapire,R.,andSinger,Y. Learningtoorder
7. Future Work things. JAIR, 10:243–270, 1999.
Crammer, K. and Singer, Y. Pranking with ranking. In
We proposed the Random Shopper Model, a new
NIPS, pp. 641–647, 2001.
model that can explain contextual preferences in con-
Dou,Z.,Song,R.,Yuan,X.,andWen,J.Areclick-through
sumer behavior. While this does not directly model
data adequate for learning web search rankings? In
how people shop, it moves in a direction that is closer
CIKM, pp. 73–82, 2008.
tohumanbehaviorthanrankbyscore. Itisalsoafirst
Dwork,C.,Kumar,R.,Naor,M.,andSivakumar,D. Rank
step towards expanding the view of a feature from a
aggregation methods for the web. In WWW, pp. 613–
numbertoaMarkovchain. Thisnewviewcoulddraw
622, 2001.
moreresearchinteresttonon-numericfeaturessuchas
Freund, Y., Iyer, R., Schapire, R., and Singer, Y. An
graphs and Markov chains.
efficient boosting algorithm for combining preferences.
JMLR, 4:933–969, 2003.
While consumers do flip their preference, characteriz-
ing when and why they flip is important. We anecdo- Girolami,M.andKaban,A.Simplicialmixturesofmarkov
tally observe that users early in the shopping process chains: Distributed modelling of dynamic user profiles.
In NIPS. 2004.
are more likely to flip, e.g., flips occur with “steam
mop”andnotwhenapreciseproductispinneddown, Haviv, M. and Van Der Heyden, L. Perturbation bounds
forthestationaryprobabilitiesofafinitemarkovchain.
e.g., “garmin 265wt”. Other reasons for flips include
Advances in Applied Probability, 16(4):804 – 818, 1984.
asymmetric dominance and extremal aversion (Tver-
sky&Simonson,1993). Animprovedcharacterization Joachims,T. Optimizingsearchenginesusingclickthrough
data. In KDD, pp. 133–142, 2002.
canleadtoMLalgorithmsthatprefilterwhichqueries
totriggeranalgorithmsuchasRSMvs. triggeringthe Kemeny, J. and Snell, J. Finite Markov chains. 1969.
usual ranking algorithm. Liu, T. Y. Learning to Rank for Inforamtion Retrieval.
Now Publishers, 2009.
Finally, consumer behavior is more complex than pre-
Schweitzer, P. Perturbation theory and finite markov
dicting flips. The behavioral economics community
chains. J. of Applied Probability, 5(2):401 – 413, 1968.
has studied many other aspects of consumer behav-
ior. Commerce logs open the door to understanding Tversky, A. Elimination by aspects: A theory of choice.
Psychological Review, 79(4):281–299, 1972.
whether and how often such behavior exists. For ex-
ample, anchoring (Tversky & Kahneman, 1974) sug- Tversky, A. and Kahneman, D. Judgment under uncer-
tainty: Heuristics and biases. Science, 1974.
geststhatthefirstproductinfluencessubsequentbuy-
ing decisions, as future products are compared to the Tversky, A. and Simonson, I. Context-dependent prefer-
first product the user saw. Analogously, in commerce ences. Management Science, 39(10):1179–1189, 1993.
search,thefirstsearchresultmayalsohaveananchor- Xiong, C., Wang, T., Ding, W., Shen, Y., and Liu, T.Y.
ing effect. Future challenges lie in designing models Relationalclickpredictionforsponsoredsearch.WSDM,
pp. 493–502, 2012.
that better capture consumer behavior.