Pressure dependent electronic properties of
MgO polymorphs: A first-principles study of
Compton profiles and autocorrelation
K.B. Joshi†, B.K. Sharma‡, U. Paliwal† and B. Barbiellini$
†Department of Physics, M.L. Sukhadia University, Udaipur-313001 (India).
‡Department of Physics, University of Rajasthan, Jaipur-302004 (India).
$Department of Physics, Northeastern University, 110 Forsyth St., Boston, MA
02115 (USA).
†Corresponding author: E-mail; k_joshi@yahoo.com,
Phone: 91-294-2423641, Fax: 91-294-2423639
The first-principles periodic linear combination of atomic orbitals method within the framework of
density functional theory implemented in the CRYSTAL06 code has been applied to explore effect
of pressure on the Compton profiles and autocorrelation functions of MgO. Calculations are
performed for the B1, B2, B3, B4, B8 andh-MgO polymorphs of MgO to compute lattice
constants and bulk moduli. The isothermal enthalpy calculations predict that B4→B8 , h-
MgO→B8 , B3→B2, B4→B2 and h-MgO→B2 transitions take place at 2, 9, 37, 42 and 64 GPa
respectively. The high pressure transitions B8 →B2 and B1→B2 are found to occur at 340 and
410 GPa respectively. The pressure dependent changes are observed largely in the valence
electrons Compton profiles whereas core profiles are almost independent of the pressure in all
MgO polymorphs. Increase in pressure results in broadening of the valence Compton profiles. The
principal maxima in the second derivative of Compton profiles shifts towards high momentum
side in all structures. Reorganization of momentum density in the B1→B2 structural phase
transition is seen in the first and second derivatives before and after the transition pressure.
Features of the autocorrelation functions shift towards lower r side with increment in pressure.
Keywords: Autocorrelation functions; Compton profiles; Density functional
theory; Structural phase transition.
1. Introduction
Magnesium oxide is one of the representative materials, which has been
found to play an important role in the geophysical models of the mantle-core
boundary [1-3]. This stable binary oxide is structurally rich and crystallises in a
number of polymorphs [4-14]. There is a resurgence of interest in the structural
studies of MgO due to contradictory results on the thermal and pressurewise
stability. The ambient pressure melting point is not precisely determined and have
diverging opinions about the phase from which it transforms[15].The volume
discontinuity at 170 GPa in the shock wave experiments remains unresolved [16].
In the quest of this, polymorphs of MgO, other than B1 and B2, are being
explored. However, the focus has been to report structural and electronic
properties of these polymorphs using atomistic simulations. Phase diagram and
pressure induced structural phase transitions among various polymorphs are also
studied from first-principles methods [10-16]. Some of the efforts are directed to
study transitions both experimentally as well as theoretically. Remaining are
studied either experimentally or theoretically.
Electron momentum density (EMD) is an important ground state property
of materials. The quantity is directly related to the solid state wave functions in
the ground state [17-23]. This can be accessed through 2D-ACAR experiments
which offer good resolution [20-23]. Using position-sensitive detectors one can
avoid the integration over planes in momentum space [20-23]. However, one
needs to take care of electron-positron interactions while interpreting experimental
results. Moreover, sensitivity of the positrons to defects in the solid causes
limitations. Furthermore, in some materials role of positrons is crucial due to the
Coulomb repulsion by the nuclei [20,21]. Compton scattering on the other hand
does not suffer from these drawbacks [17-23]. Within the validity of impulse
approximation, the technique has been applied to determine projection of EMD
along the direction of the scattering vector. The γ-ray Compton scattering
experiments offer limited resolution. With the availability of synchrotron radiation
sources it is possible to perform Compton profile measurements at high resolution
with very good statistics [19]. Moreover, availability of polarized photons using
multiple wigglers enables to study spin dependent momentum density distribution
in magnetic materials [19,24-26]. Change in the spin dependent momentum
density applying temperature has also been explored [26]. Thus Compton
scattering has been applied to unfold Fermi surface topology, nature of bonding,
directional bonding behavior in a variety of solids [17-19,24-26]. Magnetic
Compton scattering has been applied to study field and temperature dependent
magnetic properties, distribution of magnetic moment, separation of orbital and
spin part of the magnetic moment in novel rare earth materials [24-26]. Despite
such a success there are rare attempts to study pressure dependent EMD or the
Compton profiles. In the experiments, pressure exerting assemblies such as
diamond anvil cell are necessary. The pressure assembly poses serious problems
in background measurements. Nevertheless, a few experiments are performed to
see effect of pressure on Compton profiles [27-30]. Thereafter, there is a scarcity
of attempts to study effects of pressure on EMD, Compton profile or the
autocorrelation functions (AF) experimentally or theoretically. This is probably
the first attempt to report pressure dependent Compton profiles, their first and
second derivatives and the autocorrelation functions from first principles method.
In this article, our major goal is to see effect of pressure on the Compton
profiles and autocorrelation functions of the ionic solid magnesium oxide. It
crystallises in a number of structures and show pressure induced structural phase
transitions theoretically. Moreover, MgO has been studied extensively from the
Hartree-Fock (HF) linear combination of atomic orbitals (LCAO) method using
various versions of the CRYSTAL code [5,6]. These studies have well set the
stability of the basis sets of magnesium and oxygen for the current investigations.
The directional and isotropic Compton profiles of MgO in rocksalt i.e. B1
structure which is stable structure under ambient conditions are studied by a
number of workers [31-34]. However, in the current effort we apply the LCAO
method within the framework of density functional theory embodied in the
CRYSTAL06 code [35-38]. In this endeavor, first we compute the lattice
constants and bulk moduli of MgO crystallizing in the B1, B2, B3, B4, B8 , andh-
MgO structures by coupling the total energy calculations with the Murnaghan
equation of state. These calculations are extended to compute enthalpy to examine
possibility of structural phase transition among these structures. All calculations
are performed considering DFT-LCAO method applying the CRYSTAL code
[35-38].
The paper is organized as follows: In section 2, we give details on crystal
structures, computational methodology and the computational parameters taken in
calculations. Results obtained on the structural parameters, pressure-induced
structural phase transitions, pressure dependent Compton profiles and AFs are
presented and discussed in section 3. In section 4, the results are summarized.
2. Crystal structures and computational method
2.1 Crystal structures
MgO under ambient conditions crystallizes in the rock-salt i.e. B1
structure belonging to the space group (SG) Fm3m. The experimental lattice
constant of B1 phase is 4.216 Å. This structure is extensively studied compared to
others. MgO also crystallizes in the high pressure phase B2 belonging to the SG
Pm3m. The MgO is presumed to exist in the B3, B4, B8 and h-MgO structures at
other pressures. The B3 phase is zincblende with SG F43m while B4 is the
wurtzite with SG P6 mc. The B8 phase of MgO has NiAs-type structure while h-
MgO is buckled boron nitride type structure. The atomic positions of Mg and O in
B8 and h-MgO structures are different despite of the same SG P6 /mmc.
2.2 Computational method
All calculations are performed using first-principles periodic LCAO
method implemented in the CRYSTAL code [35-38]. In all electron first-
principles self-consistent field (SCF) periodic LCAO procedure, the one electron
operator defined as H(k) contains kinetic energy operator, Coulomb interaction
operator and the exchange operator. The operator transforms to the Fock matrix
F(k) in reciprocal space. CRYSTAL [35] is based on both Hartree-Fock (HF) and
the DFT schemes, allows combination of the two. In the DFT, both exchange and
correlation effects are included but approximately in practice. The effectiveness
largely depends on the system under investigation. A number of exchange and
correlation functionals exist in literature for usage in the first-principles
calculations. In the current non-cellular method, each crystalline orbital ψ(r,k) is a
linear combination of Bloch functions φ(r,k) defined in terms of local functions
φ(r), normally referred as atomic orbitals. The local functions are expressed as
linear combination of certain number of individually normalized Gaussian type
functions. For Mg and O, 5-11G [39] and 8-411d1G [40] basis sets were
considered. In the present study the Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof (PBE) [41]
exchange and correlation functionals are used. These are based on the generalized
gradient approximation (GGA) which essentially accounts for density gradients
also that are neglected in the local density approximation. The self-consistent
calculations were performed considering Monkhorst and Pack [42] net of
24×24×24 for B1, B3, 21×21×21 for B2, and 18×18×18 points for the B4, B8
and h-MgO structures. The self-consistency was achieved within 11 iterative
cycles.
To perform geometry optimization for the wurtzite i.e. B4 structure, the
parameters suggested by Schleife et al [11] were taken to begin with. The internal
parameter u was then optimized by performing force calculations (OPTGEOM
option) [35,43]. Thus settling the internal parameter u, the total energy landscapes
were obtained for the (1.45≤(c/a)≤1.75) ratio at various volumes. The lowest
energy was obtained for (c/a)=1.525. At this ratio, the force calculations were
performed to refine the internal parameter further. At the refined u, the total
energy calculations were found stable (tolerance≤0.001 mH) with respect to the
(c/a) ratio. For the remaining B8 and h-MgO structures the energy landscapes
were obtained for (1.6≤(c/a)≤1.8) and (1.05≤(c/a)≤1.35) respectively. In order to
deduce the structural parameters the total energy calculations are coupled with the
Murnaghan equation of state for each structure [44].
The Compton profile is an important observable directly related to the
EMD distribution in solids. Within validity of the impulse approximation, the
spectrum of Compton scattered photons, or Compton profile, is given by [17-19]:
where n(p) is the single particle momentum density of the scatterer. Thus
Compton profile is a directional property which gives projection of EMD onto a
line p chosen parallel to the experimental scattering vector (z-axis). For isotropic
systems the double integration in Eq. (1) simplifies to:
It gives spherically average valence Compton profile. The n(p) can be determined
from n(p) by the numerical averaging procedure [35,45]. The valence electron
momentum density can be determined by sum of the squared moduli of occupied
crystalline-orbitals in a momentum representation, or equivalently, by the
diagonal element of the six-dimensional Fourier transform of the one electron
density matrix from configuration to momentum space using following relations
[35-38]:
V BZ j F j
mj n j m n  F j 
where y (k,p) is jth occupied crystalline orbital, θ is the step function and the
summation extends over all occupied states. In Eq. (4), a is the expansion
coefficient, p0 is the momentum in the BZ, which is related to p by a reciprocal
lattice vector K, s is the fractional coordinate of the c centre. Fourier transform
of the real space atomic orbital c (r) is c (p).
3. Results and discussion
3.1 Equilibrium structures and the structural phase transitions
The energetics of six phases of MgO were explored by generating total
energy curves, E(V), computationally. In case of B8 and h-MgO, c/a ratio is
optimized while for B4, both the internal coordinate u and the c/a ratio are
optimized [35,43]. The refined internal coordinate for B4 phase obtained after
adopting such strategy is u=0.3998. The total energy i.e. E(V) curves for the six
phases are plotted in Fig. 1. The optimized c/a ratio for B4, B8 and h-MgO are
1.525, 1.725 and 1.225 respectively. From Fig. 1 and Table 1 it is visually obvious
that equilibrium volume (V ) and total energy at equilibrium decreases as one
moves along B4—h-MgO—B1. For the B1 structure, computed lattice constant
(a) is 4.268 Å and bulk modulus (B ) is160 GPa. These are in very good
agreement with the experimental lattice constants a=4.216 Å and B =160 GPa
[6,46]. The lattice constants, equilibrium volume, bulk modulus and its pressure
derivatives for other structures are listed in Table 1. The current results are in
accordance with the previous results. Thus quantitative reliability in structural
parameters aptly ensures stability and accuracy of the basis sets considered in this
study.
In order to examine possibility of structural phase transitions and compute
transition pressure (P), the enthalpy (H=E+pV) calculations were performed. In
Fig. 2, enthalpy (H) curves for all six polymorphs are plotted in two panels. The
left panel shows enthalpy within the pressure range -25—75 GPa while the right
panel shows enthalpy within the range of 300—450 GPa. In the 75—300 GPa
range no pressure dependent transitions are seen. Both panels in Fig. 2, depict that
B1→B2, B3→B2, B4→B2, B8 →B2, h-MgO→B2, h-MgO→B8 and B4→B8
transitions are permissible on applying pressure. Most of the transitions are found
to occur below 75 GPa. The B4→B8 , h-MgO→B8 , B3→B2, B4→B2 and h-
MgO→B2 transitions take place at 2, 9, 37, 42 and 64 GPa respectively.
Possibilities of some of these transitions are predicted by other workers without
reporting transition pressure [11]. The high pressure transitions B1→B2 and
B8 →B2 are found to occur at 410 and 340 GPa respectively. Notably, only
B1→B2 transition is studied experimentally [1-3]. Earlier it was found that B1 is
a stable up to 110 GPa [1,6]. Later experiment showed that B1 is stable up to 227
GPa [2,3]. Theoretically the B1→B2 transition is studied by many workers [4-7,
10-14]. The transition pressure predicted by current calculation is well in
accordance with earlier predictions. In the current study six more transitions are
found which take place at negative pressure (-20—0 GPa). It may be noted that
negative pressure cannot be realized in experiments and therefore have limited
practical applications.
3.2 Pressure dependent Compton profiles:
The total, core and valence isotropic Compton profiles for the B2 and B4
structures computed at 0, 25, 42, and 75 GPa are plotted in Figs. 3(a-d). One
observes that core electrons profiles are independent of the pressure applied. The
change in the total Compton profile is entirely governed by change in the valence
electrons profile. These findings are also observed in pressure dependent profiles
computed for other polymorphs of MgO. Therefore, in Fig. 4 the pressure
dependent valence electrons profiles, typically, for the B1 and h-MgO structures
are plotted. Valence Compton profiles of remaining structures show similar
trends. Figures 3 and 4 reveal that the J(0) decreases gradually as pressure
increases. Change in J(0) is maximum when the pressure is low (say 0-25 GPa in
this case). This is well expected because in this region relative change in volume
is more compared to the high pressure region for an equal increment in pressure.
Moreover, increase in pressure broadens the Compton profiles. This broadening is
also well anticipated. On the basis of band structure calculations of B4, h-MgO,
and B1 structures, Limpijumnong and Lambrecht [8] have pointed out that
decrease in volume results in an increase in the valence band width accompanied
by a downward shift of the centre of gravity of the major valence bands. These
two effects collectively broaden the Compton profiles with decrease in volume or
increase in pressure. A remarkable feature common in the Compton profiles is the
notion that the =0, where P is the pressure in GPa. Below q=0.7 a.u., the
Compton profiles decrease with pressure and increase thereafter. This is clearly
visible in the highlighted region of the curves given in the inset of Fig. 4. Notably,
the position of this point is independent of the structures of MgO. It may probably
be species dependent. Similar studies on other materials are necessary to see its
origin.
Further salient fine features on the EMD and the pressure dependence
thereon can be gained by computing the first and second derivatives of the
isothermal Compton profiles. The first derivative of Compton profile is related to
the 3-D EMD as [19,47,48]:
where J(q) is the average Compton profile. Likewise the second derivative in
Compton profile is related to n(0) as[19,47]:
The first and second derivatives of Compton profiles of B1 and h-MgO structures
at various pressures (-25 to 50 GPa) are plotted in Figs. 5(a) and 5(b) respectively.
It is known that both first and second derivatives show rapid change at the Fermi
momentum (q ). For both structures of MgO, the momentum of the principal
maxima where rapid changes are visible shift towards higher momentum side with
pressure pointing that Fermi momentum increases with pressure. This is in
conformity with the experimental evidence derived from the Compton profile
measurements on free electron gas of sodium at high pressure. Because of the
relatively high electron density in Na, shift in the q occurs at lower pressure in
contrast to the ionic solid MgO. Moreover shift in q with pressure is less in MgO
than Na. Interestingly, only the second derivatives in Compton profiles, drawn in
Fig. 5 (b), show specific signatures at q=0.7 a.u. At -25 and 0 GPa it shows
regular behavior and a deep starts to appear thereafter in the second derivatives for
the B1 structure. This deep is shallower in h-MgO and becomes pronounced at
higher pressure.
Among several polymorphs of MgO, the B1→B2 transition is
experimentally reported to occur at pressure greater than 227 GPa. Most of the
theoretical calculations observed this transition within the 400-600 GPa range of
pressure. Therefore we compare the valence Compton profiles of the B1 and B2
structures in Fig. 6. The given Compton profiles are computed below transition
pressure i.e. 100 GPa, at transition pressure i.e. 410 Gpa, and after transition
pressure i.e. 475 GPa. It is obvious that the pressure causes broadening of the
profiles. This is well along the findings of Chang and Cohen [4] who observed
broadening in the valence bands widths of the B1 and B2 polymorphs with
decrease in volume in the band structure calculations. One can see some change
in Compton profiles of B1 and B2 structures between 0.0≤q≤1.0. These changes
are different from the changes observed in Fig. 3. This may probably due to the
pressure induced structural phase transition from B1 to B2. For further analysis,
the first derivatives of the valence Compton profiles of the two structures at 100,
410 and 475 GPa are plotted in Fig.7 (a). At transition pressure the principal
maxima reduces in amplitude and another maxima, low in amplitude, appears
around 0.3 a.u. in case of B1. The low amplitude maxima is absent below and
above the transition pressures. On the other hand, a maxima appears at transition
pressure and remains at 475 GPa for the B2 phase. These features are more clearly
visible in the second derivatives plotted in Fig. 7(b). Both the first and second
derivatives below and above transition pressure clearly hints at reorganization of
valence electron momentum density during structural phase transition. Finer
details can be gained by observing the changes in anisotropies in the directional
Compton profiles. It is hoped that the present study will open avenues to study
pressure dependent Compton profiles theoretically and experimentally.
3.3 Pressure dependent autocorrelation functions:
The Fourier transform of the Compton profile is related to the
autocorrelation function (AF) or the B-function by the following relation [17-
19,36]:
The AF function has the property that B(0)=N, where N is the number electrons
contributing to the Compton profile. The AF introduced by Pattison and William
[49] has the advantage that one deals back in the real space and can focus on the
region dominated by the valence electrons. The position of deep and zero
crossings are related to the bonding distances and nearest neighbour interaction in
the solids [36,48,49]. The isotropic AFs of the B1 structure at various pressures
are plotted in Fig. 8. Two features are noteworthy. Firstly, under ambient
conditions, B(r) = 0 at r= 3.55 a.u., the local minimum occurs at the 4.6 a.u. and a
shoulder is visible at 7.2 a.u. Beyond this, all curves show nearly identical
behaviour. It shows that the charge transfer occurs mostly within the 3.5≤ r≤7.5
range. Increment in pressure shifts these positions towards the lower r side. The
high pressure i.e. compression brings atoms closer thereby reducing the lattice
constant. It reduces the nearest neighbour distances and the bond length. This is
probably the reason for shifting towards the lower r side. Secondly, a typical AF
has a minimum value at a characteristic r. In Fig. 8, the minimum value of AF
goes further down with increment in pressure. The depth and height in the AF
after first zero crossing are attributed to the strength of interaction among
electrons of nearest neighbours forming bonds [49]. An increase in the depth and
height with pressure indicates stronger bonding. Also the value of AF at the
shoulder increases with increment in pressure. The O 2p states have been
attributed a major part in the bonding of MgO in B1 structure on the basis of AF
by a number of workers [31-33]. The O-2s states play relatively a minor role. The
interaction between bonding states becomes more pronounced in terms of charge
transfer or overlap leading to a larger change in the autocorrelation functions as
pressure increases. These features can be better analysed in terms of directional
AFs.
4. Conclusions
The first-principles method at the level of DFT is applied to study
structural phase transitions in six polymorphs of MgO. The calculations are
performed to see effect of pressure on the Compton profiles and the
autocorrelation functions. The enthalpy calculations predict that B4→B8 , h-
MgO→B8 , B3→B2, B4→B2 and h-MgO→B2 transitions take place at 2, 9, 37,
42 and 64 GPa respectively. The high pressure transitions B8 →B2 and B1→B2
are found to occur at 340 and 410 GPa respectively. It is observed that the valence
Compton profiles are sensitive to the applied pressure. The core profiles are
almost independent of the pressure in all MgO polymorphs. The valence electrons
profile becomes broad with increment in pressure. With the increase in pressure
the principal maxima in the second derivative of Compton profiles shifts towards
high momentum side in all structures. The first and second derivatives before and
after the transition pressure suggest reorganization of momentum density in the
B1→B2 structural phase transition. Features of the autocorrelation functions
shift towards lower r side with increment in pressure. The possibility of
theoretical Compton profile calculations presented in this work may invite further
pressure dependent studies. It will also enable to establish Compton scattering as
more versatile probe to study properties of materials under different conditions
like magnetic field and pressure.
Acknowledgements
UP is grateful to the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, New Delhi for awarding Senior
Research Fellowship. Financial support provided by the UGC, New Delhi through grant No.
SR/33-37/2007 to BKS is gratefully acknowledged. BB is supported by the U.S. Department of
Energy under Contract Nos. DE-FG02-07ER46352 and DE-SC0007091.