PRINCIPAL MANIFOLDS AND GRAPHS IN PRACTICE:
FROM MOLECULAR BIOLOGY TO DYNAMICAL SYSTEMS
ALEXANDER N. GORBAN
Department of Mathematics, University of Leicester, University Road
Leicester LE1 7RH, UK
E-mail: ag153@le.ac.uk
ANDREI ZINOVYEV
Institut Curie, U900 INSERM/Curie/Mines Paritech, rue d‟Ulm 26
Paris, 75005, France
E-mail: andrei.zinovyev@curie.fr
We present several applications of non-linear data modeling, using principal manifolds and principal graphs
constructed using the metaphor of elasticity (elastic principal graph approach). These approaches are
generalizations of the Kohonen‟s self-organizing maps, a class of artificial neural networks. On several examples
we show advantages of using non-linear objects for data approximation in comparison to the linear ones. We
propose four numerical criteria for comparing linear and non-linear mappings of datasets into the spaces of lower
dimension. The examples are taken from comparative political science, from analysis of high-throughput data in
molecular biology, from analysis of dynamical systems.
Keywords: Kohonen neural networks, self-organizing maps, principal manifolds, principal graphs, data
visualization.
structure in the image of Y and (b) the best
1. Introduction
approximation of the dataset D. The SOM algorithm has
In this paper, we provide several examples of several setup variables to regulate the compromise
application of the principal manifold and graphs between these goals. We start from some initial
methodology taken from applied projects: comparative approximation of the map, φ :M→Rm. On each (k-th)
political science, data analysis in molecular biology, step of the algorithm we have a datapoint x D and a
theoretical methods of dynamical systems analysis. As it current approximation φ:M→Rm. For these x and φ we
will be shown, one of the most common problems in
these fields is how to approximate a finite set D in Rm
define an “owner neuron” of x in Y: y
||x−φ (y)||. The next approximation, φ , is
for relatively large m by a finite subset of a regular low- k k+1
dimensional object in Rm.
The first hypothesis we have to check is: whether the k+1 k k x k
dataset D is situated near a low–dimensional affine
manifold (plane) in Rm. If we look for a point, straight Here h k is a step size, 0≤w(ρ(y,y x ))≤1 is a
monotonically decreasing cutting function and ρ(y,y) is
line, plane, ... that minimizes the average squared x
distance between y and y. There are many ways to
distance to the datapoints, we immediately come to the x
combine steps (1) in the whole algorithm. The idea of
Principal Component Analysis (PCA).
SOM is very flexible and seminal, has plenty of
PCA is one of the most seminal inventions in data
applications and generalizations, but, strictly speaking,
analysis. Now it is textbook material. Nonlinear
we don‟t know what we are looking for: we have the
generalization of PCA is a great challenge, and many
algorithm, but no independent definition: SOM is a
attempts have been made to answer it. In 1982 Kohonen
result of the algorithm work. The attempts to define
introduced a type of neural networks called Self-
Organizing Maps (SOM)1. SOM as solution of a minimization problem for some
energy functional were not very successful2.
With the SOM algorithm we take a finite metric
space Y with metric ρ (a space of “neurons”) and try to
map it into Rm with (a) the best preservation of initial
2 Alexander N. Gorban and Andrei Zinovyev
For a known probability distribution, principal be optimised. The elastic map algorithm is extremely
manifolds were introduced as lines or surfaces passing fast at the optimisation step due to the simplest form of
through “the middle” of the data distribution3.
the smoothness penalty. It is implemented in several
This intuitive vision was transformed into the
programming languages as software libraries or front-
mathematical notion of self-consistency: every point x
end user graphical interfaces freely available from the
of the principal manifold M is a conditional expectation
manifold, nor projection should be linear: just a software found applications in microarray data analysis,
differentiable projection  of the data space (usually it is visualization of genetic texts, visualization of
Rm or a domain in Rm) onto the manifold M with the economical and sociological data and other fields7-16.
self-consistency requirement for conditional Let G be a simple undirected graph with set of
expectations: x = E(z|(z) = x). For a finite dataset D, vertices V and set of edges E.
only one or zero datapoints are typically projected into a Definition. k-star in a graph G is a subgraph with k
point of the principal manifold. In order to avoid + 1 vertices v  V and k edges {(v , v)|i = 1, .., k}
0,1,...,k 0 i
overfitting, we have to introduce smoothers that become Definition. Suppose that for each k ≥ 2, a family S
an essential part of the principal manifold construction of k-stars in G has been selected. Then we define an
algorithms. elastic graph as a graph with selected families of k-stars
SOMs give the most popular approximations for S and for which for all E(i)  E and S(j) S, the
principal manifolds: we can take for Y a fragment of a k k k
corresponding elasticity moduli λ > 0 and μ > 0 are
regular k-dimensional grid and consider the resulting i kj
defined.
SOM as the approximation to the k-dimensional
Definition. Primitive elastic graph is an elastic
principal manifold (see, for example, Refs. 4-5). Several
original algorithms for construction of principal curves6 graph in which every non-terminal node (with the
number of neighbours more than one) is associated with
and surfaces for finite datasets were developed during
a k-star formed by all neighbours of the node. All k-
last decade, as well as many applications of this idea. In
1996, in a discussion about SOM at the 5th Russian stars in the primitive elastic graph are selected, i.e. the
S sets are completely determined by the graph
National Seminar in Neuroinformatics, a method of k
structure.
multidimensional data approximation based on elastic
Definition. Let E(i)(0), E(i)(1) denote two vertices of
energy minimization was proposed (see Refs. 7-14 and
the bibliography there). This method is based on the the graph edge E(i) and S(j)(0),...,S(j)(k) denote
analogy between the principal manifold and the elastic vertices of a k-star S(j) (where S(j)(0) is the central
membrane (and plate). Following the metaphor of k k
vertex, to which all other vertices are connected). Let us
elasticity, we introduce two quadratic smoothness
consider a map :V → Rm which describes an
penalty terms. This allows one to apply standard
embedding of the graph into a multidimensional space.
minimization of quadratic functionals (i.e., solving a
The elastic energy of the graph embedding in the
system of linear algebraic equations with a sparse
Euclidean space is defined as
matrix).
2. Method of principal elastic graphs and principal 2
elastic maps E i
E S(j) kj k ki1 k
Here we give a short description of the structure of Definition. Elastic map is a continuous manifold
the elastic functional used for construction of principal YRm constructed from the elastic net as its grid
graphs and manifolds. For more detailed description, approximation using some between-node interpolation
see other works (in particular, Ref. 14). procedure. This interpolation procedure constructs a
In a series of works (see Refs. 7-16), the authors of continuous mapping  c :{ 1 ,…,  dim(G) } → Rm from the
this paper used metaphor of elastic membrane and plate discrete map :V → Rm, used to embed the graph in Rm,
to construct one-, two- and three-dimensional principal and the discrete values of node indices {i,...,i },
manifold approximations of various topologies. Mean i = 1...|V|. For example, the simplest piecewise linear
squared distance approximation error combined with the elastic map is build by piecewise linear map .
elastic energy of the membrane serves as a functional to Definition. Elastic principal manifold of dimension
s for a dataset X is an elastic map, constructed from an
Principal Manifolds And Graphs In Practice: From Molecular Biology To Dynamical Systems 3
elastic net Y of dimension s embedded in Rm using such boundary vertex belongs to two stars. For a general
a map  opt :Y → Rm, that corresponds to the minimal elastic graph G with sets of k-stars S k we introduce the
value of the functional
following notion of pluriharmonic function.
U(X,Y)MSD W (X,Y)U  (G), (5) Definition. A map V→ Rm defined on vertices of
where the weighted mean squared distance from the G is pluriharmonic iff for any k-star S(j)S with the
dataset X to the elastic net Y is calculated as the distance
central vertex S(j)(0) and the neighbouring vertices
to the finite set of vertices {y1=v yk=v }. k
In the Euclidean space one can apply an EM S(j)(i), i = 1...k, the equality holds:
algorithm for estimating the elastic principal manifold 1 k
for a finite dataset. It is based in turn on the general (S(j)(0)) (S(j)(i)). (6)
algorithm for estimating the locally optimal embedding
Pluriharmonic maps generalize the notion of linear
map for an arbitrary elastic graph G (see Ref. 14).
map and of harmonic map, simultaneously. For
example:
2.2. Pluriharmonic graphs as ideal approximators
1) 1D harmonic functions are linear;
Approximating datasets by one dimensional
2) If we consider an n-dimensional cubic lattice as a
principal curves is not satisfactory in the case of
primitive graph (with 2n-stars for all non-boundary
datasets that can be intuitively characterized as
vertices), then the correspondent pluriharmonic
branched. A principal object which naturally passes
functions are just harmonic ones;
through the „middle‟ of such a data distribution should
3) If we create from n-dimensional cubic lattice the
also have branching points that are missing in the
standard n-dimensional elastic net with 2-stars (each
simple structure of principal curves. Introducing such
non-boundary vertex is a center of n 2-stars, one 2-star
branching points converts principal curves into
for each coordinate direction), then pluriharmonic
principal graphs.
functions are linear.
In Refs. 10,12,14 it was proposed to use a universal
In the theory of principal curves and manifolds the
form of non-linearity penalty for the branching points.
penalty functions were introduced to penalise deviation
The form of this penalty is defined in the previous
from linear manifolds (straight lines or planes). We
section (4) for the elastic energy of graph embedment. It
proposed to use pluriharmonic embeddings as “ideal
naturally generalizes the simplest three-point second
objects” instead of manifolds and to introduce penalty
derivative approximation squared: for a 2-star (or rib)
(5) for deviation from this ideal form.
the penalty equals
The principal graphs can be called data
3 3 3 3 3 complexity of the principal objects we mean the
etc. following three notions:
For a k-star this penalty equals to zero iff the
position of the central node coincides with the mean 1) Geometric complexity: how far a principal object
point of its neighbors. An embedment (G) is „ideal‟ if deviates from its ideal configuration; for the elastic
all such penalties equal to zero. For a primitive elastic principal graphs we explicitly measure deviation from
graph this means that this embedment is a harmonic the „ideal‟ pluriharmonic graph by the elastic energy
function on graph: its value in each non-terminal vertex U (G) (3) (this sort of complexity is often just a
is a mean of the value in the closest neighbors of this measure of non-linearity);
vertex. 2) Structural complexity measure: it is some non-
For non-primitive graphs we can consider stars decreasing function of the number of vertices, edges and
which include not all neighbors of their centers. For k-stars of different orders SC(G)=SC(|V|,|E|,|S |,…,|S |);
example, for a square lattice we create elastic graph this function penalises for number of structural
(elastic net) using 2-stars (ribs): all vertical 2-stars and elements;
all horizontal 2-stars. For such elastic net, each non-
4 Alexander N. Gorban and Andrei Zinovyev
Fig. 1. Approximation of data used for constructing the quality of life index. Each of 192 points represents a country in 4-
dimensional space formed by the values of 4 indicators (gross product, life expectancy, infant mortality, tuberculosis incidence).
Different forms and colors correspond to various geographical locations. Red line represents the principal curve, approximating the
dataset. Three arrows show the basis of principal components. The best linear index (first principal component) explains 76% of
variation, while the non-linear index (principal curve) explains 93% of variation.
3) Construction complexity is defined with respect to a Let us define graph grammar O as a set of graph
graph grammar as a minimum number of applications of grammar operations O={o ,..,o}. All possible
elementary transformations necessary to construct given applications of a graph grammar operation o to a graph
G from the simplest graph (one vertex, zero edges). G gives a set of transformations of the initial graph
The construction complexity is defined with respect o(G) = {G , G , …, G }, where p is the number of all
to a grammar of elementary transformation. The graph possible applications of o to G. Let us also define a
grammars17,18 provide a well-developed formalism for sequence of r different graph grammars
the description of elementary transformations. An {O(1) {o(1),...,o(1)},,O(r) {o(r),...,o(r)}}.
elastic graph grammar is presented as a set of 1 s 1 1 s r
production (or substitution) rules. Each rule has a form Let us choose a grammar of elementary
A → B, where A and B are elastic graphs. When this rule transformations, predefined boundaries of structural
is applied to an elastic graph, a copy of A is removed complexity SC max and construction complexity CC max ,
from the graph together with all its incident edges and is and elasticity coefficients λ i and μ kj .
replaced with a copy of B with edges that connect B to Definition. Elastic principal graph for a dataset X is
the graph. For a full description of this language we such an elastic graph G embedded in the Euclidean
need the notion of a labeled graph. Labels are necessary space by the map V→ Rm that SC(G) ≤ SC max , CC(G)
to provide the proper connection between B and the ≤ CC , and U (G) → min over all possible elastic
graph18. An approach based on graph grammars to graphs G embeddings in Rm .
constructing effective approximations of elastic For the simplest choice of grammar, this definition
principal graph was proposed recently10,12,14. gives us principal trees (see the section 3.3).
Principal Manifolds And Graphs In Practice: From Molecular Biology To Dynamical Systems 5
Fig. 2. Comparing linear (b) and non-linear (a) two-dimensional projections of data on the expression of genes in normal human
tissues. Each point represents a tissue sample (brain, heart, pancreas, etc., each denoted by a distinct color) by a vector of expression
of several thousands of genes. The linear projection is done by the standard PCA approach. The non-linear projection is made by the
elastic map method, described in this paper.
represents a linear combination of features with weights
3. Real-life examples of principal graph and determined by experts (see, for example, Ref. 20). This
manifold applications approach is inevitably biased by the experts‟ opinion.
An unbiased approach would be to use the best one-
3.1. Happiness (quality of life) is non-linear
dimensional approximation of data to introduce the
Let us take a simple real-life example where “objective” ranking. It makes sense if a good
application of linear data approximation is not approximation function exists.
satisfactory and non-linear one-dimensional principal Each of 192 countries is characterized by the 4
manifolds (principal curves) are needed to adequately values, thus, we can represent this dataset as a cloud of
describe the data. 192 points in 4-dimensional space. Simple visualization
In the Political World Atlas project, launched by the of this distribution allows to make a conclusion that no
Moscow State Institute of International Relations19, linear function exists that can equally well serve for
systematic quantitative data on 192 modern countries reducing the dimension of this space from 4 to 1 (see
for the 1989-2005 period were collected. One of the Fig.1). The distribution is intrinsically curved, hence,
goals was to estimate the “objective” position of post- any linear mapping will inevitably give strong
sovetic countries, in particular, in terms of “objective” distortions in one or other region of dataspace.
estimates of the quality of life. Similarly to other There is a simple reason for this. Observing Fig.1, it
projects on quantification of country happiness or life is easy to realize that all countries can be roughly
quality, the following quantitative indicators could be separated in two groups. First group consists of very
used for constructing an integral index and ranking: wealthy countries, mostly from Western and Nothern
gross product per capita in dollars, life expectancy in Europe, USA, Australia and some others (right branch
years, infant mortality in cases per 10000 habitants, of the distribution on the Fig.1). It happens that the most
tuberculosis incidence in cases per 100000 habitants. A of variation among these countries can be attributed to
common practice in this field is to combine these or the gross product per capita feature while others are
similar features in one index (number) which usually approximately equal for them and do not contribute
6 Alexander N. Gorban and Andrei Zinovyev
significantly to the variance. The second group (left in understanding various biological processes including
branch of the distribution on the Fig.1) consists of very cancer. It allows simultaneous screening of the
poor countries (mostly, African), which are “equally expression of all genes in a cell exposed to some
poor” in terms of the gross product per capita but can be specific conditions (for example, stress, cancer,
very different in terms of their problems (lower of treatment, normal conditions). Obtaining a sufficient
higher life expectancy, level of infectious diseases, number of observations (chips), one can construct a
conditions of the state health system), for a number of table of "samples vs genes", containing logarithms of
reasons (wars, difference in internal politics, etc.). the expression levels of, typically several thousands (n)
However, this classification is not perfect: in fact, there of genes, in typically several tens (m) of samples.
are many countries which are localized in the non-linear For this study, we took three distinct microarray
junction between these two branches of the 4- datasets, provided at
includes the most of the post-sovetic countries which 1) Breast cancer dataset from Ref. 22, 286 tumor
are the subject of the politologic analysis in this study, samples and 17816 genes, several natural groupings of
hence, it is important to correctly position them in the samples accordingly to survival of patients, status of
global picture. some cell receptors and molecular classification of cells.
To do this, we have constructed a principal curve 2) Bladder cancer dataset from Ref. 23, 40 tumor
approximating the curved data distribution (red line on samples, several natural groupings of samples
the Fig. 1). The advantage of using the principal curve accordingly to the stage and grade of the tumor
instead of principal line was significant in term of 3) Collection of microarrays for normal human
Mean-Squared Error (93% vs 76% of explained tissues from Ref. 24, 103 samples of healthy tissues,
variance). Importantly, using the non-linear index for grouped accordingly to the tissue of origin (brain, heart,
non-linear one-dimensional dimension reduction can pancreas, etc.).
significantly change the absolute and relative rankings In Fig. 2 we compare data visualization scatters after
for many countries, including Russia. Thus, for the projection of the normal tissues dataset, provided in
index, constructed using the first principal component, Ref. 24, onto the linear two-dimensional and non-linear
Russia in 2005 is ranked the 86th (with the most two-dimensional principal manifold. The later one is
prosperous Luxembourg at the 1st place), after, for constructed by the elastic maps approach. Each point
example, Iran (74th) and Egypt (84th). For non-linear here represents a sample of tissue, labeled by the tissue
index, Russia is ranked the 71st before Iran (77th) and name. Before dimension reduction it is represented as a
Egypt (85th). vector in Rn, containing the expression values for all n
genes in the sample.
3.2. Dimension reduction for microarrays One of the conclusions that can be made from the
Fig. 2 is that the non-linear mapping is capable of
Now let us consider application of two-dimensional
resolving the structure of the data distribution in more
principal manifolds for data visualization. This is their
details. In particular, some groups of points that are not
natural application since they permit to create a
separated on the linear scatter become separated on the
mapping from multidimensional space of data to two- or
non-linear one. We have decided to quantify this effect,
three- dimensional spaces, thus, providing a possibility
thus, comparing the quality of linear and non-linear
to create visual images of multidimensional
mappings of the same dimension. Four criteria, each
distributions.
characterizing a projection of dataset into the low-
DNA microarray data is a rich source of information
dimensional space were developed:
for molecular biology (for a recent overview, see
Ref. 21). This technology found numerous applications
Principal Manifolds And Graphs In Practice: From Molecular Biology To Dynamical Systems 7
1) Mean-Squared Error (MSE). This is simply the
mean squared distance from all of the points to the
manifold, where the projection is orthogonal (by the
shortest distance). MSE is measured in % of total
variance. Notice that non-linear approximations should
give smaller MSE by construction, since they are less
rigid than the linear ones.
2) Quality of distance mapping (QDM). This is a
correlation coefficient between the pair-wise distances
between data points before (d ) and after (d )
projection onto the manifold:
QDMcorr(d ,d ˆ ) (7) Fig. 3. Criterion 1 (Mean-Squared Error, MSE) for
comparison of linear (of dimension 1-5, 10, columns PC1-
PC5, PC10) and non-linear projections of data (of dimension
For estimating QDM measure we also proposed to
2, column ELMAP2D). The color mark on the table shows the
calculate the correlation coefficient only on “the most comparative performance of the non-linear method compared
representative” subset of pair-wise distances, selected to the linear ones. Here two-dimensional ELMAP approach
performs as well as 4-dimensional linear approximations.
by a procedure which we have called “Natural PCA”.
The procedure was introduced in Ref. 13. The first
“natural” component is defined by the pair of the most
distant points (i1, j1). The second component is such a
pair of points (i2, j2) that 1) i2 is the most distant point
to the first component, where the distance from a point
to a set of points S is defined as the distance to the
closest point in S; 2) j2 is the point from the first
component which is the closest to i2. All the next
components are introduced analogously: the nth
component (i , j ) is such a pair of points that the i is
the most distant from the union S of all components
from 1 to n-1 and j is the point from this union S
which is the closest to i . We use both Pearson and
Spearman correlation coefficients for calculating QDM.
3) Quality of point neighborhood preservation (QNP).
For measuring it, for every data point i we calculate the
size of the intersection of the set of k neighbours in the
multi-dimensional space S(i;k) and in the low-
dimensional spaceS ˆ (i;k). QNP is the average value of Fig. 4. Criterion 2 (Quality of distance mapping, QDM). For
this intersection divided by k: the column titles see the legend to the Fig. 3. The plot shows
the comparison of pair-wise point distances in the initial
mutli-dimensional space and on the manifold after projection.
QNP k 1 k i1..N |S(i;k)Sˆ(i;k)| N . (8) The subset of distances selected by NPCA approach is shown
(see the text for explanations).
4) Quality of group compactness (QGC). In this test we
assume that there is a label C(i) associated with every neighbourhood of the point i having the label C(i).
point i. Then, for each label B, we can calculate the Then, for a label B,
average number of points of the same color in the k-
neighborhood of the points before and after projection. QGC k (B)1k C(i)B c(i;k) N(B), (9)
Let us definec(i;k)as the number of points in the k-
8 Alexander N. Gorban and Andrei Zinovyev
where N(B) is the number of points having the label B.
Values of QGC close to one would indicate that the
points of the label B forms a very compact and
separated from the other colors group. Comparing
QGC(B) before and after projection into the low-
dimensional space, one can conclude on what happened
with the group of points of the label B.
It is clear from the Fig. 3-6 that the non-linear two-
dimensional principal manifolds provide systematically
Fig. 5. Criterion 3 (Quality of point neighborhood
better results accordingly to all four criteria, achieving
preservation, QNP). For the column titles see the legend to
the performance of three- and four- dimensional linear the Fig. 3. The RANDOM column shows the random
principal manifolds. permutation test when random k points are taken instead of the
real k-neighbourhood.
A special attention should be made to the
performance of the non-linear principal manifolds with
respect to the QGC criterion. It works particularly well
for the collection of normal tissues. There are cases
when neither linear nor non-linear low-dimensional
manifolds could put together points of the same class
and there are a few examples when linear manifolds
perform better. In the latter cases (Breast cancer's A, B,
lumA, lumB and “unclassified” classes, bladder cancer
T1 class), almost all class compactness values are close
sto the estimated random values which means that these
classes have big intra-class dispersions or are poorly
separated from the others. In this case the value of class
compactness becomes unstable (look, for example, at
the classes A and B of the breast cancer dataset) and
depends on random factors which can not be taken into
account in this framework.
The closer class compactness is to unity, the easier
one can construct a decision function separating this
class from the others. However, in the high-dimensional
space, due to many degrees of freedom, the “class
compactness” might be compromised and become better
after appropriate dimension reduction. In Fig. 6 one can
find examples when dimension reduction gives better
class compactness in comparison with that calculated in
the initial multi-dimensional space (breast cancer basal
subtype, bladder cancer Grade 2 and T1, T2+ classes). It Fig.6. Criterion 4 (Quality of group compactness, QGC).
means that sample classifiers can be regularized by For the column titles see the legend to the Fig. 3. The numbers
on the right and the row colors have the following meaning
dimension reduction using PCA-like methods.
(see the graph above): number 3 is a group which is compact
There are several particular cases (breast cancer in the original space and remains compact after the projection;
basal subtype, bladder cancer T2+, Grade 2 subtypes) number 1 group is not compact before and after projection;
number 2 group being compact before projection, becomes
when non-linear manifolds give better class
dispersed after the projection; number 4 group being not
compactness than both the multidimensional space and
compact before, becomes compact after the projection. „+‟ on
linear principal manifolds of the same dimension. In the left means „better than linear‟, „++‟ means „much better‟,
these cases we can conclude that the dataset in the „+++‟ means „incomparably better‟, „-‟ means „worse‟.
regions of these classes is naturally “curved” and the
Principal Manifolds And Graphs In Practice: From Molecular Biology To Dynamical Systems 9
application of non-linear techniques for classification (change in the star list) is induced by the change of
regularization is an appropriate solution. topology, because the elastic graph is primitive.
Consecutive application of the operations from this
We can conclude that non-linear principal manifolds
grammar generates trees, i.e. graphs without cycles.
provide systematically better or equal resolution of class
Definition. „Remove a leaf, remove an edge‟ graph
separation in comparison with linear manifolds of the grammar O(shrink) applicable for the class of primitive
same dimension. They perform particularly well when elastic graphs consists of two operations: 1) The
there are many small and relatively compact transformation „remove a leaf‟ can be applied to any
heterogeneous classes (as in the case of normal tissue vertex v of G with connectivity degree equal to 1:
collection). remove v and remove the edge (v,v‟) connecting v to the
tree; 2) The transformation „remove an edge‟ is
3.3. Principal trees and Metro Maps applicable to any pair of graph vertices v, v‟ connected
by an edge (v, v‟): delete edge (v, v‟), delete vertex v‟,
Let us demonstrate how the idea of graph grammars merge the k-stars for which v and v‟ are the central
(section 2) allows constructing the simplest non-trivial nodes and make a new k-star for which v is the central
type of the principal graphs, called principal trees12,14. node with a set of neighbors which is the union of the
For this purpose let us introduce a simple „Add a node, neighbors from the k-stars of v and v‟.
bisect an edge‟ graph grammar (see Fig. 7) applied to
the class of primitive elastic graphs. Also we should define the structural complexity
measure SC(G)=SC(|V|,|E|,|S |,…,|S |). Its concrete form
depends on the application field. Here are some simple
examples:
1) SC(G) = |V| : i.e., the graph is considered more
complex if it has more vertices;
2) SC(G) =  3 3 max k ,
 , otherwise
i.e., only b simple branches (3-stars) are
allowed in the principal tree.
To construct the principal tree, the following simple
Fig. 7. Illustration of the simple “add node to a node” or algorithm is applied:
“bisect an edge” graph grammar. a) We start with a simple 2- 1) Initialize the elastic graph G by 2 vertices v and v
star from which one can generate three distinct graphs shown.
connected by an edge. The initial map  is chosen in
The “Op1” operation is adding a node to a node, operations
such a way that (v ) and (v ) belong to the first
“Op1” and “Op2” are edge bisections (here they are 1 2
topologically equivalent to adding a node to a terminal node of principal line in such a way that all the data points are
the initial 2-star). For illustration let us suppose that the “Op2” projected onto the principal line segment defined by
operation gives the biggest elastic energy decrement, thus it is (v ), (v );
the “optimal” operation. b) From the graph obtained one can 2) For a sequence of grammars O(j) = {O(grow), O(grow),
generate 5 distinct graphs and choose the optimal one. c) The O(shrink)}, j=1..3, repeat steps 3-6:
process is continued until a definite number of nodes are 3) Apply all grammar operations from O(j) to G in all
inserted.
possible ways; this gives a collection of candidate graph
transformations {G , G , …};
4) Separate {G , G , …} into permissible and forbidden
Definition. Principal tree is an acyclic primitive 1 2
transformations; permissible transformation G is such
elastic principal graph. k
that SC(G) ≤ SC , where SC is some predefined
Definition. „Add a node, bisect an edge‟ graph k max max
structural complexity ceiling;
grammar O(grow) applicable for the class of primitive
5) Optimize the embedding  and calculate the elastic
elastic graphs consists of two operations: 1) The
energy U (G) of graph embedment for every
transformation “add a node” can be applied to any 
permissible candidate transformation, and choose such a
vertex v of G: add a new node z and a new edge (v, z);
graph G that gives the minimal value of the elastic
2) The transformation “bisect an edge” is applicable to opt
any pair of graph vertices v, v‟ connected by an edge (v, functional: G opt arg inf U  (G k );
G permissibelset
v‟): delete edge (v, v‟), add a vertex z and two edges, (v, k
6) Substitute G ← G ;
z) and (z, v‟). The transformation of the elastic structure opt
10 Alexander N. Gorban and Andrei Zinovyev
layout a tree on a plane without edge intersection.
But it would be useful if both local tree properties
and global distance relations would be represented
using the layout. We can require that
1) In a two-dimensional layout, all k-stars
should be represented equiangular; this is the small
penalty configuration;
2) The edge lengths should be proportional to
their length in the multidimensional embedding; thus
one can represent between-node distances.
This defines a tree layout up to global rotation
and scaling and also up to changing the order of
leaves in every k-star. We can change this order to
eliminate edge intersections, but the result cannot be
guaranteed. In order to represent the global distance
structure, it was found that a good approximation for
the order of k-star leaves can be taken from the
projection of every k-star on the linear principal
plane12 calculated for all data point or on the local
principal plane in the vicinity of the k-star, calculated
only for the points close to this star. The resulting
layout can be further optimized using some greedy
Fig. 8. “Metro map” representation of normal human tissue optimization methods.
samples (on the right) and the hierarchical dendrogram of the Note that the distance on the metro map is
same data (on the left, shown only for comparison). Both estimated by summing up the lengths of branches
methods approximate the data by a tree-like structure, but along the path (Fig.8). Hence, any layout of the tree
using different metaphors (“genealogy tree” in the case of will not distort this information. The k-stars are
hierarchical dendrogram and “metro map” for the harmonic
projected onto the principal plane in order to find a
dendrite used by the principal tree method). In both
good ordering of nodes inside the star, as a heuristics,
representations the user can estimate a distance from one
to avoid excessive tree branch intersections.
sample to another by summing up distances along the path in
However, this ordering does not encode the distance
the tree. The size of circles on the metro map diagram is
proportional to the number of points projected into the along the tree branches but rather provide a way to
corresponding node, the pie diagram represents the generate a nice 2D layout.
composition of the cluster in terms of pre-existing sample The point projections are then represented as pie
groups (human tissues, in this case). diagrams, where the size of the diagram reflects the
number of points projected into the corresponding
tree node. The sectors of the diagram allow us to
7) Repeat steps 2-6 until the set of permissible show proportions of points of different classes projected
transformations is empty or the number of operations into the node. An example of the metro map
exceeds a predefined number – the construction representation applied to the case of microarray dataset
complexity. of normal tissues is shown in Fig. 8 (compare with 2D
Using the „tree trimming‟ grammar O(shrink) allows to representation of the same dataset shown in Fig. 2).
produce principal trees closer to the global optimum,
trimming excessive tree branching and fusing k-stars
separated by small „bridges‟.
3.4. Principal manifolds for dynamical systems
Principal trees can have applications in data
visualization. A principal tree is embedded into a
multidimensional data space. It approximates the data so Invariant manifold is a central concept in the theory
that one can project points from the multidimensional of dynamical systems and its construction provides a
space into the closest node of the tree. The tree by its consistent approach for model reduction25. The general
construction is a one-dimensional object, so sthis
picture behind this concept is that starting from an
projection performs dimension reduction of the
initial condition, the dynamical system quickly reaches
multidimensional data. The question is how to produce
a planar tree layout? Of course, there are many ways to
Principal Manifolds And Graphs In Practice: From Molecular Biology To Dynamical Systems 11
vicinity of a curved low-dimensional manifold and
during most of its dynamics remains close to it.
In Ref. 26 we constructed a dynamical model of
NFkB biochemical signaling cascade. The model
contains 35 dynamic variables representing
concentrations of various biochemical species. This
system is capable for sustained oscillations and
converges to a limit cycle in the phase space. When
studying the details of the dynamics of this system, we
found that the dynamics in the vicinity of the limit cycle
can be characterized by presence of a two-dimensional
invariant manifold27.
Using the same methodology as described above in
Fig. 9. Two-dimensional invariant manifold (blue grid)
the section 2 and a phase space sampling technique, we
approximation obtained by application of the principal
have constructed the invariant manifold approximation.
manifold methodology to the set of “snapshots” (black points)
To do it, we first sample the trajectories of the
along trajectories of a dynamical system. The manifold is
dynamical system in the vicinity of its limit cycle in the
shown in the 3D projection of the first three principal
following way:
components. By red one particular trajectory is shown,
1) Using the PCA approach we found a linear
quickly approaching the manifold and further converging
manifold in which the cycle trajectory is embedded.
along it to the limit cycle.
2) A system trajectory was computed in some
interval of time [0;t ], started from a randomly chosen
m reducing complexity of the dynamics. Hence, the
point of the limit cycle plus random shift in the linear
approach presented in this example can be called the
manifold calculated at Step 1. The size of this shift 
non-linear Karhunen-Loéve expansion.
can be made up to the border of the phase space (when
one of the concentrations becomes zero).
4. Conclusions
3) The trajectory obtained at Step 2 was cut into two
parts: for t[0;t ] and t[t ;t ] intervals, where Principal component analysis was introduced into
[0;1]. For the sampling, only the second part of the applied science by Karl Pearson more than one hundred
trajectory was used, properly discretized. It was done to years ago31 and since then it became one of the most
skip the first (fast) dynamics of the system towards a used mathematical tool in many domains of science (in
hypothetical invariant manifold. every domain, where approximation of a finite set of
4) Steps 2 and 3 were repeated until sufficient points is required).
(50000 in our experiments) number points were Non-linear extensions of this method (Self-
sampled. Organizing neural networks and their further
The resulting distribution of points each generalizations such as principal manifolds, principal
representing a „snapshot‟ along the trajectory of the graphs and principal trees) also can serve as a universal
dynamical system was approximated by a non-linear tool allowing to approximate complex distributions of
two-dimensional principal manifold constructed using data points, when the linear approximation happens to
the elastic map approach. The resulting manifold be insufficient. To prove superiority and advantage of
projected into the subspace of the first three (linear) applying the non-linear approximations, one can use the
principal components is shown on the Fig. 9. The set of benchmarking criteria described in this paper.
constructed approximation to the invariant manifold can The elastic graph approach can be interpreted as an
be further used for model reduction by projection of the intermediate between absolutely flexible neural gas32
system dynamics onto it25,28. and significantly more restrictive Self-Organizing Maps
Principal component analysis applied to the and elastic maps.
trajectories of a dynamical system sometimes called Using efficient implementation of principal graphs
Karhunen-Loéve expansion29,30 and it is a useful tool for and manifolds provided by the elastic graph approach,
12 Alexander N. Gorban and Andrei Zinovyev
applying these methods in practice become relatively and Techniques" (eds. Olivas E.S., Guererro J.D.M., Sober
M.M., Benedito J.R.M., Lopes A.J.S.), (Information
easy and computationally fast exercise. In this paper, we
Science Reference, September 4, 2009), pp. 28-60.
demonstrate this on several practical examples: from
15. A.N. Gorban, A.A. Pitenko, A.Y. Zinov'ev, D.C. Wunsch,
comparative political science, data analysis in molecular Vizualization of any data using elastic map method. Smart
biology and analysis of dynamical systems for Engineering System Design 11 (2001) 363-368.
16. A.N. Gorban, A.Yu. Zinovyev, and D.C. Wunsch,
biochemical modeling.
Application of the method of elastic maps in analysis of
genetic texts, In Proceedings of International Joint
5. References Conference on Neural Networks. (IJCNN Portland,
Oregon, July 20-24, 2003).
1. T. Kohonen, Self-organized formation of topologically
17. M. Löwe, Algebraic approach to single–pushout graph
correct feature maps, Biological Cybernetics 43, (1982)
transformation, Theor. Comp. Sci. 109 (1993) 181–224.
59–69.
18. M. Nagl, Formal languages of labelled graphs, Computing
2. E. Erwin, K. Obermayer, K. Schulten, Self-organizing
16 (1976) 113–137.
maps: ordering, convergence properties and energy
19. A.Yu. Melville, M.V. Ilyin, Ye.Yu. Meleshkina, M.G.
functions, Biological Cybernetics 67 (1992), 47–55.
Mironyuk, Yu.A. Polunin, I.N. Timofeyev. Political Atlas
3. T. Hastie, W. Stuetzle, Principal curves, Journal of the
of modern time: attempt of Countries Classification. Polis
American Statistical Association 84(406) (1989) 502–516.
5 (2006) (in Russian).
4. F. Mulier, V. Cherkassky, Self-organization as an iterative
kernel smoothing process, Neural Computation 7 (1995),
site.
1165–1177.
21. Y.F. Leung and D. Cavalieri, Fundamentals of cDNA
5. H. Ritter, T. Martinetz, K. Schulten, Neural Computation
microarray data analysis, Trends Genet. 19(11) (2003)
and Self-Organizing Maps: An Introduction. (Addison-
649-659.
Wesley Reading, Massachusetts, 1992).
22. Y. Wang, J.G. Klijn, Y. Zhang et al., Gene expression
6. B. Kégl, A. Krzyzak, Piecewise linear skeletonization
profiles to predict distant metastasis of lymph-node-
using principal curves, IEEE Transactions on Pattern
negative primary breast cancer, Lancet 365 (2005) 671-
Analysis and Machine Intelligence 24(1) (2002), 59–74.
679.
7. A.N. Gorban, A.A. Rossiev, Neural network iterative
23. L. Dyrskjot, T. Thykjaer, M. Kruhoffer et al. Identifying
method of principal curves for data with gaps, Journal of
distinct classes of bladder carcinoma using microarrays.
Computer and System Sciences International 38(5) (1999),
Nat Genetics 33(1) (2003), 90-96.
825–831.
24. R. Shyamsundar, Y.H. Kim, J.P. Higgins et al. A DNA
8. A. Zinovyev, Visualization of Multidimensional Data,
microarray survey of gene expression in normal human
(Krasnoyarsk State University Press Publ., 2000, 168 p.)
tissues. Genome Biology 6:R22 (2005).
9. A. Gorban, Y. Zinovyev, Elastic Principal Graphs and
25. A.N. Gorban, I. Karlin. Invariant manifolds for physical
Manifolds and their Practical Applications, Computing 75
and chemical kinetics, Volume 660 of Lect. Notes Phys.
(2005), 359–379.
(Berlin–Heidelberg–New York, Springer, 2005).
10. A. Gorban, N. Sumner, A. Zinovyev, Topological
26. O. Radulescu, A. Gorban, A. Zinovyev, A. Lilienbaum,
grammars for data approximation, Applied Mathematics
Robust simplifications of multiscale biochemical
Letters 20(4) (2007) 382-386.
networks, BMC Systems Biology 2(1):86 (2008).
11. A. Gorban, B. Kégl, D. Wunch, A. Zinovyev (eds.).
27. Radulescu O., Zinovyev A., Lilienbaum A. Model
Principal Manifolds for Data Visualization and Dimension
reduction and model comparison for NFkB signalling In
Reduction. Lecture Notes in Computational Science and
Proceedings of Foundations of Systems Biology in
Engineering, Vol. 58 ( Berlin-Heidelberg, Springer, 2008).
Engineering (September 2007, Stuttgart, Germany).
12. A. Gorban, N.R. Sumner, A. Zinovyev. Beyond The
28. A. Gorban, I. Karlin, A. Zinovyev, Invariant grids for
Concept of Manifolds: Principal Trees, Metro Maps, and
reaction kinetics, Physica A, 333 (2004) 106–154.
Elastic Cubic Complexes, In Gorban A., Kégl B., Wunch
29. Karhunen K. Zur Spektraltheorie Stochastischer Prozesse.
D., Zinovyev A. (eds.) Principal Manifolds for Data
Ann.Acad. Sci. Fennicae, 37 (1946).
Visualization and Dimension Reduction, Lecture Notes in
30. M.M. Loève, Probability Theory, (Princeton, N.J.:
Computational Science and Engineering 58 (Springer,
VanNostrand, 1955)
Berlin-Heidelberg, 2008), pp. 96-130.
31. K. Pearson, On lines and planes of closest fit to systems of
13. A. Gorban, A. Zinovyev, Elastic Maps and Nets for
points in space, Philosophical Magazine, series 6(2)
Approximating Principal Manifolds and Their Application
(1901) 559–572.
to Microarray Data Visualization. In Gorban A., Kégl B.,
32. T. M. Martinetz, S. G. Berkovich, and K. J. Schulten.
Wunch D., Zinovyev A. (eds.) Principal Manifolds for
Neural-gas network for vector quantization and its
Data Visualization and Dimension Reduction, Lecture
application to time-series prediction. IEEE Transactions
Notes in Computational Science and Engineering 58
on Neural Networks 4 (1993), 558–569.
(Springer, Berlin-Heidelberg, 2008), pp. 96-130.
14. A.N. Gorban and A.Y. Zinovyev, Principal Graphs and
Manifolds. In "Handbook of Research on Machine
Learning Applications and Trends: Algorithms, Methods