Proceedings of the 1st Workshop on
Robotics Challenges and Vision
June 27, 2013
Table of Contents
Soft Subdivision Search in Motion Planning........................... 1
Large Motion Libraries: Toward a “Google” for Robot Motions........ 5
Kris Hauser
Predicting the Change - A Step Towards Life-Long Operation in
Everyday Environments............................................... 9
Niko Su¨nderhauf, Peer Neubert and Peter Protzel
The Social Co-Robotics Problem Space: Six Key Challenges........... 13
Laurel D. Riek
Wearable vision systems for personal guidance and enhanced
assistance............................................................. 17
Gonzalo Lopez-Nicolas, Aitor Aladren and J.J. Guerrero
Learning the Relation of Motion Control and Gestures Through
Self-Exploration....................................................... 21
Saˇsa Bodiroˇza, Aleksandar Jevti´c, Bruno Lara and Verena Hafner
1v3123.2041:viXra
Program Committee
Nancy Amato Texas A & M University
Hamidreza Chitsaz Wayne State University
Howie Choset Carnegie Mellon University
Kamal Gupta Simon Fraser University
Seth Hutchinson University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Lydia Kavraki Rice University
Moslem Kazemi Carnegie Mellon University
Dinesh Manocha University of North Carolina-Chapel Hill
Proceedingsofthe1stWorkshopon ii
RoboticsChallengesandVision(RCV2013)
inconjunctionwithRobotics: ScienceandSystems
June27,2013–Berlin,Germany
Best Paper Awards
1st Soft Subdivision Search in Motion Planning
2nd Large Motion Libraries: Toward a “Google” for Robot Motions
3rd Predicting the Change - A Step Towards Life-Long Operation in
Everyday Environments
Proceedingsofthe1stWorkshopon iii
RoboticsChallengesandVision(RCV2013)
inconjunctionwithRobotics: ScienceandSystems
June27,2013–Berlin,Germany
Soft Subdivision Search in Motion Planning
Chee K. Yap
Courant Institute, New York University
New York, NY 10012 USA
Email: yap@cs.nyu.edu
Abstract—The main paradigm for practical motion planning planning. See [5] for a rare non-algebraic planning problem
in the last two decades is Probabilistic Road Map (PRM). that is computable using transcendental number theory.
We propose an alternative paradigm called Soft Subdivision
Search (SSS). The SSS approach is based on two ingredients:
the standard subdivision of space, coupled with soft predicates. 2. Practice. Since the mid 1990’s,the Probabilistic Road
Suchpredicatesareconservativeandconvergentrelativetoexact Map (PRM) paradigm has been dominant;Kavraki et al. [11]
predicates.Thisleadstoanewclassofresolution-exactplanners. gave the basic formulation. A more general viewpoint [12]
We view PRM and SSS as frameworks for broad classes of regards PRM as the probabilistic form of “Sampling Road
planners. There are many parallels between SSS and PRM:
Maps”. For simplicity, we use “PRM” as surrogate for all
bothframeworksareversatile,practical,easytoimplement,with
sampling methods. Quoting Choset et al [6, p.201]: “PRM,
adaptive local complexity. The critical difference is that SSS
avoids the Halting Problem of PRM. We address three issues: EST, RRT, SRT, and their variants have changed the way
(1) We axiomatize some basic properties that allow resolution- pathplanningis performed for high-dimensionalrobots. They
exact planners to be constructed in the SSS framework. have also paved the way for the development of planners for
(2) We show how soft predicatescan beeffectively andcorrectly
problems beyond basic path planning.” In his invited talk at
implemented using numerical approximations.
the workshop1 on open problems in this field, J.C. Latombe
(3) We recover exact planners by extending our framework.
The SSS framework is a theoretically sound basis for new stated that the major openproblemof PRM is that it doesnot
classesofalgorithmsinmotionplanningandbeyond.Wediscuss knowhow to terminate when there is no path. In practice,the
the prospects of SSS planners being able to solve currently algorithm is timed-out, but this leads to problems such as the
challenging problems and their relation to PRM.
“Climbers Dilemma” giving rise to issues like the “Climbers
I. INTRODUCTION Dilemma” (Bretl 2005). We will call it the Halting Problem
forPRM(liketheHaltingProbleminTuringmachines,itisa
Motion Planning is a fundamental problem in robotics. It
semi-decidable).Itistheultimateformofthe“NarrowPassage
originated as the “findpath problem” in Artificial Intelligence
Problem” [6, p. 201]. Latombe’s talk suggested promising
[3]. In the 1980s, computational geometers began the algo-
approachessuch as Lazy PRM [2], but clearly a large part of
rithmic study of motion planning [19, 9], focusing on exact
the literatureis devoted to this issue. The theoreticalbasis for
planners: such planners return a path if any exists, and report
PRM algorithms is probabilistic completeness [10], or more
“No Path” otherwise. It was early observedthat there are two
generally, “sampling completeness”. But the Halting Problem
universalapproachesformotionplanning:CellDecomposition
is inherent in such completeness.
[16] and Retraction [19]. After the work of Canny [4], the
retraction is popularly known as the “roadmap approach”. In
3. Common Ground. We seek a common ground for
the 1990’s the roadmap approach takes another turn. ¶
theoryandpractice:strongertheoreticalguaranteeswithoutthe
inordinate demands of exactness. Fortunately, exactness is a
1. Theory. Today, exact motion planning is textbook
¶ mismatchforrobotics.Thisisevidentfromtheremarkthatall
material[6,13]andcontinuestobeactivelyinvestigated(e.g.,
physicalconstants,devicesand sensorshavelimited accuracy.
[8]).Neverthelessitsimpactonroboticsismodest:Zhangetal.
Yet it does not absolve us from mathematical precision if
[22] noted that exact implementations have been limited to 3
we wish the theoretical development of robotic algorithms
degrees of freedom, and for simple robots only. Exactness
to thrive. This tension between practice and theory has led
is costly as it implicitly requires algebraic numbers. The
to their divergent paths described above. We turn to the idea
techniques of Exact Geometric Computation [20] can avoid
of “resolution complete” methods, noting that the early work
direct manipulation of algebraic numbers, and is practical
of Brooks and Lozano-Perez [3] was already on this track.
for many basic problems. Nevertheless, the usual expedi-
It is known that resolution complete methods can avoid the
ent is to replace exact arithmetic by approximate machine
Halting Problem [22]. The notion of resolution completeness
arithmetic, leading to the ubiquitous problems of numerical
is seldom scrutinized. Our companion paper [17] pointed
non-robustness. Efficiency aside, there is a fundamental but
out some untenable or lacking interpretations, and proposed
less well-known barrier: the Turing computability of exact
algorithms for most non-algebraic problems is unknown [5].
1 IROS 2011 Workshop on Progress and Open Problems in Motion
Thisbarrierexistsinmostproblemsbeyondkinematicmotion Planning, September30,2011,SanFrancisco.
Proceedingsofthe1stWorkshopon 1
RoboticsChallengesandVision(RCV2013)
inconjunctionwithRobotics: ScienceandSystems
June27,2013–Berlin,Germany
the notion of resolution-exactness. Surprisingly, resolution- defines a configuration space C
exactnesshas“inherent”indeterminacy,evenfordeterministic planner input is (ε,Ω,α,β) where ε > 0 is the resolution
algorithms using exact predicates. This indeterminacyis mild parameter, Ω R k is a polyhedral set, and α,β C space .
comparedtosamplingcompleteness,andagoodmatchforthe Theplannerisresolution-exact(orε-exact)ifithasaconstant
needs of robotics. K > 1 such that on any input, it outputs an Ω-avoiding path
Resolution-exactness is basically a numeric/analytic con- from α to β if there exist paths with clearance Kε; and it
cept, but exactness is not an adjective we associate with outputs “No Path” if there are no paths with clearance ε/K.
numerics. Our main contribution is to explicate ideas that are The role of K is critical: it causes indeterminacy, but is also
intuitivelyknowntopractitioners,toprovideaclearfoundation the key to avoiding exact computation.
for theoretical algorithm designers to ply their craft. This There are two ingredients in resolution-based methods:
seems critical: without a clear foundation, many theoreticians first is the subdivision of C . The subdivision may be
would shun such algorithms. Exact computation has served organized as a subdivision tree, often called quadtrees. Tree
as the foundation for over 2 decades, but its limitations are nodes correspond to subsets B C with simple shapes
showing(asdiscussed above).Whatwe needis a viableexact such as boxes or simplices. Although grid search is often
numerical foundation (cf. Smale’s effort in this direction). identified with resolution complete algorithms, we stress that
We will argue that algorithms in our framework are not just grid methods are usually a form of sampling and inadequate
theoretically-sound but implementable and useful. for ε-exactness. The second ingredient is a classification
predicate to decide if a node B is free or not. The obstacle
4.OverviewofPaper. Ourfullpaper[21]aimstoexpose setΩdefinesthefreespace,C free =C free (R 0 ,Ω) C space .
thefoundationsofresolutionexactness.Therearefourthemes: Wlog, C is an open set; its boundary ∂C comprises
(0) We take a leaf from the success of PRM research: the the semi-free configurations. Say α C space is stuck if it is
simplicity and generality of PRM framework ensures that neither free nor semi-free. The exact classification predicate
implementers of this framework can get easy access to a is C :B C(B) FREE,STUCK,MIXED such that
whole family of algorithms. This led us to formulate an
FREE if B C ,
analogous framework called soft subdivision search (SSS). ⊆ free
Curious aside: PRM and SSS correspond (resp.) roughly to C(B)=  STUCK if B ∩ C free is empty,
the two universal approaches to motion planning, namely 
MIXED else.
retraction/roadmap and cell-decomposition.
ItiseasytoconstructexactplannersusingC.MoreoverC(B)
(1) Next, we axiomatize the setting for SSS planners by
could be computed exactly for nice B (e.g., B is a box). But
consideringtheproblemoffindingpathsinY X connecting
⊆ ourthrustistoavoidthehighcostofexactness.Thebasicidea
givenα,β Y where X is a normedlinear space. The boxes
∈ (ansatz) is: in the presence of subdivision, exact predicates
in subdivision trees may be shapes such as simplices. The
can be replaced by suitable approximations. More precisely,
goal is to derive general principles to guide the design of
a predicate C :B C(B) FREE,STUCK,MIXED is a soft
SSSplanners.Herewemustavoidthetemptationofexcessive 7→ ∈{ }
versionofC ifitisconservative(i.e.,C(B)=MIXEDimplies
generality,leadingtoweakgenericresultsaboutmetricspaces. 6
We aim at a balance which capturesa largeclass of problems
C(B) = C(eB)), andeconvergent (i.e., B
i implies C(B ) C(p)). Foreanalysis, we may also
about which non-trivial theorems can be proved. → ∞ i →
neeed some measure of “effectivity” or convergencerate.
(2) One bane of exact algorithms is the “implementation
Whatwe knowe:softpredicatesare relativelyeasy todesign
gap”.Exactprimitivesaretypicallyalgebraicbutimplementers
and to implement. Indeed, the computation of C can be
use machine arithmetic approximation, thereby forfeiting all
correlatedto the expansionof the subdivisiontree . LaValle
the guarantees of exactness. We derive principles for correct T
insightfully call this aspect of our work as “openieng up the
implementation of soft predicates, and derive error estimates
blackboxof collision testing”. Softpredicateshave nice prop-
to allow machine arithmetic filters.
(3) SSS planners take an input resolution parameter ε which ertieslikecomposability:ifapolyhedralrobotR 0 ⊆ R k hasa
coverR = m T thenweobtainasoftpredicateforR from
must be positive. If we admit ε = 0, the planners become 0 ∪i=1 i i
softpredicatesfortheT ’s.Thuspredicatesforcomplexrobots
non-halting like PRM. We indicate solutions, leading to new i
like R is reducibleto simpler robotsT . To ensure efficiency
classes of exact algorithms. 0 i
and adaptivity, the technique of filters will prove essential (a
Within the constraints of this workshop presentation, we
well-known phenomenon in numerical methods). We refer to
only address theme (0) and give a critical evaluation of SSS
related work (notjust in motion planning)exemplifyingthese
planners for solving challenging planning problems.
remarks (e.g., [14, 17, 18, 15]).
II. BASICS
To aid further discussion, we need some definitions. Our 5. Critical Discussion. It is hard to claim novelty in an
terminologyisquitestandard,butwerelyonreaders’intuition oldidealikeresolution-basedmethods,althoughweclaimnew
for now. Consider the standard kinematic motion planning theoreticalfoundations.Itishardertoimproveupona20-year
problem for a fixed rigid robot R 0 R k (k = 2,3) which oldparadigmlikePRM,whereremarkableadvanceshavebeen
Proceedingsofthe1stWorkshopon 2
RoboticsChallengesandVision(RCV2013)
inconjunctionwithRobotics: ScienceandSystems
June27,2013–Berlin,Germany
made over the years. Nevertheless, we claim a place for SSS data structures and subroutines.
planners in practical robotics under PRM’s shadow.
First, we address a conceptual objection. Some critiques 6. The PRM Framework. There are many possible
formulations, but we follow LaValle [13, Section 5.4.1]: to
view the “No Path” outcome in SSS planners as equivalent
find a path connecting α,β C , we maintain a graph
to the “PRM time-out” but in resolution space. Hence it is G = (V,E) where α,β ∈ V C and edges in E
no less “arbitrary”. This analogy can mislead in two ways. correspond to paths. { We n } ee ⊆ d thre ⊆ e predicates: Free(u) to
First, the said inherent inaccuracies in sensors, actuators and test if configuration u is free; Connect(v,u) to test if the
physicalconstantsmeanthatpathswithclearancebelowsome (straight)motion fromv to u is free; a termination criterion
that returns “success” (a path is found) or “failure” (time-out
(calculable) resolution are as good as “No Path”. So the
or other condition).
“No Path” outcome in SSS planners may be principled, not
arbitrary. Second, “time-out” in resolution search is only the
PRMFRAMEWORK:
mostobviouswayterminate(weuseitbelow),butitisnotthe While (termination criterion fails):
onlyway.Infact,itisadeeplyinterestingquestiontodevelop 1. Vertex Selection Method (VSM):
techniques for fast detection of “No Path” (cf. [22, 7]). Choose a vertex v in V for expansion.
2. Configuration Generation Method (CGM):
Consider our suggestion that SSS is practical. The subdi-
Generate some u C space (perhaps near v)
vision infrastructureis well-understoodand based on efficient 3. Local Planning Method ∈ (LPM):
data structures like union-find. The soft predicates we design If Free(u),
[17] can mostly reduce to estimating distances between two Add u to V
If Connect(v,u), add (v,u) to E.
obstaclefeatures(i.e.,point,lineorplane).Thisalmostseems
Return success or failure accordingly.
trivial compared to exact algorithms; so SSS planners are
clearly implementable. But will these implementations be Chosetetal. [6,p.198]notedthatPRM ispracticalbecause
practically efficient? Here, we invoke the evidence of prior the predicate Free(u) is relatively cheap. The large literature
resolution-basedwork such as Zhu and Latombe [23], Barhe- oncollisiondetectionisaboutthispredicate.We offeranother
hennandHutchinson[1],andZhang,KimandManocha[22]. reason for the great success of PRM: the framework allows
Ofcourse,wemustreinterpretthemusingournewperspective; one to easily modify the constituentcomponents(VSM, CGM,
it is illuminating to revisit these papers with hindsight. LPM) to obtaina variety ofalgorithmsfor diverse needs.The
The preceding paragraph is not new except for our SSS basicinfrastructureisrelativelystable,thankstothesimplicity
perspective. The deeper debate among roboticists is about the and generality of PRM. We want to emulate this in SSS.
ability of resolution methods to scale up in dimension. The
consensus is that resolution methods can only reach medium 7. The SSS Framework. In addition to the usual input
degrees-of-freedom(DOF), while PRM reachesmuch higher2 (ε,Ω,α,β), an initial box B C is given: we are
degrees. Choset [6, p. 202] suggests that state-of-art PRM interested in paths restricted to B . The subdivision tree
can handle DOF in the range 5 12. They noted that a 10 is rooted at B , and each node B B is classified by a
DOF planar robot from Kavraki (1995) cannot be tackled by softpredicateC.Wegrow byexpandingsuccessiveMIXED-
other methods. However, we find no conceptual barriers for leaves until we find a path or conclude “No Path”.
SSS to match PRM. Randomness is not pertinent since SSS e
can also expand randomly. A naive approach to resolution SSSFRAMEWORK
methodsyieldstreesizesthatareexponentialinthedepth;but 1. While (C(Box(α))=FREE) ⊳ Initialization
If Box(α) has length <ε, Return (”No Path”)
related subdivision work in root isolation [15] shows we can
ElseeExpand(Box(α))
achieve tree size that is worst-case polynomial in the depth.
The performance of SSS planners are highly dependent on 6
... do the same for β ...
the tree expansion strategy; this is no different from PRM. 2. While (Feind(Box(α))=Find(Box(β))) ⊳ Main Loop
Indeed, the tree structure of subdivision seems to give SSS a If Q is empty, Return(“No Path”)
greatadvantage.Currently,we have limited (butencouraging) B Q.GetNext()
experiments to support our intuition, but we feel the field is
3. Compute a FREE channel P from Box(α) to Box(β)
wide open for experimentation.
Generate and return the “canonical path” P inside P.
III. TWO FRAMEWORKS FORMOTION PLANNING. A priority queue Q=Q holds all MIXED-leaves of radius
We intend to view PRM as an algorithmic frameworkfor r(B) ε.TheroutineQ.GetNext()returnsaleafofhighest
a largeclass ofsampling-basedplanners.An algorithmwithin priority which is split by Expand(B). The FREE boxes are
the frameworkis3 justa specific instantiation,usingparticular storedinaunion-findstructurefortheconnectedcomponents:
twoboxesB,B aredirectlyconnectedifdim(B B )=d 1.
2Wedonotconsiderveryhighlyflexiblerobotssuchasmolecules,snakes, If “Box(α)” is a leaf of containing α, our algorithm halts
humanoids, etc., where the DOF can go much higher than discussed here. as soon as Box(α) and B T ox(β) are in the same component.
Whatcounts as“success” ismuchlessformalinsuchsettings.
The performance of SSS is naturally adaptive but highly
3Tobesure,therearedegreesofspecificity.Themostspecificinstantiation
mightbecalled “implementation” ofsomelessspecific“algorithm”. dependentonGetNext() andExpand(). Ford 4degreesof
Proceedingsofthe1stWorkshopon 3
RoboticsChallengesandVision(RCV2013)
inconjunctionwithRobotics: ScienceandSystems
June27,2013–Berlin,Germany
freedom,carefulexpansioniscritical;donotalwaysexpectto RobotMotion:Theory,Algorithms,andImplementations.
split into 2d children. The methods in [23, 1, 22] fall under MIT Press, 2005.
our framework. [7] J.DennyandN.M.Amato. TogglePRM:Acoordinated
mappingofC-freeandC-obstacleinarbitrarydimension.
8. Similarities and Differences. There are many simi- In Proc. WAFR. MIT, Cambridge, USA. June 2012.
laritiesbetweenPRM and SSS, especiallyin theircontraststo [8] M. Safey el Din and E. Schost. A baby steps/giant
exact algorithms. Both have two key subroutines: (i) search steps probabilistic algorithm for computing roadmaps in
strategies (VSM in PRM, GetNext() in SSS), and (ii) free- smooth bounded real hypersurface. Discrete and Comp.
ness testing (Free(u) in PRM, C(B) in SSS). Both SSS Geom., 45(1):181–220,2011.
and PRM have the ability to find paths before exploring [9] D. Halperin, L. Kavraki, and J.-C. Latombe. Robotics.
the entire C . Thus, Hsu et al.e[10, p. 640] calls this a In J. E. Goodman and J. O’Rourke, eds., Handbook of
“foundational choice in PRM planning”. In contrast, exact Discrete and Comp. Geom., chap. 41. CRC Press, 1997.
methods require expensive (non-adaptive) pre-processing to [10] D. Hsu, J.-C. Latombe, and H. Kurniawati. On
compute a description of C . Both frameworks naturally the probabilistic foundations of probabilistic roadmap
compute a path, i.e., a parametrized curve in C ; exact planning. IJRR, 25(7):627–643,2006.
methods require a separate subalgorithm for this. [11] L. Kavraki, P. Sˇvestka, C. Latombe, and M. Over-
The key difference is that SSS planners have no Halting mars. Probabilistic roadmaps for path planning in high-
Problem. In SSS we use a more demanding predicate C(B) dimensionalconfiguration spaces. IEEE Trans. Robotics
than Free(u). The benefit is that SSS can compute free and Automation, 12(4):566–580,1996.
channelsjustbycheckingadjacencyoftwoFREEboxes;ePRM [12] S. LaValle, M. Branicky, and S. Lindemann. On the re-
needs an extra predicate Connect(v,u). lationshipbetweenclassicalgridsearchandprobabilistic
roadmaps. IJRR, 23(7/8):673–692,2004.
IV. CONCLUSION
[13] Steven M. LaValle. Planning Algorithms. Cambridge
In this paper, we described the SSS framework for ε- U. Press, 2006.
exactplanners.Ideasofresolution-limitedalgorithmsarewell- [14] S. Plantinga and G. Vegter. Isotopic approximation of
known, but to our knowledge, the simple4 properties of soft implicitcurvesandsurfaces.InProc.SGP,pp. 245–254,
classifiers have never been isolated. These “simple ideas” New York, 2004. ACM Press.
promise to create new algorithms that are practical and theo- [15] M. Sagraloffand C.K. Yap. A simple but exactand effi-
retically sound, not only in motion planning. There are many cient algorithm for complex root isolation. 36th ISSAC,
openquestionsconcerningSSS.Althoughthereareinteresting pp. 353–360, 2011. June 8-11, San Jose, California.
theoretical questions, we feel the immediate challenge is to [16] J. T. Schwartz and M. Sharir. On the piano movers’
prove the practical power of SSS. Following up on [17], we problem: II. General techniques for computing topolog-
plantodothisbydesigningandimplementingavarietyofsoft ical properties of real algebraic manifolds. Advances in
predicates and search strategies, from 6DOF robots, medium Appl. Math., 4:298–351, 1983.
DOFflexiblerobots(e.g.,Kavrakirobot),andcomplexrobots. [17] C.Wang,Y.-J.Chiang,andC.Yap. OnSoftPredicatesin
Like PRM, we expect many variants of SSS to arise. Subdivision Motion Planning. In 29th Symp. on Comp.
Geom.. To Appear. Rio de Janeiro. Jun 17-20, 2013.