1v7554.3021:viXra
Proceedings of the II Iberian Nuclear Astrophysics
Meeting on Compact Stars,
September 22nd-23rd 2011, Salamanca, Spain.
Editors: M. A. P´erez-Garc´ıa,J. A. Pons, C. Albertus,Journal of Physics: Con-
ference Series, Volume 342 (2012), ISSN 1742-6588.
ORGANIZING COMMITTEE
Dr M A´ngeles P´erez-Garc´ıa (A´rea F´ısica Teo´rica-Universidad de Salamanca &
Dr J A Miralles (Universidad de Alicante)
Dr J Pons (Universidad de Alicante)
Dr C Albertus (A´rea F´ısica Teo´rica-Universidadde Salamanca & IUFFYM)
Dr F Atrio (A´rea F´ısica Teo´rica-Universidadde Salamanca & IUFFYM)
ThesecondIberianNuclearAstrophysicsmeetingwasheldattheUniversity
ofSalamanca,Spain onSeptember 22 -23 2011. This volume index contains
the links to most of the presentations delivered at this international workshop.
This meeting was the second in the series following the previous I Encuentro
Ib´erico de Compstar, held at the University of Coimbra, Portugal in 2010.
The main purpose of this meeting was to strengthen the scientific collab-
oration between the participants of the Iberian and the rest of the southern
European branches of the European Nuclear Astrophysics network, formerly,
COMPSTAR.ThisESF(EuropeanScienceFoundation)supportednetworkhas
been crucial in helping to make a broaderaudience for the the most interesting
and relevant research lines being developed currently in Nuclear Astrophysics,
especially related to the physics of neutron stars. It is indeed important to em-
phasize the need for a collaborative approach to the rest of the scientific com-
munities so that we can reach possible new members in this interdisciplinary
area and as outreach for the general public.
The program of the meeting was tailored to theoretical descriptions of the
physics of neutron stars although some input from experimental observers and
othercondensedmatterandopticsareasofinterestwasalsoincluded. Themain
scientific topics included:
• Magnetic fields in compact stars
• Nuclear structure and in-medium effects in nuclear interaction
• Equation of state: from nuclear matter to quarks
• Importance of crust in the evolution of neutron stars
• Computational simulations of collapsing dense objects
• Observational phenomenology
In particular, leading experts from the computational simulation of core-
collapse supernovae and the effect of hadronquark phase transitions developed
specialized review talks. Prospects in future observationsor a more dilute clas-
sification of magnetars were also discussed. The importance of the equation
ofstate,three-bodyforces,finite nuclei,phenomenologicalfermionicinteraction
models,andthemicrophysicsinputsofdifferentmany-bodyapproachestosome
veryimportantquantities as the symmetry energywere reviewedand discussed
fromeitherthenon-relativistictotherelativisticframework. Theimportanceof
the crustwith the existence ofa crystallizedstructure andvortex-crustpinning
weresomeoftheimportantsubjectsdiscussedinthecontextofcoolingandfield
dynamics.
Finally,somecondensedmatterandopticstalkspresentedustherichinsight
that Cold Atom Physics can give us on low-density interactions and the new
and very intense laser Petawatt beams can test matter under strong external
fields, respectively.
We would to thank the Faculty of Science and University of Salamanca for
hosting the meeting. We also thank for partial financial support the Euro-
pean ERC Network COMPSTAR, The Physics of Neutron Stars under refer-
ence 3803 and the Spanish Ministerio de Ciencia e Innovacio´n (MICINN) with
project FIS2011-14759, MULTIDARK Consolider-Ingenio 2010, MICINN ref.
CSD2009-00064and the local institutions of Instituto de F´ısica Fundamental y
Matema´ticas (IUFFYM) and Universidad de Salamanca, Spain.
Of coursewe thank those who havecontributed to make this meeting a nice
occasion to gather and start to develop fruitful collaborations. To them go our
grateful acknowledgments.
• Evolution of proto-neutron stars with hadronquark phase transition.
I Bombaci, D Logoteta, C Providˆencia and I Vidan˜a.
• The Symmetry energy of nuclear matter under a strong magnetic field.
R Casali, C Providˆencia and D Menezes.
• Unified equation of state for neutron stars and supernova cores using the
nuclear energy-density functional theory.
A F Fantina, N Chamel, J M Pearsonand S Goriely.
• Vortex-lattice interaction in Pulsar Glitches.
F Grill and P Pizzochero.
• Structure and Shear Modulus of the Neutron Star Crust.
J Hughto.
• Effect of hyperonic three-body forces on the maximum mass of neutron
stars.
D Logoteta, I Vidan˜a, C Providˆencia,A Polls and I Bombaci.
• Is the apparent dichotomy between bursting activity of magnetars and
radio pulsars real?
J A Pons and R Perna.
• Effect of the symmetry energy on compact stars.
C Providncia,R Cavagnoli, D P Menezes and P K Panda.
• Thepygmydipolestrength,theneutronradiusof208Pbandthesymmetry
energy.
X Roca-Maza,M Brenna, M Centelles, G Col`o, K Mizuyama, G Pozzi,X
Vin˜as and M Warda.
• Intense infrared lasers and laboratory astrophysics.
L Roso.
• Fully antisymmetrised dynamics for bulk fermion systems.
K Vantournhout and H Feldmeier.
• Symmetry energy within the BHF approach.
I Vidan˜a, C Providˆencia,A Polls and A Rios.
• The influence of magnetic field geometry on magnetars X-ray spectra.
D Vigan`o, N Parkins, S Zane, R Turolla, J A Pons and J A Miralles.