Production of oriented nitrogen-vacancy color centers in synthetic
A. M. Edmonds, U. F. S. D'Haenens-Johansson and M. E. Newton
Department of Physics, University of Warwick, Coventry, CV4 7AL, UK
K.-M. C. Fu
Departments of Physics and Electrical Engineering, University of Washington,
Seattle, WA 98195, USA
C. Santori and R. G. Beausoleil
Hewlett-Packard Laboratories, 1501 Page Mill Rd., Palo Alto, CA 94304, USA
D. J. Twitchen and M. L. Markham
Element Six Ltd., King's Ride Park, Ascot, Berkshire, SL5 8BP, UK
The negatively charged nitrogen-vacancy (NV) center in diamond is an attractive candidate for
applications that range from magnetometry to quantum information processing. Here we show that
only a fraction of the nitrogen (typically < 0.5 %) incorporated during homoepitaxial diamond growth
by Chemical Vapor Deposition (CVD) is in the form of undecorated NV centers. Furthermore, studies
on CVD diamond grown on 110 oriented substrates show a near 100% preferential orientation of
NV centers along only the 111 and 111directions, rather than the four possible orientations. The
results indicate that NV centers grow in as units, as the diamond is deposited, rather than by
migration and association of their components. The NV unit of the NVH is similarly preferentially
oriented, but it is not possible to determine whether this defect was formed by H capture at a
preferentially aligned NV center or as a complete unit. Reducing the number of NV orientations from
4 orientations to 2 orientations should lead to increased optically-detected magnetic resonance
contrast and thus improved magnetic sensitivity in ensemble-based magnetometry.
One of the most intensively studied atom-like solid state systems is the negatively charged nitrogen-
vacancy (NV) color center in diamond. The NV photoluminescence (PL) intensity is strongly
modulated depending on whether the system is in the M = 1 or M = 0 ground electron spin state,
facilitating optically detected magnetic resonance on single defects at room temperature. An
essentially spin free lattice can be produced by chemical vapor deposition (CVD) of diamond
depleted in 13C and with a low (<1013 cm-3) concentration of paramagnetic impurities. In this material
electron spins of single NV centers have remarkably long spin de-phasing times (T ) exceeding a few
ms even at room temperature. [1] This enables quantum logic elements to be realized utilizing long-
range magnetic dipolar coupling between individually addressable single electron spins associated
with separate NV centers in diamond, [2] and nanoscale spin imaging with a single NV center. [3] It
is not only single NV centers that are attracting attention. Recently the coupling of a
superconducting qubit to a spin ensemble of NV centers has been reported, highlighting the
possibility of diamond spin-ensemble based quantum memory for superconducting qubits. [4]
Both neutral (NV0) and negatively charged NV centers are typically present in as-grown CVD
diamond, unless considerable efforts are made to exclude nitrogen from the source gases. Currently
the key exploitable properties of grown-in NV centers are typically far better than those centers
produced by ion implantation. Low yield from implantation could be due to the limited number of
vacancies around the implanted nitrogen [5] whereas the sub-optimal spin and optical properties
are most probably related to residual implantation damage defects in the vicinity of the NV center.
Revealing the mechanism for NV center production during CVD diamond growth and demonstrating
that the orientation can be controlled is the focus of this paper.
We have two possible mechanisms for the production of NV centers during CVD diamond growth. At
typical CVD diamond growth temperatures (e.g. 900 – 1500 K) the substitutional nitrogen donor (N)
is immobile while vacancies are highly mobile and can diffuse through the lattice. [6] Hence, if
vacancies are injected during growth then NV centers could be produced by vacancy capture at a
previously incorporated N (known to be very efficient vacancy trap [6]). Alternatively, NV centers
could be grown-in as units, with their production related to processes occurring on the growth
surface. Nitrogen is readily incorporated into CVD diamond in the form N [7] and there is a lattice
distortion associated with N 0 due to the occupation of a N—C anti-bonding orbital by the extra
electron (compared to carbon) of nitrogen. [8] The unique N—C bond is about 25-30 % longer than
the normal C—C bond length and the donor level is very deep (E = 1.7 eV). [9] However, when
empty or partially empty states are available in the band gap (e.g. NV0) the extra nitrogen electron
can be transferred to the available state (e.g. producing NV), the lattice distortion disappears and
the positively charged substitutional nitrogen center (N +) [10] sits on the tetrahedral lattice site. In
addition to the two charge states of N and NV defects, the nitrogen-vacancy-hydrogen complex (see
supplementary information) is a common defect in CVD diamond, existing as NVH or NVH0. [11-13]
Thermal treatment (at temperatures well below the growth temperature and hence unlikely to
result in any structural changes) and ultraviolet irradiation can significantly change the optical
absorption of nitrogen doped CVD diamond and the concentrations1 of N 0/+, NV0/ and NVH0/.
1 Square brackets as in [X] are used to indicate the concentration of X.
Figure 1: (a) The NV concentration plotted against the total substitutional nitrogen concentration in diamond
samples grown by CVD. The solid line is plotted for the situation where ([N 0] + [N +]) = [NV]. (b) The
concentration of NV centers plotted against the concentration of the NVH centers. The solid line is plotted
for the situation where [NV] = [NVH]. In both cases the broken line is a fit to the data points. In all
figures the data points marked with  were obtained from measurements on samples grown by Element Six
Ltd and deliberately doped with nitrogen, and those marked with  were on samples purchased from Apollo
Diamond Inc.
The data in Fig. 1(a) show the metastable (measured after prolonged exposure to laboratory/day
light at room temperature) concentration of NV, measured by Electron Paramagnetic Resonance
(EPR), plotted against the sum of the neutral ([N 0], measured by EPR) and positively charged ([N +],
measured by IR absorption) N defect concentrations, ([N +] + [N 0]), in CVD diamond samples from
different suppliers, but all grown on approximately {100} oriented substrates. [NV] is typically more
than two orders of magnitude less than the concentration of N . Although there is considerable
scatter in the data, the trend is that [NV] increases with total substitutional nitrogen content. In the
highest purity intrinsic material studied [N 0]  0.1 ppb (measured by EPR; detection limit for 10 mm3
samples is ~0.02 ppb). Taking a value of 0.1 ppb for the total N defect concentration in the highest
purity material with the data in Fig. 1(a) suggests that the NV concentration is  (0.2-0.5) ×10-3 ppb
in such material. This corresponds to on average  10-30 NV centers in a volume of 10×10×4 µm3, a
value which is consistent with NV counting in such material. [14] Figure 1(b) shows [NV] plotted
against [NVH] for the samples (measured in the metastable state) grown by Element Six Ltd on
100oriented substrates, where the concentration of both defects could be measured by EPR.
There is a strong correlation between [NV] and [NVH], with the latter being greater than an order
of magnitude more abundant. This may indicate that under controlled conditions the ratio of [NV]
to [NVH] is fixed over a wide range of nitrogen doping. Data on samples from other suppliers follow
this trend, but with much greater scatter. The ratio of concentrations ([N +] + [N 0]):[NVH]:[NV] is
typically 300:30:1 in nitrogen doped CVD diamond samples grown on (100) oriented samples. In the
limited number of single growth sector samples studied that were grown on 110oriented
substrates the ratios between the different defect concentrations are similar, but the concentration
of N 0 is approximately three times higher in the samples grown on 110 oriented substrates than
on 100 oriented substrates under identical growth conditions. Samlenski et al. [15] showed that
nitrogen was more readily incorporated into the 111 growth sectors than 100 sectors, by a
factor of between three and four, but noted, as has subsequently been reported by others, [16] that
there is a low incorporation probability for the nitrogen dopant.
The N 0, NV0 and NV defects are known to have C symmetry and NVH motionally averages to an
effective C symmetry on the EPR time scale. [12] For a diamond sample homoepitaxially grown on
an 001 oriented substrate (or any of the 100 family), all the 111 directions are equivalent with
respect to the 001 growth direction. However, for CVD diamond grown on an 110 oriented
substrate, two 111 directions are perpendicular to the vertical 110 growth direction (i.e. they lie
in the growth plane) and two 111 directions make an angle of approximately 35 with respect to
the growth direction (i.e. they point out of the growth plane). Figure 2(a) shows a model hydrogen
terminated 110 diamond surface (including a growth step) in which a nitrogen atom has been
incorporated. This nitrogen is three-fold coordinated with a non-bonding lone pair pointing out of
the surface. When the nitrogen is overgrown it is possible that either a N or a NV defect is produced
depending on whether a vacancy is incorporated in the next layer above the nitrogen. In this way
only 111 and  111
oriented NV centers could be produced.
It is thought that growth on a flat 110 surface is initiated by H abstraction from and CH
chemisorption on the diamond surface, H abstraction from and CH addition to the chemisorbed CH
molecule, H abstraction from the second CH molecule and from an adjacent site on the diamond
surface, and bonding between the C H radical and the diamond. [17] Thus a nucleus for the next
layer growth is formed (i.e. an island has formed by bridging two chemisorbed C atoms across an
atomic “trough” on a 110 surface), and subsequent monolayer growth requires only
chemisorption of one C atom. Therefore, the “trough-flow” growth of 110 layers is likely to be
much more rapid than their nucleation. If a N atom is incorporated into this “trough-flow”, the site
adjacent to the N atom is very attractive for C addition since the chemisorbed atom would form two
bonds with the surface, whilst the N atom adopts a three-fold coordination. Hence it seems very
unlikely that 111 or 111 oriented NV centers would be formed for growth on a 110 surface.
For “trough-flow” growth on a layer above an incorporated N atom, when the growth front reaches
the three-fold coordinated N the probability for addition of a C atom should be somewhat reduced
and hence a 111 and 111 oriented NV unit introduced for growth on a 110 surface. Theoretical
modeling of this process is likely to be challenging, but it would be very interesting to see if this
intuitive explanation and the reported experimental data are supported by detailed calculation.
One cannot observe preferential orientation of the N 0 center, since it is known that this center
rapidly re-orientates between the different symmetry related 111 distortions, [18, 19] even at
room temperature. Ensemble EPR studies on the incorporation of NV defects into a free standing
single sector homoepitaxial CVD diamond sample grown on an 110 oriented substrate are
reported in Figs. 2(b) and 2(c). White light optical excitation was used to spin polarize NV ,
dramatically increasing sensitivity. [20] Fig. 2(b) shows the EPR spectrum recorded from this sample
with the magnetic field close ( 1) to the 111 crystallographic direction (i.e. approximately
perpendicular to the 110 growth direction), and in Fig. 2(c) the EPR spectrum recorded with the
magnetic field was oriented approximately ( 1) along the 111 crystallographic direction.
Unsurprisingly the N 0 EPR spectra are identical, independent of which 111 direction the magnetic
field is oriented along, as expected for a defect which is aligned along the four possible orientations
with equal probability. However, it is clearly seen that the NV EPR spectra differ for the two
orientations of the magnetic field. When the magnetic field is aligned along 111(Fig. 2(b)) the
outermost EPR lines from NV centers aligned parallel to the magnetic field (visible in Fig. 2(c)) are
absent; there are no detectable NV centers oriented along the 111 direction. Similarly it can be
shown that there are no NV centers oriented along the 111 direction. When the magnetic field is
aligned along 111 (Fig. 2(c)) or 111 the outermost EPR lines resulting from NV centers aligned
parallel to the magnetic field are present. It must be remembered that the spin-polarization of the
NV ground state depends on the orientation (and magnitude) of the magnetic field with respect to
the defect axis and is at a maximum when the two are parallel. This is the reason that the inner NV
transitions in Fig. 2(c) are less intense then the outer pair. Analysis of the EPR peak intensities in Fig.
2 reveals that > 97 % of the NV centers are oriented along either the 111or111 directions. If a
vacancy migrated to a pre-existing N defect all orientations of the NV center would be possible so
the data clearly indicate that the NV center is grown-in as a unit. The NVH centers are similarly
preferentially oriented with respect to the growth direction, indicating that NVH centers are grown-
in as complete units or at least the preferentially oriented NV fragments are grown-in and later each
capture a mobile hydrogen atom.
Figure 2: (a) Idealized representation of a hydrogen terminated (110) diamond surface (including a growth
step) in which a nitrogen atom (shown without a surface hydrogen) has been incorporated. Inset shows the
orientation of the possible 111 directions. (b) and (c) RT 9.5 GHz CW EPR spectra from (110)-grown CVD
diamond sample. The narrow lines close to the center of the spectrum originate from the N 0 defect and those
further from the center from the NV defect. White light optical excitation from a HgXe arc lamp was used to
spin polarize the EPR spectrum from the NV defect and increase sensitivity. In (b) the EPR spectrum was
recorded with the magnetic field oriented close ( 1) to the 111 crystallographic direction (i.e.
approximately perpendicular to the 110 growth direction) and in (c) the magnetic field was oriented
approximately ( 1) along the 111 crystallographic direction.
Ensemble EPR measurements showed that in samples containing relatively high levels of nitrogen
impurities the NV centers were preferentially grown in as units. In order to confirm that this was
also true for samples with much lower concentrations of defects consistent with decoherence times
in excess of 0.5 ms, high-purity epitaxial synthetic diamond layers grown on an 110oriented
diamond substrate were characterized using confocal PL imaging. Two 40×40 µm confocal PL images
taken 38 µm beneath a diamond surface are shown in Figs. 3(a) and 3( b). This depth was chosen to
minimize background fluorescence from the surface in the final images however single NVs can also
be detected at the surface within the optical depth of focus (4 µm). The confocal images are
composite images obtained from summing 9 separate scans in which laser polarization is encoded
into three color channels according to the methodology discussed previously. [21] Because the
excitation rate and collection efficiency depend on the relative angle between the laser polarization
and the NV axis, centers with different orientations appear as spots with different colors in the
composite image. This is clearly seen in Fig. 3(a) for a natural diamond sample with a (111)-polished
surface. For the (110)-grown sample shown in Fig. 3(b), single NV centers are again clearly resolved,
but all of them appear to have approximately the same excitation polarization dependence,
indicating preferential orientation. From Fig. 3(b) and similar data we estimate that this sample
contains approximately 10 NV centers in 400 µm3 which is in accord with the predictions based on
the data in Fig. 1, assuming that [N 0]  0.1 ppb in this material.
Figure 3: (a) Confocal scanning photoluminescence (PL) image of randomly-oriented single NV centers in a
(111)-polished natural diamond sample. This composite image was generated by encoding laser polarization
dependence into color as described in Ref. [21], such that the four possible N-V angles are clearly
distinguished. (b) A similar image obtained from a diamond homoepitaxial layer grown on a (110) oriented
diamond substrate. All of the observed NV centers have similar polarization dependence. (c) Polarization
dependence of the PL intensity for 6 NV centers in the (110) sample. (d) Theoretical room-temperature
polarization dependence for in-plane (lower curves) and out-of-plane (upper curve) NV centers. The maximum
intensity 1 corresponds to a center with a dipole moment aligned to the excitation field and perpendicular to
the collection/excitation axis. The model does not include saturation effects.
In Fig. 3(c), the PL intensity is plotted vs. laser polarization angle for six selected NV centers in the
(110) sample, with 0 corresponding to an electric field along [001]. Variation in overall brightness
may be caused by some NV centers being out of focus, or due to contributions from multiple NV
centers. However, the observed contrast (I −I )/I , in which I is the maximum (minimum)
max min max max(min)
intensity in the polarization curve, varies within a small range, 0.32-0.36. Figure 3(d) shows the
theoretically expected dependence for in-plane (lower two curves) and out-of-plane (upper curve)
orientations. The calculation assumes that the excitation power is far below saturation, and that the
two excited orbital states are equally populated at room temperature. [22] The theoretical contrasts
are 1/3 and 1 for out-of-plane and in-plane NV centers, respectively. The observed polarization
dependence is consistent only with that expected for NV centers oriented out-of-plane.
Our analysis of a series of PL images found only a few objects out of approximately 1200 examined
with anomalous polarization dependence. Upon further investigation, these spots were found not to
be associated with stable NV defects. Thus we estimate that >99.9% of the NV centers in the studied
region are preferentially oriented with their trigonal axes pointing out of the (110) growth plane.
Preferential orientation of the NV and NVH centers has been observed in samples grown on 110
oriented substrates over a wide range of nitrogen doping (> 3 orders of magnitude) and interpreted
in terms of the NV unit growing in as the diamond is deposited rather than by migration and
association of their components. Although it is not possible to confirm that the mechanism for
incorporation of NV and NVH centers is the same on 001 oriented surfaces the similar ratio of
concentrations of N 0, NVH and NV defects in 001 and 110oriented grown CVD diamond
samples supports such an assertion. The experimental data unambiguously show that only a small
fraction (typically less than 0.5 %) of the nitrogen is incorporated as the undecorated NV unit, with
the vast majority as N . The NV concentration is often so low that if during growth there were even a
very small concentration of mobile vacancies then the NV’s produced by vacancy capture at the
much more abundant N defect would dominate and no preferential orientation of NV’s would be
observed. Hence we propose, at least for the samples studied here, there are very few mobile
vacancies present during growth. In nitrogen doped material the combined concentration of NVH
and NV is typically very much less than the concentration of N +, indicating the presence of as yet
unidentified traps. [13]
Reducing the number of NV orientations from 4 orientations to 2 orientations is a significant
advancement and should lead to increased optically-detected magnetic resonance contrast and thus
increased magnetic sensitivity in ensemble-based magnetometry. For quantum information
applications control of the orientation of the NV optical dipole will be important for NV-cavity
coupling. For magnetometry applications the highest sensitivity magnetometers will be obtained in
ensemble systems in which all NVs are similarly oriented. Preferential orientations of NV centers
created by implantation and annealing has not been demonstrated but near 100 % out of plane
orientation is possible for homoepitaxial growth on an 110 oriented diamond substrate. In the
samples studied we are able to observe NVs at the surface within the optical depth of focus
(approximately 4 µm). Future directions for this work include creating preferentially oriented NVs
very close to the diamond surface (10-100 nm) and suppressing the excitation of one of the two
orientations through a combination of the optical excitation polarization and diamond orientation.
Electron Paramagnetic Resonance: Quantitative ensemble room temperature continuous wave
Electron Paramagnetic Resonance (EPR) measurements were carried out using commercially
available Bruker EMX and ELEXSYS EPR spectrometers operating at approximately 9.5 GHz (X-band).
The systems were set up so that it was possible to rotate the sample in two perpendicular planes to
achieve a desired orientation with respect to the magnetic field. Microwave power saturation, which
occurs when the spin lattice relaxation rate is not sufficiently high to maintain the equilibrium spin
population distribution while stimulated transitions are excited by microwaves, needs to be
considered if EPR is to be used in a quantitative manner. The spectrometers were run using
magnetic field modulation such that the spectral features approximate the first derivative of the EPR
line shape. The EPR intensity was determined by fitting the experimental spectrum to a simulated
spectrum, deconvolving overlapping spectra from different defects, and integrating the latter twice
using a computer program developed in-house. A Tsallis function was used to produce the simulated
spectra since EPR line shapes are usually not well reproduced with Lorentzian or Gaussian functions.
Furthermore, the algorithm utilizes the pseudo-modulation technique to account for the distortion
of the EPR line shape due to field modulation. Defect concentrations were calculated by comparing
the EPR signal intensities to that of a reference sample of known concentration. The reference
sample used in this study is a small, single growth sector, HPHT synthetic type Ib diamond containing
270 ± 20 ppm atoms of N 0 (1 ppm = 1 part per million carbon atoms = spin density of 1.76×1017
cm−3). With signal averaging the room temperature EPR detection limit in a diamond sample of
volume ≈ 10 mm3 for [NVH] is approximately 0.2 ppb, whereas that for [N 0], utilizing rapid passage
techniques, is approximately 0.02 ppb. In the dark the ensemble EPR detection limit for NV is similar
to that for NVH but with optically excited spin polarization this can be reduced by two orders of
magnitude. [20] However, since a number of factors can influence the spin polarization efficiency
quantitative analysis is more challenging. White-light from a HgXe arc lamp directed onto the sample
using a liquid light guide (transmission 315-700 nm) was used to spin polarize the negatively
charged nitrogen-vacancy centers and improve the EPR detection sensitivity for measurements of
the preferential orientation of these color centers.
Infrared absorption (IR) spectroscopy: A Perkin Elmer Spectrum GX Fourier Transform IR
spectrometer equipped with a beam condenser was used to monitor the concentration of N +. At
low levels, [N +] was estimated from the strength of the infrared absorption at 1332 cm-1, rather
than using the entire N + infrared absorption band. [10] This process assumes that only N +
contributes to the infrared absorption at 1332 cm-1 and hence gives an upper limit. However, with
this caveat in mind, it does allow an estimation of [N +] down to  200 ppb.
Confocal Photoluminescence: Single center room temperature photoluminescence measurements
were carried out using a confocal setup in which an excitation laser (532 nm) was focused to a
submicron spot inside the sample for non-resonant excitation of the NV centers. This setup also
allowed for the control of the laser polarization incident on the sample.