MARGOLIESetal.:PROJECT-BASEDLEARNINGWITHINALARGE-SCALEINTERDISCIPLINARYRESEARCHEFFORT 1
Project-based Learning within a Large-Scale
Interdisciplinary Research Effort
Robert Margolies, Maria Gorlatova, John Sarik, Peter Kinget, Ioannis Kymissis, and Gil Zussman
Abstract—The modern engineering landscape increasingly re-
quiresarangeofskillstosuccessfullyintegratecomplexsystems.
Project-basedlearningisusedtohelpstudentsbuildprofessional
skills. However, it is typically applied to small teams and small
efforts. This paper describes an experience in engaging a large
number of students in research projects within a multi-year
interdisciplinaryresearcheffort.Theprojectsexposethestudents
to various disciplines in Computer Science (embedded systems,
algorithm design, networking), Electrical Engineering (circuit (a) (b)
design, wireless communications, hardware prototyping), and
Applied Physics (thin-film battery design, solar cell fabrication).
While a student project is usually focused on one discipline
area, it requires interaction with at least two other areas. Over
5 years, 180 semester-long projects have been completed. The
studentswereadiversegroupofhighschool,undergraduate,and
M.S. Computer Science, Computer Engineering, and Electrical
Engineering students. Some of the approaches that were taken
to facilitate student learning are real-world system development
constraints, regular cross-group meetings, and extensive involve-
Fig. 1: (a) The intended EnHANT form factor, (b) an EnHANT
ment of Ph.D. students in student mentorship and knowledge
mockup integrated with a flexible solar cell and thin-film battery,
transfer. To assess the approaches, a survey was conducted
and(c)anenvisionedenergyharvesting-adaptiveEnHANTnetwork.
among the participating students. The results demonstrate the
effectivenessoftheapproaches.Forexample,70%ofthestudents
surveyed indicated that working on their research project im- Inthispaperwedescribeourexperienceinengagingalarge
proved their ability to function on multidisciplinary teams more and diverse group of students in project-based learning within
than coursework, internships, or any other activity. a large-scale interdisciplinary research effort. Our experience
Index Terms—Interdisciplinary learning, project-based learn- with organizing multiple student projects to contribute to
ing, student project organization, embedded systems, Internet of a large-scale effort is unique and this paper describes our
Things, wireless networking approaches and some of the lessons we learned.
Our ongoing project-based learning activities are related to
the “Internet of Things” [9] – digital networking of everyday
I. INTRODUCTION
objects. Since 2009 a team of seven faculty members from
The modern engineering landscape requires system engi- the Department of Computer Science and the Department
neering skills and interdisciplinary knowledge that are best of Electrical Engineering at Columbia University have par-
acquired through participation in large-scale projects. While ticipated in the Energy Harvesting Active Networked Tags
theneedtoengagestudentsinlarge-scale“systemperspective” (EnHANTs) project [10]. The goal of the project is to develop
projects has been recognized [1], [2], such projects are rarely a new type of a networked wireless device. These small,
attemptedinacademicsettings.Project-basedlearning[3],[4] flexibletags(theenvisionedformfactorforafutureEnHANT
isactivelyusedtohelpstudentsbuildprofessionalskills,such is shown in Fig. 1(a), and a recent mock-up is shown in
as teamwork and communication skills. Despite the many Fig. 1(b)) will be attached to commonplace objects to allow
project-based learning approaches that have been attempted them to communicate and network. EnHANTs will enable
and the many frameworks that have been proposed [5]–[8], to futuristic applications envisioned for the Internet of Things,
the best of our knowledge, project-based learning is typically such as finding lost objects (i.e., lost keys, sunglasses, or
only applied to small teams and small efforts. toyswillbeaccessibleviawirelesslinks)anddetectingobject
configurations.
R. Margolies, M. Gorlatova, J. Sarik, P. Kinget, I. Kymissis, and Recent advances in ultra-low-power wireless communica-
G. Zussman are with the Department of Electrical Engineering, Columbia
tions,energyharvesting(derivingenergyfromambientsources
University, New York, NY 10027. E-mail: rsm2156@columbia.edu,
maria.gorlatova@gmail.com, jsarik@gmail.com, {kinget, johnkym, such as light and motion), and energy harvesting-adaptive
gil}@ee.columbia.edu. networking will enable the realization of EnHANTs in the
This work was supported in part by Vodafone Americas Foundation
near future [9]. Designing adaptive networks of EnHANTs,
Wireless Innovation Project, United Microelectronics, a grant from Texas
Instruments,andNSFgrantsCCF-0964497,CNS-0916263,CNS-10-54856. shown schematically in Fig. 1(c), requires reconsideration of
1v5396.0141:viXra
MARGOLIESetal.:PROJECT-BASEDLEARNINGWITHINALARGE-SCALEINTERDISCIPLINARYRESEARCHEFFORT 2
protocols on all levels of the networking stack. Additionally, Control Module
designing the EnHANTs to achieve the desired form factor UWB-IR
MIB600 Communication
requires tight integration of the networking and communica- Programming Module
tions protocols with the enabling hardware technologies. This
necessitates close and continuous interactions of students and
faculty members with expertise in the associated technology
areas. Working on the EnHANTs project exposes the students
to various disciplines in Electrical Engineering (circuit de- Energy Harvesting Module
sign,wirelesscommunications),ComputerScience(embedded
systems, algorithm design, networking), and Applied Physics (a)
(battery and solar cell design).
EnHANT Prototype
Over 17 semesters, we have involved a diverse population
Energy Harvesting Module
Software-based Solar Antenna
o d f en 8 ts 0 i h n ig 1 h 80 sc s h e o m ol e , st u e n r- d lo e n rg g ra r d e u s a e t a e r , ch M p a r s o te je rs c , ts an re d la P te h d .D t . o s t t h u e - Lig S h y t s C te o m ntrol Cell Energ B y a m tt o e n ry it oring D B i L s a c o t h t g e a i r c r y g e Com U M m W o u d B n u - i I c le R a t ion
design and development of the EnHANT prototypes and EnHANTs Control Module e B s RF Tx
t p h l e ina p r r y o . to A ty p p r e oje te c s t tb ty e p d i . ca T ll h y e fo st c u u d s e e n s t o p n ro o j n e e cts dis a c r i e pli m na u r l y tid a i r s e c a i- , M T C e o o n n s i t t t r b o o r l e i & n d g M I S n o t y n e s i r t t f o e a r m c in e g T D o a F p ta l o o l r w o a g t e y , , D C is o c n h t a ro rg l e Switch C R h x ip
but requires interaction with at least two other areas. The System Tiny OS + Control Med C iu o m nt A ro c l cess FPGA Chip
Fennec Fox
projects necessitate collaboration, provide students with in-
Information Control Light Current
depthfundamentalunderstandingofnetworkingconcepts,and
requirestudentstoimprovetheircommunicationskills.Weuse
Fig. 2: The EnHANT prototype: (a) photo, and (b) block diagram.
“real-world”systemintegrationdeadlinesandfrequentsystem
demonstrations to motivate students and to encourage cross-
disciplinary collaboration. Students demonstrated prototypes
importanceoflearningembeddedsystemdesignfromasystem
andthetestbedatsixconferencedemonstrationsessions[11]–
perspectivehaspreviouslybeenemphasized[2].Project-based
[16] and at over three dozen additional live on-site and off-
learning approaches for embedded system design have also
site demonstrations. Students also contributed to publications
beenembracedindifferentcourseworks[3],[4].Thenecessity
describingtheprototypesandthetestbed[17],[18].Toevaluate
ofengagingstudentsinlargesystemdevelopmentprojectshas
our learning activities, we conducted a survey among the
been recognized as an important educational objective, and
students.Ofthestudentswhocompletedthesurvey,over90%
some tools for emulating the scale of the development have
indicated that the project was rewarding and enriching, and
been proposed [1].
70% indicated that working on this project improved their
This paper builds on the previous research by describing a
ability to function on multidisciplinary teams more than any
methodforengagingstudentsinproject-basedlearningwithin
other activity in their academic career.
alarge-scalemultidisciplinaryresearcheffort,wherethestruc-
This paper is organized as follows. Section II describes
ture of the projects is critical to success [22]. Project-based
the educational objectives and the related work. Section III
learning encourages system level thinking [23], helps develop
describes the EnHANTs umbrella project and the student
engineering design skills [24] and “soft skills” [25], and is
projects. Section IV describes our approaches to organizing
well-suited for team-based [26] and long-term projects [27].
student projects and some lessons we learned over the 5-
The research projects can help students to develop technical
year course of the umbrella project. Section V presents the
skills and encourage undergraduates to continue to graduate
evaluation results and Section VI describes the outcomes of
studies [28].
the project. Section VII concludes the paper.
The high-level educational goal of the project is to im-
II. CONTEXTANDINTENDEDOUTCOMES prove the student’s overall education by exposing them to
Previousresearchhasdescribedstructuringstudentresearch a large-scale multidisciplinary research project. The project’s
experiences as a course [19], [20], a research-based program main educational objectives focus on improving the students’
aimed at undergraduates [21], and a framework for accom- abilities to function on multidisciplinary teams and commu-
modating undergraduate students in a research group [5], nicate effectively. Specifically, some notable objectives were
[6]. Researchers have also examined methods for providing to enable students to effectively understand a systems view of
students with interdisciplinary research opportunities [8] theirspecificprojectinthecontextoftheoverarchingumbrella
and for increasing student communication and collaborative project. It was also our goal to enable students to effectively
skills [7]. To the best of our knowledge, our experience communicate with team members of different backgrounds
with providing many students interdisciplinary project-based (i.e., hardware and software) as part of a unique multidisci-
research opportunities as part of a single large-scale ongoing plinary design and development process. Other learning out-
research effort is unique. comes, some of which were inspired by ABET EC 2000 [29]
The EnHANTs research effort is in the embedded systems included improving the students ability to design and conduct
domain. The applicability of project-based learning to em- experiments and analyze and interpret data. In Section V we
bedded systems has been specifically noted. Additionally, the discuss evaluation results related to some of these objectives.
MARGOLIESetal.:PROJECT-BASEDLEARNINGWITHINALARGE-SCALEINTERDISCIPLINARYRESEARCHEFFORT 3
[Gorlatova et al. 2010] [Gorlatova et al. 2010] [Zhu et al. 2011] [Stanje et al. 2011] [Wang et al. 2012] [Margolies et al. 2013]
IEEE ACM ACM ACM IDTechX IEEE
SECON’10 MobiCom’10 MobiSys’11 SenSys’11 USA’12 INFOCOM’13
Prototype Phase I Phase II Phase III Phase IV Phase V Phase VI
Sept. 2009 Apr. 2013
Energy-harvesting Node
aware algorithms Link
Single-hop network Single-hop
network Multihop network
Energy harvesting Light Crystalline Si Amorphous Si solar cells Flexible solar cells
+ solar cells sensor solar cells Organic solar cells
Communications Sensor board Ba m tte o r n y i t + o r c i h n a g r g e R e e n a e l r - g ti y m m e o h n a i r t v o e r s in te g d Flexible batteries
+ Medium Access CC1000 radio UWB-IR Transceiver
Control (MAC) UWB-IR MAC
Logging Real-time
monitoring
Testbed Flashlights and desk lamps M in a c n a u n a d l e l s i c g e h n t t c l o a n m tr p o s l , c M on a t n ro u l a , l L li E g D ht s Software-based Compact SBLC
light control (SLBC)
Fig. 3: A timeline of the EnHANTs prototypes and testbed development, Phases I-VI. The milestones achieved during these phases were
presented at conference demonstration sessions [11] (7 student coauthors), [12] (7 student coauthors), [14] (9 student coauthors), [13] (10
student coauthors), [15] (10 student coauthors), and [16] (8 student coauthors).
III. PROJECT-BASEDLEARNING the custom-designed organic solar cells (Phase V) and
commercial flexible solar cells (Phase VI).
TheEnergyHarvestingActiveNetworkedTags(EnHANTs)
• Ultra-Wideband Impulse-Radio (UWB-IR) wireless
umbrella project [10] has engaged, over 17 semesters, 80 stu-
communications spend significantly less energy than
dentsin180interdisciplinaryhands-onsemester-longprojects.
other low-power wireless technologies [30]. Early-phase
In this section, we first briefly describe the umbrella project.
prototypes communicated with each other via stan-
Then, we describe the student involvement.
dard (non-UWB) commercial sensor network mote
transceivers [31]. Prior to integration of the custom
A. Umbrella Project UWB-IRcommunicationmodulesinPhaseIII,wesubstan-
tially modified the mote operating system (which did not
The EnHANTs project [10] is a large multi-year interdis-
support custom transceivers). The integration additionally
ciplinary research project related to the Internet Of Things.
required the implementation of a custom medium access
The main focus of the project is the development of the
control module, since the UWB-IR transceiver character-
EnHANTsprototypesandtheEnHANTprototypetestbed.The
isticsdiffergreatlyfromthepropertiesoftheconventional
current prototype is shown in Fig. 2. The prototypes harvest
transceivers.
indoor light energy using thin-film solar cells, communicate
• Energy harvesting-adaptive algorithms were first de-
with each other using custom-developed transceivers, and
signedanddevelopedforsimplesinglenodescenarios,and
implement custom energy-harvesting-adaptive algorithms on
were later implemented for network scenarios. Following
several layers of the Open Systems Interconnection stack.
the integration of the UWB-IR transceivers in Phase III,
Thetestbedmonitorstheprototypes’communicationsandnet-
we re-implemented the algorithms to take the UWB-IR
working parameters and controls the amount of light incident
characteristics into account. In Phase VI, we introduced
on the prototypes’ solar cells.
an adaptive multihop network.
The prototypes and the testbed were developed in a set
• Testbed functionality first consisted of a data logger
of phases over 5 years. The photos of the testbed in the
with a simple visualization interface, which we replaced
different phases are shown in Fig. 3, which additionally
with a custom-designed real-time monitoring and control
demonstratestheiterativedevelopmentofthedifferentaspects
system. We additionally developed several prototype light
of the prototype and testbed functionality. We summarize the
energy control systems, from relatively simple manual
functionalitydevelopmentstepsbelow.Allhardware,software,
setups (Phases III and IV) to a software-based system
and algorithm modifications to the prototype and testbed
that exposes the prototypes to real-world trace-based light
functionality were designed, developed, integrated, and tested
energy conditions (Phase V).
as part of student projects.
At the end of each phase, a fully functional prototype
• Energy harvesting allows EnHANTs to self-power by
testbed was demonstrated by students, as indicated in Fig. 3:
obtaining energy from ambient sources (light, motion). As
part of the umbrella project, we have fabricated flexible • Phase I demo at IEEE SECON’10 [11]: 7 student coau-
solar cells that efficiently harvest indoor light, and inte- thors from 2 research groups.
grated them with the prototypes. Initially, we designed the • Phase II demo at ACM MobiCom’10 [12]: 7 student
prototypestosense,butnotharvest,availableenvironmen- coauthors from 4 research groups.
tal energy (Phase I). Next, we integrated rigid commercial • Phase III demo at ACM MobiSys’11 [14]: 9 student
solar cells and implemented real-time energy harvesting coauthors from 4 research groups.
state monitoring (Phases II and III). Finally, we integrated • Phase IV demo at ACM SenSys’11 [13]: 10 student
MARGOLIESetal.:PROJECT-BASEDLEARNINGWITHINALARGE-SCALEINTERDISCIPLINARYRESEARCHEFFORT 4
coauthors from 4 research groups. Ph.D. High School Local students
• Phase V demo at IDTechX’12 Energy Harvesting and 10 % 6% 73%
Storage USA Conference [15]: 10 student coauthors from
3 research groups.
• Phase VI demo at IEEE INFOCOM’13 [16]: 8 student M.S. Undergrad Visitors
48% 36% 27%
coauthors from 3 research groups.
The Phase IV demo [13] received the conference’s Best (a) Academiclevel. (b) Academicaffiliation.
Fig. 5: Students involved in the EnHANTs project.
Student Demonstration Award.
The conference demonstrations were conducted in different
cities, which necessitated solving not only technological but Female Circuits
also logistical challenges. For example, Phase II, IV, and VI 28% 17%
Electronics
demonstrations required shipping. The Phase VI demonstra- Networking 20%
tion [16] was conducted abroad, which exposed students to
the differences in electrical systems of different countries and Male Other
to some of the challenges of international shipping logistics.
(a) Gender. (b) Mainfocusarea.
Additionally, we recently described the prototypes and the
Fig. 6: Students semesters.
testbedintwopublications[17],[18](7studentcoauthorsfrom
4 research groups; 16 contributing students from 5 research
throughout the research groups involved in the EnHANTs
groups additionally acknowledged).
project.Thisimprovesstudents’communicationandteamwork
skills.Fourrepresentativestudentprojectsaredescribedbelow.
B. Student Projects More than 40 additional project descriptions are provided
As of September 2014, over 17 semesters the EnHANTs at [10].
umbrellaprojecthasengaged80studentswhohavecompleted • Real-timemonitoringandcontrolsystem(PhaseIproject,
180 semester-long projects. The number of student projects completed by an undergraduate Computer Science stu-
completed each semester is shown in Fig. 4. The student dent): The student developed a Java-based system to mon-
demographics are presented in Fig. 5 and Fig. 6. Out of itor and control the EnHANTs prototypes. The project
80 students, 6% were high school students we engaged via involved designing the necessary data structures to enable
a Harlem Children Society’s program that pairs university communication between the prototypes and the computer
researcherswithstudentsfromunder-servedcommunities[32]. running the monitoring system. The student designed the
36% were undergraduates, 48% were M.S. students (nearly systemtosupportbothatext-basedinterfaceanda“visual
all of which were in non-thesis terminal M.S. programs), and demo” interface that shows the activity of the prototypes
10% were Ph.D. students. 73% of students were enrolled in in an easy-to-understand way. This project, implemented
academic programs in Columbia University, while the other using TinyOS and Java, required knowledge of sensor
27% were visiting students, such as Research Experience for networking,wirelinecommunication,andsoftwaredesign.
Undergraduate (REU) students, students from local colleges The student extensively interacted with students who were
without advanced research facilities, or visiting international modifying the prototype operating system and developing
students. Students that were enrolled in academic programs at energy-harvesting-aware algorithms.
Columbia University typically took this project as an elective • Energy harvesting module (Phase III project, completed
independent research project course (separate from the senior by an M.S. Electrical Engineering student): The student
design capstone project). Out of the 180 student projects, improved the design of the Energy Harvesting Module
51% were full-time projects (summer research internships, (EHM) that tracked the energy harvested from the solar
REUprojects,M.S.thesisresearchsemesters).Theother49% cell and the state of the battery in real time. The project
weresemester-longresearchprojectcoursestowhichstudents required the student to improve on a simple prototype
typically dedicated 8-15 hours per week. 72% of the projects that used an off the shelf Coulomb counter. The student
werecompletedbymalestudentsand28%byfemalestudents. worked with the students developing energy-harvesting-
Themainfocusareasforthestudentprojectswerenetworking adaptive algorithms to define a new specification for the
(51%),circuitsandsystems(17%),andelectronicsandapplied range, resolution, and response time of the EHM. The
physics (20%). Other projects focused on operating systems student designed and built a new EHM that included a
and VLSI design (12%). high side current sense amplifier and new digital interface
The student projects within the EnHANTs project are col- to meet these requirements. This project required knowl-
laborativeandmultidisciplinary.Aprojecttypicallyfocuseson edge of circuit design and embedded programming and
onedisciplinaryarea(e.g.,algorithmdesign,operatingsystems an understanding of how the underlying hardware would
development, solar cell design) but requires interaction with affect higher level system performance.
at least two other areas. These projects challenge students by • Prototype UWB-IR communication module (Phase III
requiring them to gain understanding of concepts outside of project, completed by an M.S. Electrical Engineering
their comfort zone. Additionally, the projects require students student): The student developed and tested the UWB-IR
to independently and proactively seek out relevant expertise communication module. The student integrated a custom-
MARGOLIESetal.:PROJECT-BASEDLEARNINGWITHINALARGE-SCALEINTERDISCIPLINARYRESEARCHEFFORT 5
09Sp09Su 09F 10Sp10Su 10F 11Sp11Su 11F 12Sp12Su 12F 13Sp13Su 13F 14Sp14Su
stnapicitraP
Ph.D.
M.S.
Undergr.
Fig. 4: Student projects by semester.
designed UWB-IR transmitter and receiver chipset onto a than anticipated. For example, Electrical Engineering students
single printed circuit board and programmed a complex are oftentimes unfamiliar with good software development
programmable logic device to perform data serialization practices,whilemanyComputerSciencestudentsmaynotun-
and deserialization, preamble detection, and byte synchro- derstandhowtohandleexperimentalelectronics.Additionally,
nization. The student also developed a UWB-IR radio many students that are not majoring in Electrical Engineering
driver using TinyOS. Primarily focused on circuit design, do not understand the concepts of frequency-domain signal
this project required the student to develop expertise in processing that are essential to the understanding of wireless
networking, operating systems, and software design. networking.
• Energy harvesting-adaptive network (Phase V project, These knowledge gaps often lead to both technological
completed by an undergraduate Computer Engineering andinterpersonalissues.Cross-groupproblemsolvingrequires
student): The student implemented network layer pro- students to trust each other’s expertise, but these gaps in
tocols that handled the EnHANT packet routing. The knowledge can make the trust difficult to establish. When
student first tested the network functionality using the working with students, we encourage close and continuous
commercial transceivers, and then extensively evaluated cross-group interactions to address these issues. We highlight
its performance with the custom UWB-IR transceivers. that such gaps are normal and should be treated as learning
The student also implemented energy harvesting-adaptive opportunities.
network layer algorithms, which changed packet routing Additionally, some of the most challenging problems arise
paths based on the environmental energy availability. The when a student is interfacing his or her project with another
studentextensivelytestedthesealgorithmswiththecustom project.Thedifficultyofsolvingtheseinterfaceproblemsmay
energy harvesting modules. While primarily focused on lead to interpersonal tensions. In our experience, designing
networking, the project required the student to gain an well-defined interfaces between different technologies has
in-depth knowledge of energy harvesting and UWR-IR been a challenging task that often required faculty members’
communications. involvement.Ultimatelytheseissuescanonlybeaddressedby
establishing, maintaining, and nurturing the connections be-
IV. PROJECTORGANIZATIONANDLESSONSLEARNED tween the research groups and between the different students.
Organizingmultiplestudentprojectstocontributetoalarge-
scaleeffortischallenging.Inthissectionwedescribehowthe
student projects were structured to facilitate student learning. B. Real-world System Integration Deadlines
We also present lessons that were learned throughout the
EnHANTs prototype and testbed design, development, and
5-yearcourseoftheproject.Thelessonslearnedfocusonreal-
integration have proceeded in a series of phases (see Fig. 3).
worldexperiencesincludingcloseandcontinuouscross-group
At the end of each phase, the fully integrated prototype and
interactions, well-defined interfaces between student projects,
testbed were presented at a major conference.
structured short-term goals, real-world work environment, de-
Using conference timelines as real-world deadlines for
velopment of student mentors, and project self-promotion.
the integration of different student projects has many ben-
efits. Providing structured short-term deadlines for student
A. Multidisciplinary Projects
projects, rather than abstract long-term goals, energizes and
As described in Section III, the student projects are collab- motivates the students. Students are additionally motivated
orative and multidisciplinary, often requiring interaction with by seeing their work integrated with the work of others,
at least two technical areas. The students work in different used in conference presentations, and subsequently extended.
labs,focusondifferentdisciplines,andhavedifferenttechnical We learned that short-term system integration deadlines also
skills, priorities, work styles, and expectations. encourage frequent cross-disciplinary collaboration, as the
Earlyonwediscoveredthatthegapsbetweentheknowledge students worked together to quickly solve problems that were
of the students with different expertise areas are much wider arising. In addition, constant updates to the software and
MARGOLIESetal.:PROJECT-BASEDLEARNINGWITHINALARGE-SCALEINTERDISCIPLINARYRESEARCHEFFORT 6
“Participating in this project . . .”
Agree Disagree No opinion
Increased my Was Made me a Been a Improved my Improved my Improved my Improved my
understanding rewarding and better valuable part ability to ability to ability to ability to
of the research enriching computer of my function on communicate design and analyze and
process scientist or education interdisciplinary effectively conduct interpret data
engineer teams experiments
Fig. 7: Project survey results: Effects of project participation on educational objectives.
the hardware throughout the integration deadlines reduce the
impact of unsuccessful projects.
C. Frequent Cross-group Meetings
Students present their work to the faculty and students
from the different research groups at regular (weekly or bi-
Fig. 8: A Phase III con- Fig. 9: A Ph.D. student
weekly) meetings. Such frequent cross-group meetings re- ference demonstration [14] mentoring an undergradu-
semble interdepartmental meetings that are used to manage presented by M.S. and ate student.
large-scale projects in industry environments. The frequent Ph.D. students.
meetingsfacilitatecross-groupproblem-solvingandencourage
new team members to quickly get up to speed on the state demonstration components. The backups are tested both as
of the projects. Additionally, the presence of faculty and individualcomponentsandwhileintegratedwiththerestofthe
students from different research groups at these meetings system. Off-site demonstrations entail rigourous contingency
challenges students to present their work so that it could be planning. Included in the many logistics to be considered are
understood by people with different backgrounds, enabling international shipping of our testbed, prototypes, and moni-
multidisciplinary discussions. The students also report that toring system and voltage and plug adapters to accommodate
observing how faculty members solve problems during these international power supplies.
meetings improves their own problem solving skills.
E. Ph.D. Student Mentorship
D. Frequent System Demonstrations The faculty members involved in the EnHANTs project
Functional “live” EnHANT prototypes and testbed are fre- are heavily engaged in the student projects. However, faculty
quentlydemonstratedindifferenton-siteandoff-sitepresenta- members delegate many of the day-to-day student supervision
tions.1 Frequent demonstrations, particularly those conducted taskstothePh.D.students.ThePh.D.studentsprovidetechni-
off-site (for example, Fig. 8 shows the Phase III conference cal support and guidance to the students (for example, Fig. 9
demonstration setup assembled at the conference location by shows a Ph.D. student troubleshooting a prototype component
the student presenters), encourage students to design and together with an undergraduate student). Additionally, the
develop robust software, hardware, and algorithms and to Ph.D. students are responsible for testing and verifying junior
extensivelyverifyandtesttheirwork.Thisimprovesstudents’ student projects before integration with EnHANTs prototypes
technical skills, and provides them with an understanding and testbed, and for ensuring continuity between the different
of the quality standards required from technology in “real- student projects.
world” applications. Additionally, the testbed demonstrations Handling many of the day-to-day activities, the Ph.D. stu-
give students opportunities to present their work to vastly dents quickly learn student mentorship skills from the faculty
different audiences. to become advisors to the high school, undergraduate, and
The frequent demonstrations of the EnHANTs system ne- M.S.students.ThisawardsthePh.D.studentswithopportuni-
cessitate rigorous risk management. For example, we prepare ties to practice teaching, assigning deadlines, and motivating
and fully test 2–3 “hot” backup components for each of the their advisees. Additionally, the Ph.D. students serve as initial
reviewers for all presentation materials prepared by the junior
1Inspiredbyagilesoftwaredevelopmentpractices,weensurethataversion students, which allows the Ph.D. students to practice giving
of the prototypes and testbed is always ready to be demonstrated. We do feedback (both technical and related to different aspects of
notintegratenewsoftwareorhardwarewithoutextensivetestinganddesign
writtenandverbalcommunications).Thisexperienceprovides
for backward compatibility. This further reduces the impact of unsuccessful
studentprojects. thePh.D.studentswithinsightsintothemanagerialaspectsof
MARGOLIESetal.:PROJECT-BASEDLEARNINGWITHINALARGE-SCALEINTERDISCIPLINARYRESEARCHEFFORT 7
“Which activity has most”:
This project Coursework Internship Other
Fig. 10: Undergraduate and M.S. students presenting their work to
incoming M.S. students in Summer 2013.
Improved my ability to Improved my ability to Increased my
function on multi- communicate effectivelyknowledge of computer
disciplinary teams networking concepts
Fig. 12: Project survey results: Project involvement compared with
other activities.
G. Knowledge Transfer
The large-scale, long-term nature of the umbrella project
necessitates knowledge transfer between the students. The
projectusesaninternalwikithatiskeptuptodatewithshared
technical information and documentation. We learned that,
while knowledge transfer needs to be carefully monitored and
emphasized,moststudentsembraceitwhentheycanseefirst-
hand that the documentation they create is used by their peers
Fig. 11: A screenshot of the umbrella project website welcome
andmentors.Similarly,moststudentsembracetheopportunity
page [10].
to introduce peers to their work and to teach them.
academic positions, as well as with high level skills that are
valuable in industry environments.
V. EXPERIENCESANDFEEDBACK
After the completion of Phase V of the umbrella project
in October 2012 (see Section III), we conducted a survey
F. Outreach and Promotion
to evaluate student learning and the effectiveness of our
Studentsalsoserveasambassadorsfortheumbrellaproject, approaches. In this section, we summarize the results of the
performing tasks that are oftentimes typically done by fac- survey and other student feedback and briefly discuss our
ulty. For example, the students often directly present their changestotheorganizationalstructureoftheumbrellaproject
research to prospective graduate and undergraduate students based on the feedback. We also briefly summarize student
(see Fig. 10) and to university visitors. Due to the large outcomes.
scale of the project, the students regularly get opportunities We conducted a survey among all 45 high school, under-
to demonstrate their work to high-profile visitors they would graduate,andM.S.studentsthathadparticipatedintheproject
not otherwise encounter. This encourages the students to take up to October 2012. The survey contained multiple-choice
pride in showcasing their work. Among the visitors with questions and optional open-ended questions. Answers to the
whomtheprojects’undergraduateandM.S.studentsinteracted multiple-choicequestionsweremeasuredonaLikertscale:1–
are many top academic researchers from the networking, stronglydisagree,2–disagree,3–neitheragreenordisagree,
communications, and electronics communities. Additionally, 4 – agree, 5 – strongly agree.
many visitors came from different companies including IBM, The survey response rate was 75.5%. In the survey’s open-
Juniper, Samsung, and Phillips. The students interacted with ended questions, students shared many observations, com-
technicalandnon-technicalcompanyrepresentatives.Thenon- ments, and suggestions about the project organization. Fig. 7,
technical representatives included visitors with roles in mar- 12, and 13 show some of the results. Fig. 7 demonstrates
keting, operations, and sales. the percentage of students that agreed (or strongly agreed)
Additionally, the students publicize their contributions to and disagreed (or strongly disagreed) with statements related
the project on the EnHANTs website (see [10] and Fig. 11), to the educational objectives (see Section II) and overall
which is maintained by the members of the project. At the student experience. Fig. 12 shows how the students compared
end of each project, the students publish the results of their their project involvement to other activities (e.g., coursework,
workonthewebsite.Thisprocessencouragesstudentstostep internship) on particular aspects of soft skills and technical
back from the intensity of their research, see their work in a knowledge. Fig. 13 shows on the Likert scale the average
positivelight,andpresentitinanexcitingmanner.Welearned evaluationscoreforsomeofthesurveyquestionsrelatedtothe
that providing students with venues for displaying their work student mentorship by faculty members and Ph.D. students.
motivated students. The direct involvement of students in the Overall, the students’ experiences were overwhelmingly
project promotion activities was also useful in recruiting new positive.Over90%ofthestudentsbelievedtheirprojectexpe-
students. riencetoberewardingandenriching.Over85%ofthestudents
MARGOLIESetal.:PROJECT-BASEDLEARNINGWITHINALARGE-SCALEINTERDISCIPLINARYRESEARCHEFFORT 8
Undergraduate M.S.
Academic M.S.Students–Columbia(1),UniversityofMichigan(1); Ph.D.Candidates–CarnegieMellon(1),Columbia(6),Harvard(1),Northwestern(1)
Ph.D. Candidates – Columbia (1), Princeton (2), Texas
A&M(1),UTAustin(1)
Software Program Manager at Microsoft; Manager of Cloud Op- iOSDeveloperatLongtailStudios;CofounderofSoftwareCompany(Vessel.io);Technology
Roles erations at Bullhorn; Associate Applications Developer at AssociateatJPMorganChase;ApplicationsEngineeratOPNET;SalesEngineeratBluebox
AT&T;FlightSoftwareEngineeratMarshallSpaceFlight Security
Center SoftwareDevelopers–Apple(1),InteractiveBrokers(1),LamResearch(1),Microsoft(1),
Software Developers – Akcelita (1), Bloomberg LP (1), Oracle(1),VMWare(1),VMTurbo(1),WorkMarket(1)
CreditKarma(1),ZocDoc(2)
Hardware BatteryTestEngineerat24MTechnologies;ProductEngi- SystemsEngineersatRaytheonCo.(2);ElectricalEngineeratSunPowerCorp.
Roles neeratIntel;ElectricalEngineeratBalaConsultingEngi- Circuit Design Engineers – Ambarella (1), SK Hynix (1), Credit Suisse (1), Silicon
neers Laboratories(1),BoeingSpaceSystems(1)
Other Unknown(3) PilotatU.S.AirForce;BusinessAssistantatTCLMultimedia;Unknown(1)
TABLE I: The placements of 22 undergraduate and 32 M.S. students that already graduated (6 undergraduate and 5 M.S. students are are
yet to graduate).
elacStrekiL
“The Ph.D. student or faculty member that I worked with . . .” their work with the work of others, students’ opinions
Strongly Agree (5) Ph.D. Faculty aboutthedeadlinesweremixed.Someofthestudentssaid
that they liked the ”feel of product evolution” and ”liked Agree (4)
the challenging deadlines”. Yet other students pointed out
Neutral (3)
several deadline-related inefficiencies in project organiza-
Disagree (2) tion. For example, one of the students noted that at times
Strongly Disagree (1) hewasnotgivenenoughadvancenoticeonsystemrequire-
Was Provided Was interested Provided Was a positive
approachable appropriate in the insight into the role model ments prior to a deadline. Another student mentioned that
and accessible help and success of academic
guidance my project experience the deadlines resulted in unnecessarily “long and boring”
systemtesting.Anotherstudentalsofeltthatbecauseoftoo
Fig. 13: Project survey results: Evaluation of mentoring by Ph.D.
students and faculty. manyintegrationdeadlinesshedidnothaveenoughtimeto
makeprogressonhercomponents’next-generationdesign.
indicated that working on this project improved their ability To improve the student’s experiences, we dedicated extra
to function on multidisciplinary teams and to communicate attention to making sure that our subsequent deadlines
effectively, made them a better computer scientist or a better (such as the Phase VI deadline in April 2013) were
engineer, and was a valuable part of their education (Fig. 7). organized such that they did not negatively impact the
70% of the students indicated that working on the project students.
improved their ability to function on multidisciplinary teams • Frequent cross-group meetings: Most students appre-
morethananyotheractivity.Additionally,50%ofthestudents ciated the opportunities for problem-solving and work
indicated that working on the project improved their ability discussions and showcasing provided by the regular cross-
to communicate effectively more than any other activity, and group meetings. One student noted that “the meetings are
over 40% of the students indicated that this project increased anexcellentwayforputtingeverythinginthebigpicture.”
their knowledge of computer networking more than any other Yet several students also commented that the meetings
activity (Fig. 12). were unnecessarily long, and suggested that a better meet-
The students’ feedback on the project organization features ing structure should be considered for future projects.
provided additional insights into the features’ effectiveness. To improve the quality of the meeting presentations we
encourage students to discuss their presentation with their
• Multidisciplinary projects: Most students enjoyed the
Ph.D. mentors. We are also considering introducing joint
multidisciplinarynatureoftheirprojects.Whenspecifying
presentations for students from the same research group.
what they liked most about the project, over 50% of
• Frequent system demonstrations: Over 95% of the
the students commented on one of its multidisciplinary
studentsindicatedthatpresentingtheirworkwasareward-
aspects.Onestudentenjoyedherprojectbeing“aboutboth
ing and enriching experience. Several students specifically
hardware and software”, and said it was “innovative and
mentioned the presentation skills among the skills they
challenging to integrate many different aspects in one”.
acquired or improved while working on the umbrella
One student’s favorite thing about his project was the
project.Onestudentnotedthat“theopportunitytopresent
“integration of my work with other parts of the system –
to others was invaluable. Plus it was a lot of fun!”
felt like a cohesive project that mattered more”. However,
• Student mentorship: The majority of students appreci-
students also noted that “getting everyone on same page
ated the support provided by their Ph.D. student mentors.
was difficult at times”, and said that “not being able to
Over 80% of the students said that their mentor was
know exactly what others are doing” was an impediment
approachable and accessible, and provided appropriate
to achieving some of their project goals. Based on this
guidance(Fig.13).Onestudentnoted:“I’veneverconsid-
feedback, we have been encouraging the students to inde-
ered pursuing higher education past undergrad level, but
pendently and proactively collaborate with each other.
I’m starting to see the appeal in getting a Masters and/or
• Real-world system integration deadlines: While stu-
Ph.D. now, after working around so many happy and pas-
dents nearly universally enjoyed being able to integrate
MARGOLIESetal.:PROJECT-BASEDLEARNINGWITHINALARGE-SCALEINTERDISCIPLINARYRESEARCHEFFORT 9
sionate people.” Several students additionally specifically RFID Journal, Columbia’s The Record, IEEE Spectrum, and
complimented their mentors. MIT Technology Review.
• Outreach and promotion: Students were enthusiastic Individual Awards: Students received: NSF Graduate Re-
and excited about many different aspects of the opportuni- search Fellowship, 2013 MIT EECS Rising Star workshop
ties to present their work. More than 80% of the students invitation, Columbia Presidential Teaching Award, Wei Fam-
said that this experience improved their communication ily Foundation Fellowship (stipend and tuition for an in-
skillsandmorethan50%saidthatithelpedthemtoclarify coming Ph.D. student), Exzellenzstipendium 2011 Fellowship
theircareerpath.Oneofthestudentsnotedthatpresenting (competitive Austrian fellowship), as well as departmental
her work was an ”overall confidence booster”. Another Undergraduate Research Awards (two), and M.S. Awards of
specificallymentionedthatitwas“incrediblyrewardingto Excellence (two). The Ph.D. mentors received several awards,
start the project not knowing very much about the subject some directly stemming from mentoring activities including
and end with the ability to present my work with real the Google Anita Borg Fellowship, NSF Graduate Research
knowledge of what I had worked on”. Fellowship, Computing Innovation Fellowship as well as de-
• Knowledge transfer: Despite students’ favorable opin- partmental Jury Award, Armstrong Award, and Collaborative
ions of their mentors and despite their appreciation of the Research Award.
opportunities to teach others, a large portion of the nega- Publications:Ninestudentsco-authoredresearchpapers[17],
tive feedback focused on insufficient knowledge transfer. [33]–[39]. A undergraduate authored [34] (with four other
Several students commented on the insufficient technical students acknowledged). This paper was featured in the MIT
introduction to their project. One student stated that “in Technology Review Report on Business [40] and in the MIT
the beginning I felt I didn’t have enough support to ask Technology Review Physics ArXiv Blog [41]. 29 students co-
very basic things”, and another student noted that “a lot authored published demo descriptions [11]–[16] (see Section
of work goes to waste if you are unable to successfully III) and five students co-authored first-of-their-kind energy-
pass it on to the next person”. Based on this feedback we harvesting datasets [42], [43].
haveincreasedoureffortstoensurethatthestudentscreate Career Placement: As of September 2014, 83% of the B.S.
high-quality up-to-date documentation. and M.S. students have graduated and the other 17% are
Following the feedback from the survey, as we worked continuing their studies. Table I shows the current positions
through the Phase VI demonstration of the umbrella project of the graduated students. Of the students who have already
andpastit,wehavebeenmodifyingtheorganizationalaspects graduated, 30% continued to higher-level academic programs
of the project to additionally facilitate student development. in top schools like Princeton, Harvard, and Carnegie Mellon,
Wetakeaddedcareinschedulingtasksrelatedtosysteminte- including seven at Columbia (some of which later became
grationdeadlines,soasnottoover-burdenstudentsanddetract mentors in the program).2 The other 70% were recruited by
from research and educational objectives. To address cross- technology companies, such as Microsoft, Raytheon, Boeing,
group technological issues more quickly and to improve the Apple, Intel, OPNET, Oracle, VMturbo, and ZocDoc, as well
effectivenessofweeklycross-groupmeetings,wealsoconduct as by NASA and the US Air Force. Several students have
manymorefrequent(upto2–3timesperweek)smaller-group indicated that working on the umbrella project prepared them
interactions, typically involving only the relevant students and for some of the challenges they face in their careers. For
their Ph.D. mentors. Additionally, we take added care to ease example, one student noted that the “experience presenting
students’introductiontotheprojectandtoensureotheraspects my work has been really helpful in my current job profile”,
of knowledge transfer. For example, we now educate students and another highlighted that “being held accountable for
on important aspects of umbrella project disciplines that they deadlines and project completeness helped prepare me for
maybeunfamiliarwith(e.g.,weensurethatcomputerscience work environment”.
students are trained to handle experimental electronics). In addition, a few of the Ph.D. mentors already graduated
and assumed postdoctoral positions in EPFL, Princeton, and
Columbia, research positions in AT&T Labs Research and
VI. OUTCOMES
D.E. Shaw Research, and industry positions. Three of the
Inthissection,welisttheoutcomesoftheprojectincluding mentors also founded start-ups. All of the mentors indicated
project awards, individual awards, student publications, and that their mentoring experience was instrumental in shaping
career placements. their career paths.
Project Awards: A demonstration of the EnHANTs testbed
(with 10 student authors and 4 faculty mentors) received the
VII. CONCLUSIONS
Best Student Demo Award at the ACM SenSys’11 conference
[13].TheEnHANTsprojectalsowonthe1st placeinthe2009 While the modern computing landscape increasingly re-
quires large-scale system engineering skills, such skills are
VodafoneAmericasFoundationWirelessInnovationCompeti-
rarely acquired in a typical computing program. To address
tionandaprojectvisionpaper(with3studentsacknowledged)
this, over the last 5 years, we have been engaging a diverse
received the 2011 IEEE Communications Society Award for
Advances in Communications [9]. Following these recogni-
2AlloftheM.S.studentswereoriginallyenrolledinanM.S.onlyprogram
tions, the EnHANTs project and the student outcomes were
that does not lead to a Ph.D. and the high percentage of Ph.D. acceptance
also featured in several media outlets including BBC/PRI, amongthemisveryunique.
MARGOLIESetal.:PROJECT-BASEDLEARNINGWITHINALARGE-SCALEINTERDISCIPLINARYRESEARCHEFFORT 10
group of students in research projects within a large-scale [15] M. Wang, L. Pena, J. Sarik, H. Wang, R. Margolies, M. Gorlatova,
interdisciplinary Energy Harvesting Active Networked Tags G. Burrow, B. Vigraham, P. Kinget, I. Kymissis, and G. Zussman,
“Energyharvestingactivenetworkedtags(EnHANTs)prototypes,”Nov.
(EnHANTs) project. To date, 180 semester-long projects have
2012, Demo presented in IDtechEx Energy Harvesting and Storage,
been completed within the EnHANTs project. The projects Washington,DC.
challenge students’ knowledge and organizational and com- [16] R. Margolies, L. Pena, K. Kim, Y. Kim, M. Wang, M. Gorlatova,
J. Sarik, J. Zhu, P. Kinget, I. Kymissis, and G. Zussman, “Demo: An
munication skills. Some of the approaches we have used to
adaptivetestbedofenergyharvestingactivenetworkedtags(EnHANTs)
facilitate student learning are the real-world system develop- prototypes,”inProc.IEEEINFOCOM’13,Apr.2013.
ment constraints, regular cross-group meetings, and extensive [17] M. Gorlatova, R. Margolies, J. Sarik, G. Stanje, J. Zhu, B. Vigraham,
involvement of Ph.D. students in student mentorship and M. Szczodrak, L. Carloni, P. Kinget, I. Kymissis, and G. Zussman,
“Prototyping energy harvesting active networked tags (EnHANTs),” in
knowledge transfer. Students find the projects rewarding and Proc.IEEEINFOCOM’13mini-conference,Apr.2013.
gain valuable skills. Our experience demonstrates feasibility [18] ——,“Energyharvestingactivenetworkedtags(EnHANTs):Prototyp-
of engaging diverse groups of students on large-scale inter- ing and experimentation,” Submitted to ACM Transactions on Sensor
Networks(TOSN),2014.
disciplinary research efforts. It sheds light on some potential
[19] J.A.Polack-WahlandK.Anewalt,“Learningstrategiesandundergrad-
pitfalls of such efforts (e.g., inadequate cross-group commu- uateresearch,”ACMSIGCSEBull.,vol.38,no.1,pp.209–213,2006.
nication and knowledge transfer), and suggests best practices [20] T.GreeningandJ.Kay,“Undergraduateresearchexperienceincomputer
scienceeducation,”inProc.ACMITiCSE’02,June2002.
to overcome these challenges.
[21] J. Peckham, P. Stephenson, J. Herve´, R. Hutt, and M. Encarnac¸a˜o,
“Increasing student retention in computer science through research
programs for undergraduates,” ACM SIGCSE Bull., vol. 39, no. 1, pp.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
124–128,2007.
The authors thank the students for their participation in [22] E. P. Saliklis, ““putting a fence” around architectural engineering
undergraduate research projects,” in ASEE National Conference, June
the project and the evaluation survey as well as all of the
2006.
Ph.D. students who participated in the project through their [23] R.N.Savage,K.C.Chen,andL.Vanasupa,“Integratingproject-based
mentorship of the student projects. learningthroughouttheundergraduateengineeringcurriculum,”Journal
of STEM Education: Innovations & Research, vol. 8, no. 3/4, p. 15,
July-Dec.2007.
REFERENCES [24] C.L.Dym,A.M.Agogino,O.Eris,D.D.Frey,andL.J.Leifer,“Engi-
neeringdesignthinking,teaching,andlearning,”JournalofEngineering
[1] S. Schocken, “Taming complexity in large-scale system projects,” in Education,vol.94,no.1,pp.103–120,2005.
Proc.ACMSIGCSE’12,Feb.2012. [25] H.A.HadimandS.K.Esche,“Enhancingtheengineeringcurriculum
[2] W.WolfandJ.Madsen,“Embeddedsystemseducationforthefuture,” throughproject-basedlearning,”inProc.IEEEFrontiersinEducation,
Proc.oftheIEEE,vol.88,no.1,pp.23–30,2000. 2002.
[3] C.S.Lee,J.H.Su,K.E.Lin,J.H.Chang,andG.H.Lin,“Aproject- [26] R. M. Felder, D. R. Woods, J. E. Stice, and A. Rugarcia, “The future
based laboratory for learning embedded system design with industry of engineering education ii. teaching methods that work,” Chemical
support,”IEEETrans.Educ.,vol.53,no.2,pp.173–181,2010. EngineeringEducation,vol.34,no.1,pp.26–39,2000.
[4] S.HussmannandD.Jensen,“Crazycarracecontest:Multicoursedesign [27] J. E. Mills and D. F. Treagust, “Engineering education: Is problem-
curriculainembeddedsystemdesign,”IEEETrans.Educ.,vol.50,no.1, based or project-based learning the answer?” Australasian Journal of
pp.61–67,2007. EngineeringEducation,vol.3,pp.2–16,2003.
[5] A.Bernat,P.J.Teller,A.Gates,andN.Delgado,“Structuringthestudent [28] A.L.Zydney,J.S.Bennett,A.Shahid,andK.W.Bauer,“Impactofun-
researchexperience,”inProc.ACMITiCSE’00,July2000. dergraduateresearchexperienceinengineering,”JournalofEngineering
[6] E.Wenderholm,“Challengesandtheelementsofsuccessinundergrad- Education,vol.91,no.2,pp.151–157,2002.
uateresearch,”ACMSIGCSEBull.,vol.36,no.4,pp.73–75,2004. [29] ABET,“EngineeringChange:AstudyoftheimpactofEC2000,”www.
[7] B.ColemanandM.Lang,“Collaborationacrossthecurriculum:Adis- abet.org/engineering-change,2006.
ciplinedapproachtodevelopingteamskills,”inProc.ACMSIGCSE’12,
[30] M. Crepaldi, C. Li, K. Dronson, J. Fernandes, and P. Kinget, “An
Feb.2012.
interferencerobustS-OOKIR-UWBtransceiverchipset,”IEEEJ.Solid-
[8] D. S. Raicu and J. D. Furst, “Enhancing undergraduate education: A StateCircuits,vol.46,no.10,pp.2284–2299,Oct.2011.
REUmodelforinterdisciplinaryresearch,”ACMSIGCSEBull.,vol.41,
[31] “CrossbowMICA2Mote,”www.xbow.com/Products/Product pdf files/
no.1,pp.468–472,2009.
Wireless pdf/MICA2 Datasheet.pdf,2009.
[9] M. Gorlatova, P. Kinget, I. Kymissis, D. Rubenstein, X. Wang, and
[32] “Harlemchildrensociety,”harlemchildrensociety.org,2014.
G.Zussman,“Energy-harvestingactivenetworkedtags(EnHANTs)for
[33] M. E. Bhalke, S. P. Subbarao, and I. Kymissis, “A laboratory process
ubiquitousobjectnetworking,”IEEEWirelessCommun.,vol.17,no.6,
forencapsulationofairsensitiveorganicdevices,”IEEETrans.Electron
pp.18–25,Dec.2010.
Devices,vol.57,no.1,pp.153–156,Jan.2010.
[34] M.Gorlatova,J.Sarik,G.Grebla,M.Cong,I.Kymissis,andG.Zuss-
//enhants.ee.columbia.edu,2014.
man,“Moversandshakers:Kineticenergyharvestingfortheinternetof
[11] M. Gorlatova, T. Sharma, D. Shrestha, E. Xu, J. Chen, A. Skolnik,
things,”inProc.ACMSIGMETRICS’14,June2014.
D.Piao,P.Kinget,I.Kymissis,D.Rubenstein,andG.Zussman,“Demo:
Prototyping Energy Harvesting Active Networked Tags (EnHANTs) [35] J. Sarik, K. Kim, M. Gorlatova, I. Kymissis, and G. Zussman, “More
withMICA2Motes,”inProc.IEEESECON’10,June2010. than meets the eye - a portable measurement unit for characterizing
[12] M. Gorlatova, Z. Noorbhaiwala, A. Skolnik, J. Sarik, M. Szczodrak, lightenergyavailability,”inProc.IEEEGlobalSIP’13Symp.onEnergy
J.Chen,M.Zapas,L.Carloni,P.Kinget,I.Kymissis,D.Rubenstein,and HarvestingandGreenWirelessCommunications,Dec.2013.
G. Zussman, “Demo: Prototyping energy harvesting active networked [36] Y.Afsar,J.Sarik,M.Gorlatova,G.Zussman,andI.Kymissis,“Evaluat-
tags,”DemopresentedinACMMobiCom’10,Sept.2010. ingphotovoltaicperformanceindoors,”inProc.38thIEEEPhotovoltaic
[13] G.Stanje,P.Miller,J.Zhu,A.Smith,O.Winn,R.Margolies,M.Gor- SpecialistConference(PVSC38),June2012.
latova, J. Sarik, M. Szczodrak, B. Vigraham, L. Carloni, P. Kinget, [37] M.Gorlatova,A.Wallwater,andG.Zussman,“Networkinglow-power
I. Kymissis, and G. Zussman, “Demo: Organic solar cell-equipped energy harvesting devices: Measurements and algorithms,” in Proc.
energyharvestingactivenetworkedtag(EnHANT)prototypes,”inProc. IEEEINFOCOM’11,Apr.2011.
ACMSenSys’11,Nov.2011,BestStudentDemoAward. [38] ——,“Networkinglow-powerenergyharvestingdevices:Measurements
[14] J.Zhu,G.Stanje,R.Margolies,M.Gorlatova,J.Sarik,Z.Noorbhaiwala, andalgorithms,”IEEETrans.MobileComput.,vol.12,no.9,pp.1853–
P.Miller,M.Szczodrak,B.Vigraham,L.Carloni,P.Kinget,I.Kymissis, 1865,Sept.2013.
and G. Zussman, “Demo: Prototyping UWB-enabled EnHANTs,” in [39] Z.Wang,A.Tajer,andX.Wang,“Communicationofenergyharvesting
Proc.ACMMobiSys’11,June2011. tags,”IEEETrans.Commun.,vol.60,no.4,pp.1159–1166,Apr.2012.
MARGOLIESetal.:PROJECT-BASEDLEARNINGWITHINALARGE-SCALEINTERDISCIPLINARYRESEARCHEFFORT 11
[40] R. Metz, “The Internet of you,” MIT Technology Review, May 2014.
the-internet-of-you/
[41] The Physics Arxiv Blog, “Human motion will power the Internet of
things, say energy harvesting engineers,” MIT Technology Review, Jul.
human-motion-will-power-the-internet-of-things-say-energy-harvesting-engineers/
[42] M. Gorlatova, M. Zapas, E. Xu, M. Bahlke, I. J. Kymissis, and
G.Zussman,“CRAWDADdatasetcolumbia/enhants(v.2011-04-07),”
[43] M. Cong, K. Kim, M. Gorlatova, J. Sarik, J. Kymissis, and
G. Zussman, “CRAWDAD data set columbia/kinetic (v. 2014-05-13),”