SPECIAL FOCUS PAPER
PROMOTING ACTIVE LEARNING IN ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING BASIC STUDIES
Promoting Active Learning
in Electrical Engineering Basic Studies
A. Lehtovuori1, M. Honkala1, H. Kettunen2, and J. Leppävirta3
1 Aalto University School of Electrical Engineering, Espoo, Finland
2 University of Helsinki, Helsinki
3 Outotec, Espoo
Abstract—Active learning, project-based teaching, and neering, where these two courses were merged into the
student collaboration are current trends in engineering EPOP course trying to create larger subject entities and
education. Incorporating these have also been the goal of the helping students to connect issues together. Earlier results
basic studies development project EPOP started at the Aalto and positive feedback obtained from the application of the
University School of Electrical Engineering in 2011. In the problem-based learning (PBL) approach to the Circuit
project, two obligatory basic courses in circuit analysis and Analysis courses [7] encouraged the use of interactive
electromagnetic field theory have been taught using interac- teaching methods. In the EPOP course, instruction was
tive engagement during the spring of 2012. This paper given to a group of 20 students using interactive and
presents the implementation of the teaching, including motivating multiform teaching in order to engage students
methods and evaluation with several concrete examples. As and to add enthusiasm to learning. Many different and
a result of the novel teaching, motivation and the engage- versatile teaching methods were used including laboratory
ment of students were at a high level during the whole work, simulation exercises, collaborative calculation
course and learning results were better than those of the exercises done in small groups, and larger projects.
students participating the traditional lecture course
The main focus of this paper is the practical implemen-
tation of the EPOP course, because far too often only the
Index Terms—Group work, interactive engagement, motiva-
methods and results are reported without a concrete
tion, peer instruction.
description of the actual course work. However, the lack
of appropriate teaching material is the biggest barrier to
I. INTRODUCTION
apply these methods in practice [6]. Therefore, here the
Engineering education is under pressure to change [e.g., authors aim to give a concrete and detailed description of
1-6]. More effort should be channeled into motivating and the practical implementation of the teaching. Also, teach-
attracting students and to engage them in their studies and ing results are compared to those of the traditional lecture
the learning process. At the same time, the significance of courses. This paper first discusses the goals of the integra-
professional skills and life-long learning are emphasized. tion and the renewal process. Next, the practical imple-
Traditional engineering teaching methods, such as lec- mentation of the teaching is presented with several exam-
tures, exercises and lab work have been criticized because ples of exercises used during the course. Finally, the
they do not prepare engineering students to collaborate evaluation of students and a reflection on the teaching are
and to learn active learning behavior, which emphasize collected in Sections IV and V.
interaction between students. In addition, conceptual
thinking is now considered more important than before. II. OBJECTIVES OF THE TEACHING
Understanding the central ideas of the domain, compre-
Circuit analysis 2 and Dynamic field theory are heavy
hending the relationships between basic concepts, and
basic courses that include a large amount of quite hard
applying central relationships in problem solving should
theoretical content. The Circuit analysis 2 course includes,
be encouraged. Professional life today is increasingly
e.g. time-domain analysis using the Laplace transform;
interdisciplinary and challenges engineers to learn to
driving-point and transfer functions; z, y- and chain
interact with others, to give and accept criticism, and also
parameters for two-ports; and, in addition, also transmis-
to listen to and understand alternative viewpoints. Howev-
sion lines in the time and frequency domain and imped-
er, collaboration is a process, and students need help to
ance matching with the Smith chart. The Dynamic field
practice teamwork skills like conversing and listening,
theory course consists of Maxwell’s equations in dynam-
leadership, conflict management, decision making, confi-
ics, Faraday’s law, time-harmonic fields, eddy currents,
dence building, and finding compromises.
electromagnetic waves in free space and in closed struc-
Circuit analysis 2 and Dynamic field theory are obliga- tures, reflection and transmissions waves, and the basics
tory 5-credit courses for all electrical engineering students of antennas.
in Aalto University School of Electrical Engineering
The goal of EPOP project was to integrate these two
(ELEC). Due to the large number of students, these
courses together and to increase the teaching focus on
courses are normally taught in the traditional form with
hands-on engineering skills: laboratory measurements and
lectures, exercises, homework, and exams. Both courses
using simulation software. Also, teaching methods for
have two hours of lectures and two of exercises per week.
collaborative learning were added to increase the motiva-
The basic studies development project EPOP started in
tion to study. Large basic courses have many known
2011 at the Aalto University School of Electrical Engi-
iJEP ‒ Volume 3, Special Issue 3: "EDUCON2013", June 2013 5
SPECIAL FOCUS PAPER
PROMOTING ACTIVE LEARNING IN ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING BASIC STUDIES
problems which are mainly a consequence of the large age collaboration was the main focus. However, it is
number of students compared to resources available, as important to be aware that collaborative activities are not
described also in [8]. always successful [6, 10]. Comprehension and achieve-
The purpose of combining the courses was to find rele- ments are not guaranteed to improve simply by putting
vant common themes to provide a framework and motiva- students to work near each other. When planning the
tion for teaching and learning. The following six topics teaching, creating the right atmosphere for collaborative
were chosen: teaching is important. A competitive class environment
can be a barrier for collaboration [1]. The prerequisites for
1. Transient phenomena
successful cooperation are a common goal for working
2. Electromagnetic spectrum and sufficiently open problems with multiple approaches
3. Reflection, transmission, transmission lines and or solutions [2].
the TEM wavemode
This project also provided a chance to prepare new la-
4. TE and TM wavemodes and resonators boratory and simulation exercises. In order to encourage
5. Two-port cooperation, it is important to use wider problems with
several possible solutions. Designing workable, educa-
6. Antennas
tional, and motivating new exercises which are strictly
These larger themes aim to engage students in their
connected to the theory and learning outcomes takes a
studies and encourage critical thinking and scientific
surprisingly long time. Sometimes teacher's good ideas
reasoning. In practice, the students solve problems and
work not with students, so possibility to test exercises in
participate in small projects in groups of 2-3 persons.
smaller student group and get feedback of them is worth
Courses with this kind of conceptually complex content using of help.
are not perceived as motivating among students, and as a
Continuous evaluation during a course has been experi-
consequence, there are also many drop-outs. This is partly
enced as motivating, and it supports regular study habits,
due to inadequate prerequisite knowledge. Without strong
issues which are not self-evident to the first year students.
mathematical skills, the workload of the courses increases
Therefore, student evaluation was considered to require a
quite a bit. Even the easiest problems can cause insupera-
rethink. Instead of just an exam at the end of the course,
ble difficulties if students’ mathematical background is
project work, exercises, and participation in the course are
poor and they are unfamiliar with differential equations,
also an essential part of the evaluation. Collaborative
the Laplace transform, and vector algebra. Despite recog-
evaluation of the project work is applied in order to
nizing this problem, the large number of students restricts
motivate cooperation, but exams are evaluated individual-
the amount of individual guidance that can be given
ly in order to prevent free riding.
during the course. In addition, large course content does
Finally, comes the project’s aim to strengthen students’
not enable the use of much time for motivating students.
conceptual thinking. Interaction between procedural and
The renewal of the bachelor study program in Aalto
conceptual knowledge has been studied quite a lot, as
University put pressure but also presented the perfect
reported, e.g., in [11]. Improvement in students’ concep-
opportunity to make larger changes to existing courses.
tual thinking enhances also their skills to solve algebrai-
The EPOP project provided the possibility to renew
cally involved problems. Conceptual knowledge helps
teaching, test ideas beforehand, and to find means, to
students to understand purposes and reasons, which
implement good practices in large courses also. Therefore,
facilitates learning procedural skills. When mathematical
the EPOP project had many goals in addition to the
procedures are no longer unconnected pieces of infor-
normal course objectives.
mation, it frees up the capacity for practicing solving
First, the authors want to increase collaboration with procedures and makes them more automatic and fluent.
and between students. Our studies are accused of being Conceptual knowledge also enables to identify and apply
non-engaging, including too much self-study, of leaving calculation methods for solving problems and detect errors
students alone, and lacking the cooperation. These chal- in calculations.
lenging issues, also discussed in [4, 5] can partly lead to
dropping out from the courses. Additionally, the study III. PRACTICAL IMPLEMENTATION OF TEACHING
progress will be an essential meter of the school’s budget
The biggest challenge in adopting interactive teaching
funding, which increases the school's responsibility of
methods may be the lack of complete teaching material.
students. Getting a social network of friends, working
Most papers on education research concentrate on the
together, and being in tighter contact with the teaching
theory behind methods or they report the research of
staff can improve study progress. These factors are espe-
learning outcomes without giving any concrete examples
cially important with first-year students, who should be
of the exercises, questions, or task formulations. However,
helped to build their peer networks. Adopting group work
designing and implementing exercises which support and
as a part of teaching is one of the means recommended,
encourage interaction is probably the most challenging
because the amount of interaction among students as well
task. For this reason, a concrete and detailed description of
as between students and staff remarkably affects to the
the practical implementation is given here.
learning outcomes also. Almost any form of student
In spring 2012, eighteen students participated in the
involvement benefits learning [9]. Similarly, the group
pilot EPOP course, which consisted of four two-hours
work enhances students’ professional skills, which is a
sessions per week, some of which were reserved for self-
part of the official learning outcomes of the academic
study. Interactive engagement (IE) was applied in the
degree.
teaching. It is a category of teaching methods that acti-
Therefore, the authors wanted to test new teaching
vates students to work together. IE forms an effective
methods and get more familiar with different group
learning environment in science education based on
guidance methods. Finding good practices which encour-
SPECIAL FOCUS PAPER
PROMOTING ACTIVE LEARNING IN ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING BASIC STUDIES
research [12]. Regular and intensive interaction between es, design exercises, and demonstrations are presented,
students plays an important role where feedback and aiming to give clues and inspiration to teachers wanting to
guidance is given not only by the teacher but also by other pop-up their classes.
students. Continuous feedback supports the learning
A. Demonstrations
process. IE can be understood as a way to take advantage
of interaction to enhance student learning. In practice, this The first actual teaching session on the course was held
means working heads-on and usually also hands-on. The in a student laboratory. Before any instruction on the
goal is challenging students to do something that requires theory, the students were given three simple demonstra-
brainwork. tional setups that were related to electromagnetic induc-
tion and Faraday’s law. The demonstrations were not
For all the six topics, students worked in small groups
presented by the teacher, but the students had to discover
of 2-3 persons. For every topic, the groups were formed
the phenomena by themselves in groups of three students.
again using different rules (for example, free choice, a
They were asked to write down observations, prepare a
heterogeneous group based on achievements in former
report on one of the demonstrated phenomena, and explain
studies, or by drawing lots). Versatile teaching methods
the underlying theory. This was a clear way to wake the
like laboratory measurements, simulations, and demos
students up to notice that now the teaching is something
were used. The essential part of the student-centric teach-
out of the usual and their own activity is required. Instead
ing is doing and acting both alone and as a group member,
of the traditional way to give first the general theory, the
where the teachers give guidance and feedback all the
order was now reversed, and, the theory was constructed
time. The peer instruction (PI) method and collaborative
inductively based on experimental observations [13],
problem solving was used constantly during the course.
which is the way many famous theories originally were
Laboratory measurements (as group work) as well as
formulated.
simulation software were used frequently. For circuit
simulation, the AWRDE software was utilized. The The first setup consisted of a strong permanent magnet
electromagnetic simulations were performed using and a self-made copper coil of two LEDs with different
COMSOL Multiphysics. Also, Matlab was used as a colors soldered at its ends in opposite directions [14].
computational tool in some cases. When the magnet is moved in the vicinity of the coil, the
flash of an LED indicates an induced electric current in
The schedule and methods used in EPOP are summa-
the coil and the green or red color of the light its direction.
rized in Table I to give an overview of the teaching
With this setup, how the orientation of the magnet or the
methods and assessment used. Collaborative calculation
direction and speed of its movement affected the ampli-
exercises and PI were used regularly weekly and are,
tude and the direction of the induced current can be
therefore, omitted from the list of teaching methods. Also
studied.
participation in specified parts of teaching (simulations,
demos, labs) was part of the achievement. The second setup consisted of a small permanent mag-
net and a hollow aluminum tube. When the magnet is
TABLE I. dropped into the tube, the induced eddy currents begin to
SUMMARY OF THE EPOP COURSE slow down its fall, being a classic example of magnetic
braking [15].
Duration Teaching
Topic Assessment
(weeks) methods The third setup was a simple electric motor, which was
Demos, built out of a battery, a permanent magnet, a nail and a
Transient 3 Exam problem
simulations, labs copper wire [16]. An electric current in a magnetic field
Exam problem,
EM spectrum 2 Demos experiences a force, which makes the motor rotate. An-
learning diary
other, even simpler variation was also presented, where
Design exercise,
Transmission Simulations, the magnet was attached to the battery and a rigid copper
3.5 two exam
lines labs problems wire rotated around the battery. An Internet search ‘ho-
Simulation mopolar motor’ results in numerous video clips and
TE/TM 1.5 Simulations
exercise instructions for building different variations of this motor.
Simulations, Project work on
Two-port 2
labs two-port B. Peer Instruction with clickers
Design exercise,
Antennas 2 Simulations Instead of conventional lecturing, one of the objectives
exam problem
of the EPOP project was to pilot new alternative ways of
teaching. Theory of dynamic fields was mainly taught in
Special attention was paid to the quality of the exercises
eight contact teaching sessions where the peer instruction
used. The exercises were designed so that they demand
(PI) approach [17, 18] was applied. The PI method was
applying and combining learned topics and did not have
introduced by Eric Mazur in the 1990’s to enhance stu-
only one strictly defined solution so that students are
dents’ conceptual understanding by engaging them in
encouraged to integrate their ideas and collaborate. One
discussion and making them teach each other. In short, the
important feature is that exercises cannot be divided into
procedure is the following. The teacher poses the students
separate parts such that each team member could work on
a multiple-choice question, which all students first answer
his or her own part individually.
individually. Then, the students discuss their answers with
The course also took place in a newly renovated class- each other in small groups trying to convince their part-
room where the students were seated at round tables ners about the correct answer and its reasoning. After the
making them automatically form groups of 3-4 students, discussion, each student answers the same question once
which was an ideal setup when considering collaboration. again. The number of correct answers is expected to
In the following, the teaching methods and some concrete increase after the discussion.
examples of laboratory measurements, simulation exercis-
iJEP ‒ Volume 3, Special Issue 3: "EDUCON2013", June 2013 7
SPECIAL FOCUS PAPER
PROMOTING ACTIVE LEARNING IN ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING BASIC STUDIES
In practice, PI is often implemented by using electrical the amplitude of the flux halves, the induced electromo-
response devices simply referred to just as clickers. PI tive force
could be applied using simpler and cheaper equipment, for A) drops to one quarter
example just by raising hands, but the clickers have clear
benefits [19, 20]. First of all, the answering is anonymous,
C) remains unchanged
making it easier also for the shy and insecure students to
participate. Usually the clickers come also with polling D) doubles
software, which presents a diagram of the distribution of E) quadruples
the students’ answers in real time. This allows, or actually
The correct answer is D. Before the discussion the votes
forces, the teacher to adapt the teaching according to the
were distributed over several choices, but after the discus-
students’ responses. If the question appears very easy, no
sion a clear majority has found the correct alternative (see
discussion is required. If, on the contrary, a wrong answer
Figure 1). This example clearly shows the efficiency of
still dominates after the discussion, a further recap of the
the peer discussion. The number of students who an-
subject is needed leading to agile teaching [19].
swered this question was 16.
As a method, PI seemed very promising, since the goal
was to activate and engage the students in interaction. The
students cannot only passively listen to the teacher, but
they have to think and respond to the questions them-
selves. Communication and discussion between the
students is required. Moreover, the role of conceptual
understanding was to be emphasized. Questions and
conversation help students to identify incorrect under-
standing and gaps in their knowledge.
To ensure that students study the subject before coming
to class and that the entire course material is covered to
the same extent as in the traditional lecture course, pre-
study reading as a homework assignment was given
before every session. Each time they were asked to submit
Figure 1. Answers to question 1 before and the after the peer discus-
their answer to three questions, which were graded. Two sion.
of them were related to the considered topic, such as,
“What are eddy currents and how are they generated?”, Due to the small number of students on the course, it is
“How do you define the polarization of an electromagnet- questionable to draw any statistically valid quantitative
ic wave?” or “What kind of different waveguides exists conclusions of the method. However, considering the 21
and where are they used?” The third question was always questions that followed the full PI procedure the method
the same as the reading incentives presented in [18]: worked as expected in 17 questions, i.e., the correct
“What did you find difficult or confusing about the answer won the polling after the discussion with gains
reading? If nothing was difficult, tell us what you found [12] between 33% - 100%. It must be noted that the small
most interesting.” These pre-study assignments were the number of students causes the large range of variation in
only part in PI method that affected the course assessment. gain, which must be considered only as a suggesting
Participation in the actual PI sessions was voluntary and measure. Nevertheless, the results are consistent with
polling was anonymous. results presented in literature.
Nevertheless, the most crucial challenge was, again, to
C. Simulation exercises
find and develop reasonably good multiple-choice ques-
tions, as they, regardless of the applied technology, In addition of the theory and crucial concepts, numeri-
eventually determine the success and relevance of the cal software was studied during the course in order to
whole method. The questions were adopted from several strengthen professional skills. The AWR Design Envi-
sources and some were modified or written by the teacher ronment (AWRDE) circuit simulator [23] was used to
himself with help from colleagues. The most valuable analyze circuits and electromagnetic fields were simulated
sources for questions and ideas were [17], [22], and the with the COMSOL Multiphysics program. Matlab was
additional online material for [21]. Altogether 33 multiple- also utilized as a tool for numerical calculations.
choice questions were used during the eight teaching Example of a Comsol Multiphysics simulation ex-
sessions. All these sessions did not only consist of PI, as ercise:
for instance, sometimes exercise solving was included.
Use the Comsol Multiphysics software to model the
The minimum number of questions per session was two
soda can which is half filled with liquid. Compute the
and the maximum was seven. In the following, two
lowest resonance frequency as a function of permittivity
example questions formulated by the authors and used on
of the liquid in the following two cases: A) The can is
their course are presented.
upright and B) the can is on it's side
Example question 1:
The students especially enjoyed this simulation project.
According to Faraday’s law, a time-dependent mag- The visualization using numerical software aimed to focus
netic flux density B(t) = B 0 cos(ωt) induces an electro- the learning on understanding the phenomena, making the
motive force in a rectangular conducting loop. Assume electromagnetic fields visible, which otherwise human eye
the flux is perpendicular to the plane of the loop. If the cannot see. Getting to know computational software that is
side length of the loop is doubled, but simultaneously actually used in professional life was found to be very
SPECIAL FOCUS PAPER
PROMOTING ACTIVE LEARNING IN ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING BASIC STUDIES
motivating. The student feedback presented in Section IV surface of the earth radiates omnidirectionally. Hence
supports these remarks. the reception is to be made more effective by building
an array of N elements. The array is deemed to be good
D. Laboratory measurement
enough when the half-power beamwidth of its main lobe
Practical measurements were used to familiarize stu- is at most 22°. However, the situation is complicated an
dents with laboratory equipment and to motivate studying interfering signal of the same frequency arriving from
theory. As an example of a two-port, the third-order the opposite direction, that is from 30° south of west,
Butterworth low-pass filter was studied by measuring, and whose signal strength is to be attenuated at least by
doing calculations, and with simulations. Both y parame- 30 dB compared to the desired signal.
ters and driving-point functions were considered.
Example:
Measure the z parameters of the low-pass filter in
Figure 2 at 300 kHz. R = 50 Ω, C = C = 4.7 nF and L
= 100 µH.
Figure 2. Third-order Butterworth low-pass filter
The students considered that the laboratory measure-
ments as well as simulations connected the theoretical
Figure 3. Antenna project work
calculations to practice.
The team's objective is to design an antenna array ful-
E. Design exercise
filling these conditions and to plot the farfield radiation
A couple of larger design exercises were given to stu-
pattern using Matlab. What is the smallest number of
dents in order to motivate to study theory. In these exer-
elements capable of having a sufficiently narrow beam
cises, applying the taught knowledge was required in
in the correct direction? How, in this case, should the
order to find a good solution to the problem. Knowledge
elements be positioned and by how much are they sepa-
from both field theory and from circuits (transmission line
rated from each other? What phase shift δ would possi-
analogue) must be combined so that a matching for a
bly be required between the elements?
multilayer interface in the following problem is found.
Generally Matlab was considered useful. However, for
Project work 3: Transmission lines, reflection,
some students writing their own Matlab scripts appeared
transmission, and the TEM wave
to be challenging. The students also stated that plotting the
The multilayered boundary surface is to be matched radiation patterns themselves helped them better under-
such that an IR-B plane wave (f = 200 THz) incident stand the principles of antenna radiation
normally from the left does not reflect from it. The
refraction coefficient of the material to be used in the IV. EVALUATION OF STUDENTS
matching layer is n = 2. What should be the thickness
2 Assessment has a significant influence on learning. To
d of the layer? Is this layer sufficient or is another
2 motivate students, working during the course and home-
matching layer necessary? If necessary, what is its
work were an essential part of the assessment, i.e., partici-
thickness d1 if its refraction coefficient n =1.5? The
1 pating in the laboratory measurements and simulation
boundary surface has air (n = 1) on either side and the
0 exercises affected the grade. In the evaluation, the value of
material used is non-magnetic (µ = µ ) and lossless. Use
0 the exams was only 40 % and 60 % of the total points was
the Smith chart (transmission line analogy) to solve the
collected through course work. The limit for an accepted
problem, and check your solution by determining the
achievement was 50 %, i.e. passing the course without the
transmission matrix K and then computing the reflection
exam was possible. The final grade was determined as
coefficient R.
follows:
How much of the incident power is transmitted
• 40 % exam problems (5 exam problems from cer-
through the matched boundary surface?
tain topics during the exam periods)
As another example, the following antenna design exer-
• 15 % participation in classes, laboratory measure-
cise with multiple solutions encourages students to inte-
ments, simulation exercises etc.
grate their ideas and supports collaboration. Matlab was
• 45 % homework and projects returned during the
used for the calculations.
course, examples presented in the previous section.
Project work 6: Antennas.
In order to emphasize the significance of the coopera-
The transmission broadcast at f = 10 MHz and arriv- tion between students, over 30 % of the evaluation was
ing from 30° north of east, as shown in Figure 3, is to be from the collaborative work. Nevertheless, even though
received using vertical monopole antennas. Based on the the collaboration improves motivation and engagement to
image principle, these antennas radiate like dipoles the studies, the knowledge of an individual student is not
when erected from the ground. Thus an antenna on the automatically increased through cooperation. Therefore, to
iJEP ‒ Volume 3, Special Issue 3: "EDUCON2013", June 2013 9
SPECIAL FOCUS PAPER
PROMOTING ACTIVE LEARNING IN ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING BASIC STUDIES
verify the skills of each student separately, assessment was not poor even when the discussion above is taken into
was mainly based on the individual’s achievements. consideration.
A. Learning results
The group of EPOP students was quite a heterogeneous
group, and many of them have delayed their studies. In
spite of this, everybody passed the course and almost all
examination results were better than in the traditional
lecture-based course!
Seven examination tasks common to the normal lecture
courses were given to the EPOP students, four calculation
problems and three concept questions. The first three tasks
were about circuit analysis. Task 1 was a transient analysis
problem, and task 2 was a problem about the behavior of
transmission lines in the time domain. The third task was
concept questions about transmission lines in the frequen-
cy domain. Tasks 4-7 were about dynamic field theory. Figure 5. Scaled average results of the multi-choice questions
(maximum 1)
The fourth task was a concept question about power
transfer and the task 5 was a problem on the time-
The results of the multi-choice questions are presented
harmonic plane wave. The sixth and the seventh tasks
in the Figure 5. The EPOP students got better results from
were concept questions and calculation problem about
every question, and the same questions were easy (number
antennas.
1) or difficult (number 5) for both of the groups. Both
groups made the same mistake in question 5. The main
reason was the misleading formulation of the answer
alternatives.
B. Student feedback
All students were interviewed after the EPOP course.
Some examples of their comments (translated to English)
are presented in the following to indicate how the students
experienced the project. One of the goals of the EPOP
course was to shift the focus from the mathematics to the
understanding of phenomena and conceptual thinking.
This was also recognized by the students, as this comment
implies:
Figure 4. Scaled average results of examination problems (max. 1)
A: Yeah, I mean, it ain't enough you just do the math.
Figure 4 shows the scaled average results of all the You gotta understand what you're calculating.
problems. Because of the scaling, the grades resulting
from these problems were slightly differently weighted,
The group creates positive pressure to be active and
but this presentation is only for comparing the results. The
increases engagement and motivation to learning. The
results showed that the EPOP students obtained better
following comment tells that peer support encourages
results in all tasks except in task 4. The reason for this is
working regularly.
that the topic of task 4 was treated in detail in the tradi-
tional lectures but was not so heavily emphasized in the
EPOP course. A: I dunno, like I have this... in this project I mean,
However, some care has to be taken when interpreting what should I say, like maybe this small peer pressure;
the results. Even though the examination problems and like you don't wanna leave your mates in the lurch and so
concept questions were the same for both the EPOP and on. So I do what I said, like promised to do, 'cos of the
traditional course students, the time used per question was others. Like it's hard getting motivated when you're like
slightly different, and the traditional students had more alone, you know. But when your mates are around you,
questions in a wider range of the subjects. This possibly you know, it's kinda easier to get it. Motivated, I mean. At
favors EPOP students a little. In addition, the EPOP group least I have noticed this here and in my other life.
was small and therefore very significant conclusions
cannot be made about the learning results. When compar- Starting studying already at the beginning of the course
ing the results, it should be also noted that this new and keeping it up regularly during the entire course is very
collaborative teaching given in a small group demands demanding for some students. Students need help and
more resources. In any case, the effect of the extra effort enforcement to do that, and continuous evaluation is a
compared the achieved improvement has to be evaluated good trick to do it.
separately.
The main result of this analysis is that although the IE
A: Well, at least that’s just how it is (--) they just im-
teaching was not so calculation-oriented than the tradi-
prove my working habits. Like when you often still really
tional lecture-based teaching, the success of the EPOP
leave it easily... work at the last minute, so then you think
students in the calculation problems in the examinations
that in this kind of interaction that you're less lazy. And
SPECIAL FOCUS PAPER
PROMOTING ACTIVE LEARNING IN ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING BASIC STUDIES
then, yeah, you notice sort of that you're a tight team like, load in the group. Groups with heterogenic abilities are
then sort of you go to class, you know, just 'cos it's cool often the best for learning.
fun, like. The project showed that continuous evaluation and the
possibility to follow the accumulation of the points
The interaction with staff is very important for students: throughout the course motivated students a lot, i.e., the
evaluation should be something other than just a final
exam. Long-term assessment increases the engagement
A: Here's the teacher who knows your name and I know
with the learning process, and working continuous natu-
his name. And I can like ask, and everything's informal.
rally improves the learning results. Moreover, there is no
reason to be afraid of giving hard problems to students
The simulation software skills have been noticed to be with insufficient prerequisites, if they receive enough
motivating, because they (and measurement skills, as support and guidance is available. Hard work is not a
well) are considered be useful in the professional life to source of suffering, but rather a way to give resources to
come. Also, the visualization in the simulations have been win difficulties, to improve self-confidence, and a starting
regarded as an important feature. point for insights. That the teacher sets high expectations
for their achievements, is an important signal to the
students.
A: It was interesting being able to check out these pro-
Although applying PI with clickers works well, collabo-
grams. I guess that in professional life they use these
ration itself is more important. Instead of individual
simulators in practice. So it's not bad at all to be able to
technical concepts, the main focus should be in activating
get to use them at this stage. I'd never ever used any
thoughts, encouraging conceptual thinking, promoting
simulation software before.
conversation between students, and giving fast feedback.
Clickers work as an effective stimulus for these objec-
A: Yeah, it's the same in Comsol when you see just that, tives.
where the field is the strongest and such.. It's always
Because the manner in which the curriculum is imple-
somehow like when you see the formula, you don't know
mented in practice seems to be much more important than
anything at all [what it's saying].
its actual form or content [16], more attention is focused
on teaching methods and engagement to add interaction
V. DISCUSSION
and collaboration.
The project has several objectives as listed in Section II.
This section gathers the most important observations and VI. CONCLUSION
insights of the teachers. Also, the influence of the project
The EPOP teaching project gave the possibility to test
on teaching now and in the future is assessed.
and evaluate many important aspects in teaching basic
The student interviews indicate that collaboration was courses. Especially, it was noted that both the most
useful for all students; both successful, advanced students talented, successful and advanced students as well as those
as well as worse students needing more help in exercises who just wanted to pass the course benefited from collab-
benefit from interaction. Similar results were reported also orative interactive engagement teaching and found it
in [24]. The best students strengthen their understanding motivating. In addition, the success of the EPOP students
of concepts when explaining issues to other students. in the examinations was at the same level as the students
Although calculating and solving problems together was who participated in the traditional, more calculation-
observed to improve motivation, guidance is necessary so oriented teaching.
that students really cooperate instead of individual think-
ing and copying at the same table. Time is required for ACKNOWLEDGMENT
thinking about the problem before starting the conversa-
The authors would like to thank Tuomas Leinonen and
tion and working together [25]. Special attention should
Ville Kivijärvi for their skilled testing and for developing
be paid to the type of the exercises used and also to the
the project work used in EPOP course. The authors are
atmosphere in class so that they promote collaboration
also grateful to Luis Costa for helping with student com-
instead of individual working and competition. In spite of
ment translations and commenting on the paper.
these challenges, the teachers experienced that during the
course the students turned from individuals to group REFERENCES
members. Instead of protecting their own ideas, students
[1] M. Guzdial, P. Ludovice, M. Realff, T. Morley, K. Carroll, and A.
started to share their thoughts with others and help each
Ladak, “The challenge of collaborative learning in engineering
other to improve their understanding. This success can be and math,” in Proc. IEEE of Frontiers in Education Conference
read also from the many student feedback comments. 2001, Reno, Nevada, oct 2001.
Promoting effective collaboration and creating condi- [2] G. S. Stump, J. C. Hilpert, J. Husman, W.-T. Chung, and W. Kim,
tions that support enhancement of academic skills is not “Collaborative learning in engineering students: Gender and
achievements,” Journal of Engineering Education, vol. 100, no. 3,
straightforward [6]. For example, group division is an
issue to be aware of as suggested by the hints and remarks
in [25, 26]. An easy and safe solution is to draw lots to
[3] M. E. Besterfield-Sacre, C. J. Atman, and L. J. Shuman, "Charac-
assign the groups and to change them often. This way teristics of Freshman Engineering Students: Models for Determin-
nobody needs to suffer from a dysfunctional group for too ing Student Attrition and Success in Engineering," Journal of En-
long. Popular practice that students self-organize into gineering Education, vol. 86, no. 2, pp. 139–149, 1997.
learning and teaching. Sometimes friendly relationships [4] D. W. Knight, L. E. Carlson, and J. F. Sullivan., “Improving
engineering Student Retention through Hands-On, Team Based,
can complicate fair division of responsibility and work
iJEP ‒ Volume 3, Special Issue 3: "EDUCON2013", June 2013 11
SPECIAL FOCUS PAPER
PROMOTING ACTIVE LEARNING IN ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING BASIC STUDIES
First-Year Design Projects”, Proceedings 31st International Con- [19] D. Bruff, Teaching with Classroom Response Systems, San
ference on Research in Engineering Education, ASEE, June 22– Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass, 2009.
24, 2007, Honolulu, HI [20] R. H. Kay and A. LeSage, “Examining the benefits and challenges
[5] C. F. Yokomoto, M. E. Rizkalla, C. L. O’Loughlin, and N. P. of using audience response systems: A review of the literature,”
Lamm, "Developing a Motivational Freshman Course Using the Comput. Educ., vol. 53, pp. 819–827, November 2009.
tion, vol. 88, no. 1, pp. 99–106, 1999. [21] B. M. Notaroš, Electromagnetics, Upper Saddle River, NJ:
[6] K. A. Smith, S. D. Sheppard, D. W. Johnson, and R. T. Johnson, [22] Concept Tests and Course Materials from CU Boulder, available
of Engineering Education”, vol. 94, no. 1, pp, 87–101, 2005. ex.htm
Problem-Based Learning Approach to Teach Elementary Circuit
[24] L. E. Keiner and T. E. Burns, “Interactive engagement: How
Analysis,” IEEE Tran. Edu, vol. 50, no. 1, pp. 41–48, Feb. 2007.
much is enough?” The Physics Teacher, vol. 48, pp. 108–111,
[8] M. Wanous, B. Procter, and K. Murshid, “Assessment for learning
[25] B. Oakley, R. M. Felder, R. Brent, and I. Elhajj, “Turning student
and skills development: the case of large classes,” European Jour-
groups into effective teams,” Journal of Student Centered Learn-
nal of Engineering Education, vol. 34, no. 1, pp. 77–85, 2009.
ing, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 9–34, 2004.
[26] R. M. Felder and R. Brent, “Effective Strategies for Cooperative
[9] A. Astin, What matters in College? Four Critical Years Revisited,
Learning,” Journal of Cooperation and Collaboration in College
San Francisco, Cal, Jossey-Bass, 1993.
Teaching, vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 69–75, 2001.
[10] B. Barron, When Smart Groups Fail, The Journal of the Learning
S15327809JLS1203_1
[11] J. Leppävirta, “Engineering students’ proficiency in electromag- AUTHORS
netic”, Doctoral Dissertation, Aalto University, 2011.
A. Lehtovuori is with Aalto University School of Elec-
[12] R. R. Hake, “Interactive-engagement versus traditional methods:
A sixthousand-student survey of mechanics test data for introduc- trical Engineering, P. O. Box 13000, 00076 Aalto, Finland
tory physics courses,” American Journal of Physics, vol. 66, pp. (e-mail: anu.lehtovuori@aalto.fi).
M. Honkala is with Aalto University School of Electri-
[13] M. J. Prince and R. M. Felder, “Inductive teaching and learning cal Engineering, P. O. Box 13000, 00076 Aalto, Finland
methods: Definitions, comparisons, and research bases,” J. Engr.
(e-mail: mikko.a.honkala@aalto.fi).
10.1002/j.2168-9830.2006.tb00884.x H. Kettunen was with Aalto University School of
[14] A. Sihvola, J. Leppävirta, and H. Kettunen, “Sign, curls, and time Electrical Engineering. He is now with the University of
variations: learning to appreciate faraday’s law,” Advanced Elec- Helsinki, P. O. Box 68, 00014 Helsinki, Finland (e-mail:
10.7716/aem.v1i1.69
J. Leppävirta was with Aalto University School of
[15] C. S. MacLatchy, P. Backman and L. Bogan, “A quantitative
Electrical Engineering. She is now with Outotec, Espoo,
magnetic braking experiment, “ Am. J. Phys., vol. 61, pp. 1096–
[16] C. Chiaverina, “The simplest motor?” Phys. Teach., vol. 42, p.
This article is an extended and modified version of a paper presented at
the EDUCON2013 conference held at Technische Universität Berlin,
[17] E. Mazur, Peer instruction: a user’s manual. New Jersey: Prentice Berlin, Germany from March 13-15, 2013. Received 04 April 2013.
Hall, 1997. Published as resubmitted by the authors 21 May 2013
[18] C. H. Crouch and E. Mazur, “Peer instruction: Ten years of
experience and results,” Am. J. Phys., vol. 69, pp.970–977, Sep-