2v3204040/sc:viXra
Propositional computability logic I
Giorgi Japaridze∗
DepartmentofComputingSciences, VillanovaUniversity,800Lancaster Avenue,Villanova,PA19085,USA.
In thesame sense as classical logic is a formal theory of truth,the recently initiated approach called
computability logicisaformaltheoryofcomputability. Itunderstands(interactive)computationalprob-
lemsasgamesplayedbyamachineagainsttheenvironment,theircomputabilityasexistenceofamachine
that always wins the game, logical operators as operations on computational problems, and validity of
a logical formula as being a scheme of “always computable” problems. Computability logic has been
introducedsemantically,andnowamongitsmaintechnicalgoals istoaxiomatize thesetofvalidformu-
las or various natural fragments of that set. The present contribution signifies a first step towards this
goal. It gives a detailed exposition of a soundness and completeness proof for the rather new type of a
deductivepropositionalsystemCL1,thelogical vocabularyofwhichcontainsoperatorsforthesocalled
parallel and choice operations, and the atoms of which represent elementary problems, i.e. predicates in
thestandard sense.
This article is self-contained as it explains all relevant concepts. While not technically necessary,
however, familiarity with the foundational paper “Introduction to computability logic” [Annals of Pure
and Applied Logic 123 (2003), pp.1-99] would greatly help the reader in understanding the philosophy,
underlying motivations, potential and utility of computability logic — the context that determines the
valueof the present results.
MSC: primary: 03B47; secondary: 03F50; 03B70;68Q10; 68T27;68T30; 91A05
Keywords: Computability logic; Interactive computation; Game semantics; Linear logic; Constructive logics
1 Introduction
The approach initiated recently in [7] called computability logic is a formal theory of computability in the
samesense asclassicallogicis a formaltheory oftruth. It understands(interactive)computational problems
as games played by a machine against the environment, their computability as existence of a machine that
always wins the game, logical operators as operations on computational problems, and validity of a logical
formula as being a scheme of “alwayscomputable” problems. With the meaning of computational resources
being dual/symmetric to that of computational problems (what is a problem for the machine is a resource
for the environment, and vice versa), computability logic is, at the same time, a logic of computational
resources.
While the original motivations behind this approach were theoretical, more than one expert has noted
that computability logic essentially “competes for the same market as linear logic”. Such an assessment
apparently does have a point, and simplifies the job of explaining the significance of the approach: most
of the reasons that attract the attention of computer scientists to linear logic apply to computability logic
as well. The general philosophies of linear and computability logics are indeed similar in their striving to
develop a logic of resources. The ways this philosophy is materialized, however, are rather different. The
scheme that linear logic has been following can be characterized as ‘from syntax to semantics’, whereas the
motto of computability logic is ‘from semantics to syntax’ (by syntax here we mean an axiomatic/deductive
∗ThismaterialisbaseduponworksupportedbytheNationalScienceFoundation underGrantNo. 0208816
constructionofalogic). Thenaturalwaytodevelopanewlogicistofirst(1)presentaphilosophy,motivation
and intuitions, i.e. an informal semantics; then (2) elaborate a formal semantics that adequately captures
thoseintuitions,andonlyafterthat(3)askwhatthe correspondinglogic(syntax)is. Thewayclassicallogic
evolvedandclimaxedinG¨odel’scompletenesstheoremmatchesthis pattern. Andthis is exactlythe scheme
that computability logic follows. On the other hand, looking back at the history of linear or intuitionistic
logics, one can see that they essentially jumped from step (1) directly to step (3). That is, a particular
deductive system was proposed (step (3)) based on some general intuitions (step (1)) without having a
mathematicallystrictandintuitivelyconvincingformalsemantics,1 sothat,intheabsenceofaclearconcept
of truth or validity, the question regarding whether the proposed system was complete and hence “right”,
could not even be meaningfully asked. Only retroactively have attempts been made to find the missing
formalsemantics. Technically it is alwayspossible to come up with some sortof a semantics that matches a
given target syntactic construction, but the whole question is how natural and meaningful such a semantics
is and how adequately it captures the original intuitions and motivations (step (1)) underlying the logic.
Unless the target construction, by good luck, really is “the right logic”, the chances of a decisive success
when following the odd scheme ‘from syntax to semantics’ could be rather slim.
Mentioning intuitionistic logic here is no accident. What has been said about computability vs. linear
logic also extends to computability vs. intuitionistic logic. The former offers a meaningful semantics that
has good claims to adequately capture the main intuitions associated with the latter, in particular, its
constructivistic intuitions and Kolmogorov’s known thesis according to which intuitionistic logic is a logic
of problems. One of the main conjectures stated in [7] is that Heyting’s intuitionistic calculus is sound and
complete with respect to computability-logic semantics. On the other hand, linear logic or even affine logic
(linear logic + weakening) can be shown to be sound but incomplete.
Classicallogic is another naturalfragment of computability logic. This is due to the fact that, as we are
going to see, classicalpredicates are nothing but a special sortof computationalproblems — problems with
zerodegreeof interactivity—and the classicalconceptoftruth is nothing but our conceptofcomputability
restricted to this special sort of problems. Thus, computability logic, rather than defying classical logic,
simplyrefines,generalizesandconservativelyextendsit,whichmakesthe formerareasonableandappealing
alternativetothelatterinvirtuallyeveryaspectofitsapplications. Inparticular,appliedtheories—suchas,
say,Peanoarithmetic—canbebasedoncomputabilitylogicinsteadofclassicallogic,gettingthiswaymuch
moreexpressive,constructiveandcomputationallymeaningfultheoriesthantheirclassical-logic-basedcoun-
terparts. Inasimilarsense,computabilitylogiccanbeconsideredarefinement,generalizationandextension
of intuitionistic and linear (the latter understood in a very broad sense) logics, which makes it a universal
frameworkthatintegrates—onthebasisofonesemantics—the abovethreepopularlogics/traditionswith
their seemingly unrelated or even antagonistic philosophies.
Taking into account that most real computing systems are interactive and that computability logic as a
game logic is in fact a logic of interaction, the latter has potential applications in various areas of computer
science, including theory of interactive computation, protocols, knowledgebase systems, or resource-based
planning systems. [7, 8] contain ample discussions and illustrations.
Among the main technical goals of computability logic — just as of any other semantically introduced
logic—istoaxiomatizethesetofvalidformulasorvariousnaturalfragmentsofit. Thepresentcontribution
signifies a first step towards this goal. It gives a detailed exposition of a soundness and completeness proof
for the rather new/unusual type of a deductive propositional system CL1, the logical vocabulary of which
contains operators for the so called parallel and choice operations, and the atoms of which represent the
above-mentioned “special sort” of problems, i.e. predicates.
It is not an ambition of the present paper to motivationally (re)introduce and (re)justify computability
logic. This job has been done in [7] and, in a more compact and less technical way, in [8]. The author
assumes that most likely the reader is familiar with at least the motivational/philosophical parts of either
article and that this is why he/she has decided to readthe presentpaper. Yet, this paper is mathematically
self-contained in that it defines all relevant concepts.
1Areaderwhosharestheauthor’stastewouldeasilyunderstandwhythephase,coherent,Kripkeorothertechnicalsemantics
donotcount here.
2 Main concepts explained informally
Computability is a property of computational problems, and the first basic issue to be clarified here is what
“computational problem” means. Apparently any answer to this question will match the general scheme
according to which a computational problem is a binary relation R between possible inputs and possible
outputs, with R(e,Γ) meaning that Γ is a “right output” on input e. That is, a computational problem is
the task of generating,for any possible input e, anoutput Γ that satisfies R(e,Γ). Here input is understood
as something that is given from the very beginning and remains fixed throughout the computation, and
obviously there is no loss of generality in assuming that it is always a (possibly infinite) string over some
finite alphabet—or,equivalently,is a tuple ora sequenceofnatural numbers. The questionaboutthe type
of the output, and how exactly it is generated, is trickier. In the traditional Church-Turing approach —
which,incidentally,ofteninsiststhatinputbefiniteandRbefunctional—outputisjusta(finite)string,and
the computing agent has full control over its generation, with the outside world being shut out throughout
the computation. Such an understanding, however,is too narrow as this has been already acknowledgedby
the theoretical computer science community [4, 10, 12] and apparently by Turing [11] himself. Most of the
tasks that real computers perform are interactive, where both the computing system and its environment
may remain active throughout the computation and communicate with each other through what is called
“observable actions” [10, 12]; then, what constitutes the output is not just a simple value generated by the
computing system at the end of the process (which can be thought of as one single observable action by
the system), but rather the entire interaction history, — the potentially long or even infinite sequence of
the observable actions taken by the interacting parties,so that the system now only has partialcontrolover
the observable outcome (output) of the process. The task performed by a server, which essentially is an
infinite dialoguewiththe environment(clients),2 perhapsisagoodexampleofacomputationalproblemnot
captured by the traditional, non-interactive models.
As this was mentioned, technically we understand interactive problems as games, or dialogues, between
two agents/players: machine and environment, symbolically named as ⊤ and ⊥, respectively. Machine, as
its name suggests, is specified as a mechanical device with fully determined, algorithmic behavior, while
the behavior of the environment, that represents a capricious user or the blind forces of nature, is allowed
to be arbitrary. “Observable actions” by these two agents translate into game-theoretic terms as their
moves, “interaction histories” as runs, i.e. sequences of moves, “possible outputs” as legal runs, and “right
outputs” as successful, or winning runs. The machine is considered to solve a given problem/game if it
wins it (ensures that a right/successfuloutput/run is generated) on every possible input no matter how the
environment behaves.
Predicates in their classical sense are thought of as a special sort of computational problems called
elementary. These are games without any moves, i.e. “dialogues” of length 0. The machine automatically
wins or loses an elementary game A on input e depending on whether A(e) is true or false (true = won,
false = lost). Another special sort of computational problems is what we call constant games. These are
gamesthatdonotdependoninput. Obviouslythenclassicalpropositions(0-arypredicates)arenothingbut
constant elementary games, so that there are exactly two constant elementary games: ⊤, won by ⊤, and ⊥,
won by ⊥.
The game of chess is a good intuitive example of a constant non-elementary game, and helpful in visu-
alizing our basic game operations. Let us call this game — as it is seen by the white player — Chess. We
assume that there are no draw outcomes in Chess: say, if the white player does not win within 100 moves,
he is considered the loser.
The operation¬, called negation, switches the rolesin the game: ⊤’s movesand wins become ⊥’s moves
andwins, andvice versa. Thus, ¬Chess is nothing but the gameof chessfromthe point ofview ofthe black
player. Notice that as elementary games have no moves, role switching there simply means switching the
(automatic) winners. In other words, ¬ restricted to elementary games acts exactly as classical negation:
it turns won (true) elementary games (predicates) into lost (false) elementary games (predicates), and vice
versa.
The operations ∧ and ∨ combine games in the following intuitive and technical sense: playing A∧B or
A∨B means playing the two games A and B in parallel. In A∧B the machine is considered the winner if
2With,say,startup-timesettingsandallocatedresourcessuchasdatabases actingintheroleofinput.
it wins in both of the components, while in A∨B winning in just one component is enough. This informal
explanationmightalreadybe sufficientto guessthat¬A∨A is analways-winnable-by-machinecombination
of games, i.e. a valid principle of computability. Say, a simple winning strategy for ¬Chess∨Chess is to
mimic, in Chess, the moves made by the environment in ¬Chess, and vice versa. However, not all classical
principles will be retained. E.g., one can show that ¬A∨(A∧A) is not valid. While proving this might
requiresomethought,atleastitisclearthattheabove‘mimickingstrategy’isnolongerapplicable: thebest
that the machine can do in the three-board game ¬Chess∨(Chess∧Chess) is to pair ¬Chess with one of
the two conjuncts of Chess∧Chess. But in that case it may happen that ¬Chess and the unmatched Chess
are both lost, which would make the whole game also lost.
This reminds us of linear logic which, too, rejects the principle ¬A∨(A∧A) with ∨,∧ understood as
multiplicatives. While the behavior of ¬,∧,∨ is indeed “similar” to that of the corresponding linear-logic
operators,itisdefinitelynotthesameasitvalidatesaproperlybiggerclassofformulas. Oneoftheprinciples
that separate computability logic from linear or even affine logic is Blass’s [3] principle
(cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:1)
We call ∧ and ∨ parallel operations. Technically the unary operation of negation ¬ also counts as a
parallel operation in this paper. Just as this was the case with ¬, when applied to elementary games, ∧
and∨ againgenerateelementarygames and,with the correspondence‘true=won,false=lost’in mind, mean
virtually the same as classicalconjunction and disjunction. This full conservationof classicalmeaning, that
also extends to the quantifier level (see [7, 8]), is exactly what makes classical logic a natural fragment of
computability logic: the former is nothing but the latter restricted to elementary problems.
Thenextimportantgroupofoperationsiswhatwecallchoiceoperations: ⊓and⊔,resembling(butagain,
not “the same as”) the additive conjunction and disjunction of linear logic. A 1⊔A 2 is the game where, at
the beginning, the machine has to make one of the moves ‘1’ or ‘2’, signifying a choice of component. After
such a move i is made, the game continues — and the winner is determined — according to the rules of
the chosen disjunct A . In case the machine fails to make an initial move/choice, it is considered to have
lost the game. A 1⊓A 2 is defined in the same way, with the only difference that here it is ⊥ rather than ⊤
who makes an initial choice and who loses if such a choice is never made. The logical behavior of parallel
operations is dramaticallydifferent fromthat of their choice counterparts. While A∨¬A is valid, A⊔¬A is
not, reminding us ofbothlinear andintuitionistic logics. Backto our chessexample,unlike Chess∨¬Chess,
winning Chess⊔¬Chess isnoteasy: here,atthe verybeginning,the agenthasto choosebetweenChess and
¬Chess, and then win the chosen one-board game.
The problem of deciding a predicate P cannow be expressedas the game P ⊔¬P. Solving/winning this
problem/game means to choose, for any given input e, the ⊔-disjunct that is true at e. Obviously this can
be donebyamachineifandonlyifP isdecidable. Hence,the failureofthe principleP⊔¬P meansnothing
but existence of undecidable problems. Speaking philosophically, ⊔ and ⊓ are constructive versions of OR
and AND.
Parallel implication→isamongthemostmeaningfuloperations. FormallyA→B isdefinedas(¬A)∨B.
Intuitively → is a problem reduction operation: solving A→B means solving B having A as an (external)
computational resource; in other words, it means reducing B to A. To get a feel of this, let us borrow
an example from [7] about reducing the acceptance problem to the halting problem. The former can be
expressedasA⊔¬A, withAbeing the predicate“Turingmachine xacceptsinputy”. Andthe lattercanbe
expressedas H⊔¬H, withH meaning “Turingmachine x halts oninput y”. While the acceptance problem
is notdecidable,itis algorithmicallyreducibleto the halting problem. Inparticular,thereis amachine that
always wins the game
Here is a strategy for such a machine on input (x,y): Wait till ⊥ selects one of the ⊔-disjuncts in the
antecedent (where the roles of the two players are switched and hence ⊔ signifies ⊥’s choice; failure of ⊥
to make such a choice results in ⊤’s winning the game). If ⊥ selects ¬H there, then select ¬A in the
consequent and celebrate victory. Otherwise, if ⊥ chooses H, simulate machine x on input y until it halts.
If the simulation accepts, select A in the consequent, and if the simulation rejects, select ¬A there. It is a
possibility that this simulationgoes on foreverand hence no move will be made in the consequent; however,
insuchascenarioH isfalse,andhaving“lied”inthe antecedentmakes⊥the losernomatterwhathappens
in the consequent.
The above strategy indeed is a reduction: it solves the consequent using an external solution to the
antecedent. [7]arguedthat→adequatelycapturesourstrongestintuitionofreducingoneinteractiveproblem
to another. The weakest intuition of reduction is captured by another computability-logic operator ◦–
(denoted ⇒ in [8]), whose logicalbehavioris conjecturedto be exactly that of the intuitionistic implication.
Restricted to non-interactive problems, ◦– has been shown to be the same as Turing reduction — the sort
of reduction that, unlike →, allows uncontrolled usage (“recycling”) of computational resources.
Severalotherbasic operations havebeen semanticallyintroducedwithin the frameworkofcomputability
logic. They include: the quantifier-level counterparts of our conjunctions and disjunctions, such as ,
with ⊓xA(x) meaning the infinite conjunction A(0) ⊓ A(1) ⊓ A(2) ⊓ ...; the so called blind operations
that generate imperfect-information games; the propositional operations, called recurrence operations, that
generate multiple copies of games and thus resemble the exponential operators of linear logic, etc. Their
definitions can be found in [7, 8]. Our present paper is only focused on the (¬,∧,∨,→,⊓,⊔)-fragment.
3 Interactive computational problems
Todefineourgamesformally,weneedsometechnicaltermsandconventions. Firstofall,letusagreethatby
aninput3 wemeananinfinitesequenceofnaturalnumbers. Inmostcases,ofcourse,wewouldbeinterested
in finite inputs. Everyfinite input canbe understoodas a tuple of naturalnumbers or— for knownreasons
— just as a single natural number. Our stipulation that input should be infinite, the only reason for which
is generality and flexibility, creates no problem: of course every finite input (a 1 ,...,a n ) can be thought of
as the infinite input ha 1 ,...,a n ,0,0,0,...i and vice versa.
We generously define a move as any finite string over the standardkeyboard alphabet. One of the non-
numeric and non-punctuation symbols of the alphabet, denoted ♠, is designated as a special-status move,
intuitively meaning a movethatis alwaysillegalto make. A labeled move is a moveprefixedwith⊤ or⊥,
with its prefix (label) indicating which player has made the move. A run is a (finite or infinite) sequence
of labeled moves, and a position is a finite run.
We will be exclusively using letters Γ,∆ as metavariables for runs, Φ,Ψ,Θ for positions, ℘ for players,
e for inputs, and α,β for moves. Runs will be often delimited with “h” and “i”, with hi thus denoting the
empty run. The meaning of an expressionsuch as hΦ,℘α,Γi must be clear: this is the result of appending
to hΦi h℘αi and then hΓi.
Definition 3.1 A game is a pair A=(LrA,WnA), where:
• LrA is a function that sends every input e to a setLrA ofruns, suchthat the following two conditions
are satisfied:
(a) A run is in LrA iff all of its nonempty finite initial segments are in LrA.
(b) No run containing the (whatever-labeled) move ♠ is in LrA.
Elements of LrA are called legal runs of A on input e, and all other runs called illegal runs on that
input. In particular, if the last move of the shortest illegal-on-e initial segment of Γ is ℘-labeled, then
Γ is said to be a ℘-illegal run of A on e.
• WnA is a function that sends every input e and run Γ to a player WnAhΓi (= ⊤ or ⊥), such that
the following condition is satisfied:
(c) If Γ is a ℘-illegal run of A on e, then WnAhΓi6=℘.
Theintuitive meaningofthe Lr componentofagameisthatittells uswhatrunsarelegal;andthe Wn
component tells us who has won a given run of the game. What runs are legal or who the winner is may
depend on what the input is, so both Lr and Wn take input e as a parameter.
3Whatwecall“input”inthispaperisreferredtoasvaluationin[7].
Understandinganillegalmoveasamoveaddingwhich(withthecorrespondinglabel)tothegivenposition
makes it illegal, condition (a) of the above definition corresponds to the intuition that a run is legal iff no
illegal moves have been made in it, which automatically implies that the empty position hi is a legal run
of every game. Condition (b) formalizes the status of ♠ as an “always-illegal” move. And condition (c)
means that an illegal run is always lost by the player who has made the first illegal move. When modeling
real-life interactive tasks, such as server-client or robot-environment interaction, illegal moves will usually
mean “impossible actions”. However,our approach— for generality,flexibility andconvenience — does not
formally rule out the possibility of making illegal moves.
Γ is said to be a unilegal run (position if finite) of game A iff, for every input e, Γ ∈ LrA. We use
LRA to denote the set of all unilegal runs of A. A unistructural game is a game A whose Lr component
does not depend on input, i.e., for any two inputs e 1 and e 2, LrA e1 =LrA e2 . All examples of games discussed
in this paper, as well as all games expressible in the language of logic CL1 to which the paper is devoted,
are unistructural. For such games, there is no difference between “legal” and “unilegal”, and in appropriate
contexts we will be using these two terms as synonyms.
Throughoutthis paper, unless otherwise specified, by a predicate we meana setP of infinite sequences
of natural numbers, i.e. a collection of inputs, with “P is true at e” or simply “P(e) is true” meaning that
e∈P, and “false” meaning “not true”. Such a P is said to be finitary iff there is an integer k such that P
only depends on the first k terms of the input — that is, for any two inputs e 1 and e 2 that (as sequences of
numbers) agreeon their first k terms, we havee 1 ∈P iff e 2 ∈P. Predicates that are not finitary are saidto
be infinitary. Of course,everyfinitary predicatethat only depends onthe firstk terms of the input canbe
thought of as a k-ary arithmetical relation, and vice versa. Say, the usual arithmetical relation −1 < −2 is
the predicate that is true at e=ha 1 ,a 2 ,a 3 ,...i iff a 1 <a 2.
WesaythatgameAiselementaryiff,foreveryinpute,LrA ={hi}. Thus,elementarygamesaregames
thathaveno legalmoves: the empty runhi is the only legalrunofsuchgames. As this wasnotedinSection
2, we think of predicates as elementary games. In particular,a predicate can be understood as the (unique)
elementary game A such that WnAhi = ⊤ iff the predicate is true at e. And vice versa: every elementary
game A can be understood as the predicate that is true at e iff WnAhi = ⊤. With this correspondence in
mind, we will be using the terms “predicate” and “elementary game” as synonyms.
Nowweformallydefinethemainoperationsongamestogetherwithwhatwecalltrivial games,forwhich
we use the same symbols ⊤ and ⊥ as for the two players.
Definition 3.2 In each of the following clauses, Φ ranges over nonempty positions, and Γ ranges over legal
runs ofthe gamethat isbeing defined. Inview ofDefinition 3.1,it wouldbe sufficientto define Lr andWn
only for this sort of Φ and Γ, respectively, for then Lr and Wn can be uniquely extended to all runs. e
ranges over all inputs. A, A 1 ,...,A n (n ≥ 2) are any games. The notation Φ¯ in clause 1 means the result
of reversing (interchanging ⊤ with ⊥) the labels in all labeled moves of Φ. And the notation Φi. in clauses
2 and 3 means the result of removing from Φ all labeled moves except those of the form ℘i.α (℘∈{⊤,⊥}),
and then deleting the prefix ‘i.’ in the remaining moves, i.e. replacing each such ℘i.α by ℘α. Similarly for
Γ¯, Γi..
1. Negation ¬A:
2. Parallel conjunction A 1∧...∧A
:
• Φ ∈ LrA1∧...∧An iff every move of Φ has the prefix ‘1.’ or ... or ‘n.’ and, for each i ∈ {1,...,n},
Φi. ∈LrAi;
• WnA1∧...∧AnhΓi=⊤ iff, for each i∈{1,...,n}, WnAihΓi.i=⊤.
3. Parallel disjunction A 1∨...∨A
:
• Φ ∈ LrA1∨...∨An iff every move of Φ has the prefix ‘1.’ or ... or ‘n.’ and, for each i ∈ {1,...,n},
Φi. ∈LrAi;
• WnA1∨...∨AnhΓi=⊥ iff, for each i∈{1,...,n}, WnAihΓi.i=⊥.
4. Choice conjunction A 1⊓...⊓A
:
• Φ∈LrA1⊓...⊓An iff Φ=h⊥i,Ψi, where i∈{1,...,n} and Ψ∈LrAi;
• WnA1⊓...⊓AnhΓi=⊥ iff Γ=h⊥i,∆i, where i∈{1,...,n} and WnAih∆i=⊥.
5. Choice disjunction A 1⊔...⊔A
:
• Φ∈LrA1⊔...⊔An iff Φ=h⊤i,Ψi, where i∈{1,...,n} and Ψ∈LrAi;
• WnA1⊔...⊔AnhΓi=⊤ iff Γ=h⊤i,∆i, where i∈{1,...,n} and WnAih∆i=⊤.
6. Negative trivial game ⊥: Φ6∈Lr⊥; Wn⊥hi=⊥.
7. Positive trivial game ⊤: Φ6∈Lr⊤; Wn⊤hi=⊤.
8. Parallel implication, or reduction A 1 →A 2 is defined as (¬A 1)∨A 2.
Noticetheperfectsymmetry/dualitybetween∧and∨, ⊓and⊔, ⊥and⊤: the definitionofeachofthese
operationscanbeobtainedfromthedefinitionofitsdualbyinterchanging⊤with⊥. Weearliercharacterized
legal plays over A 1∧A 2 or A 1∨A 2 as plays “on two boards”. According to the above definition, making a
move α on “board” #i is technically done by prefixing α with ‘i.’.
Exercise 3.3 Verify that the following equalities hold for all games:
1. A = ¬¬A;
Exercise 3.4 LetebeanyinputandAandBanypredicatesthatarebothtrueate. Verifythateitherofthe
runsh⊥1.1,⊤2.1.2i,h⊤2.1.2,⊥1.1iisaunilegaland⊤-won(one)runofthegame(A⊔¬A)→ (¬B⊔B)∧⊤ ,
i.e. — by Exercise3.3— of the game (¬A⊓A)∨ (¬B⊔B)∧⊤ . How aboutthe runs hi, h⊥(cid:0)1.1i, h⊤2.1.2i(cid:1)?
(cid:0) (cid:1)
The following fact, already observed in [7], is rather straightforwardand hardly requires any proof:
a) All elementary games are unistructural.
b) The operations ¬,∧,∨,→,⊓,⊔ preserve the unistructural property of games.
Onemoregameoperationthatwearegoingtolookatisthatofprefixation,whichissomewhatreminiscent
of the modal operator(s)of dynamic logic. This operationtakes two arguments: a game A and a position Φ
that must be a unilegal position of A (otherwise the operation is undefined).
Definition 3.6 Assume Φ is a unilegal position of a game A. The Φ-prefixation of A, denoted hΦiA, is
defined as follows:
• WnhΦiAhΓi=WnAhΦ,Γi.
Intuitively,hΦiAisthegameplayingwhichmeansplayingAstarting(continuing)frompositionΦ. That
is, hΦiA is the game to which A evolves (will be “brought down”) after the moves of Φ have been made.
We have already used this intuition when explaining the meaning of choice operations: we said that after
⊤ makes an initial move i ∈ {1,2}, the game A 1⊔A 2 continues as A i . What this meant was nothing but
that h⊤ii(A 1⊔A 2)=A
. The following Proposition3.7 summarizes this sort of a characterizationof choice
operations and extends it to other operations too. It tells us what the unilegal initial moves (i.e. one-move
unilegal positions) of a given game A are, and to what new game they bring A down.
For a player ℘, we use the notation ℘¯ to mean “the adversary of ℘”, i.e. if ℘ = ⊤, then ℘¯= ⊥, and if
Proposition 3.7 Below A,B,A 1 ,...,A n (n ≥ 2) are any games, α,β any moves, and ℘ either player; in
each subclause (b), the position used in prefixation is a unilegal position of the game to which it is applied.
We have:
2. (a) h℘αi∈LRA1∧...∧An iff α=i.β, where i∈{1,...,n} and h℘βi∈LRAi;
.
3. (a) h℘αi∈LRA1∨...∨An iff α=i.β, where i∈{1,...,n} and h℘βi∈LRAi;
.
i=1 and h℘¯βi∈LRA, or
4. (a) h℘αi∈LRA→B iff α=i.β, where
(cid:26) i=2 and h℘βi∈LRB;
5. (a) h℘αi∈LRA1⊓...⊓An iff ℘=⊥ and α=i∈{1,...,n};
.
6. (a) h℘αi∈LRA1⊔...⊔An iff ℘=⊤ and α=i∈{1,...,n};
.
The above fact is known from [7]. Its proof consists in a routine analysis of the relevant definitions.
The language of logic CL1 does not have any constructs corresponding to prefixation. However, this
operationwillbe heavilyexploitedinoursoundnessandcompletenessproofforCL1. Generally,prefixation
is very handy in visualizing a (unilegal) run of a given game A. In particular, every (sub)position Φ of such
a run can be represented by, or thought of as, the game hΦiA.
Example 3.8 Remember game G=(A⊔¬A)→ (¬B⊔B)∧⊤ from Exercise 3.4. Based on Proposition
3.7, the run h⊤2.1.2,⊥1.1iis a unilegal run of G, a(cid:0)nd to it corres(cid:1)ponds the following sequence of games:
(cid:0) (cid:1)
(ii) (A⊔¬A)→(B∧⊤), i.e. h⊤2.1.2i(i), i.e. h⊤2.1.2iG;
(iii) A→(B∧⊤), i.e. h⊥1.1i(ii), i.e. h⊤2.1.2,⊥1.1iG.
The run hits the predicate A→(B∧⊤) and, depending on whether the latter is true or false at a given
input, the (present run of the) original game G is won or lost by the machine on that input. If the run had
stopped at (ii) or (i), it would be won by ⊤ because of the ⊔-game in the antecedent.
Thereisanextensiveliteratureon“game-style”modelsofcomputationincomplexitytheory: alternating
machines, interactive proof systems, etc. An expert will notice that our approach, which is concerned with
computability rather than complexity — just as the approaches to interaction taken in [4, 12] — is hardly
related to that line of research, and the similarity is more terminological than conceptual. From the other,
‘games in logic’ or ‘game semantics for linear logic’ line, the closest to our present approach to games is
Blass’s [3] model, and less so the more recent studies by Abramsky, Jagadeesan, Hyland, Ong and others.
This is not a survey paper, and we will only occasionally comment on how other approaches compare with
ours. See [7] for more.
One of the main distinguishing features of our games among the other concepts of games studied in the
logical literature (including the one tackled by the author [5] earlier) is the absence of what in [2] is called
procedural rules — rules strictly regulating who and when should move, the most standard procedural rule
being the one accordingto which playersshould take turns in alternating order. In our games, either player
is free to make any move at any time. Such games can be called free, while games where in any given
situation only one of the players is allowed to move called strict. Strict games can be thought of as special
casesofourfreegames,wheretheLr componentissuchthatinanygivenpositionatmostoneoftheplayers
has legal moves (even though this would not formally preclude the “wrong” player from making a move,
at least such a move would not go without penalty). Our games are thus most general of all two-player,
two-outcome games. This makes them the most powerful and flexible modeling tool for interactive tasks.
It also makes our definitions of game operations as simple, compact and natural as they could be, and
allows us to adequately capture certain intended intuitions associated with those operations. Consider the
game Chess∧Chess. Assume an agent plays this two-board game over the Internet against two independent
adversaries that, together, form the (one) environment for the agent. Playing white on both boards, in the
initial position of this game only the agent has legal moves. But once such a move is made, say, on the
left board, the picture changes. Now both the agent and the environment have legal moves: the agent may
make another opening move on the right board, while the environment — in particular, adversary #1 —
may make a reply move on the left board. This is a situation where which player ‘can move’ is no longer
strictly determined, so the next player to move will be the one who can or wants to act sooner. A strict-
game approach would impose some additional conditions uniquely determining the next player to move.
Such conditions would most likely be artificial and not quite adequate, for the situation we are trying to
modelis a concurrentplayontwo boardsagainsttwo independent adversaries,andwe cannotorshouldnot
expect any coordination between their actions. Most of the compound tasks that we perform in everyday
life are free rather than strict, and so are most computer communication/interaction protocols. A strict
understanding of ∧ would essentially mean some sort of an (in a sense interlaced but still) sequential rather
than truly parallel/concurrent combination of tasks, where no steps in one component can be made until
receivingaresponseinthe other component,contrarytothe very(utility-based)idea ofparallel/distributed
computation.
The class of games in the above-defined sense is general enough to model anything that we would call
a (two-agent, two-outcome) interactive problem. However, it is too general. There are games where the
chances of a player to succeed essentially depend on the relative speed at which its adversaryresponds, and
wedonotwanttoconsiderthatsortofgamesmeaningfulcomputationalproblems. Asimpleexamplewould
be the game where all non-♠ moves are legal and that is won by the player who moves first. This is merely
a contest of speed. Below we define a subclass of games called static games. Intuitively, they are games
where speed is irrelevant: in order to succeed, only matters what to do (strategy) rather than how fast to
do (speed). In particular, if a player can succeed when acting fast in such a game, it will remain equally
successful acting the same way but slowly. This releases the player from any pressure for time and allows it
to select its own pace for the game.
We say that run ∆ is a ℘-delay of run Γ iff the following two conditions are satisfied:
• for each player ℘′, the subsequence of ℘′-labeled moves of ∆ is the same as that of Γ, and
• for any n,k ≥ 1, if the nth ℘-labeled move is made later than (is to the right of) the kth ℘¯-labeled
move in Γ, then so is it in ∆.
This means that in ∆ each player has made the same sequence of moves as in Γ, only, in ∆, ℘ might have
been acting with some delay. Then we say that a game A is static iff, whenever WnAhΓi = ℘ and ∆ is a
℘-delay of Γ, we have WnAh∆i=℘.
Remember the game G from Example 3.8, among the unilegal runs of which are Γ=h⊤2.1.2,⊥1.1iand
∆ = h⊥1.1,⊤2.1.2i. In view of the following Proposition 3.9, G is static. ∆ is a ⊤-delay of Γ and hence,
whenever Γ is won by ⊤, so should be ∆. This is indeed so, because the two runs yield the same last game
(iii) on which and only on which the outcome of the play (on a given input) depends.
The first clause of the following fact is a rather straightforward observation, and the second clause —
also extended to other computability-logic operations — has been proven in [7], Theorem 14.1:
Proposition 3.9
a) All elementary games are static.
b) The operations ¬,∧,∨,→,⊓,⊔ preserve the static property of games.
One of the main theses on which computability logic relies philosophically is that the concept of static
gamesisanadequateformalcounterpartofourintuitivenotionof“pure”,speed-independentcomputational
problems. See Section 4 of [7] for a detailed discussion and examples in support of this thesis.
Now we are ready to formally clarify what we mean by computational problems: we use the term
“(interactive) computational problem” (or simply “problem”) as a synonym of “static game”.
4 Interactive computability
Now that we know what computational problems are, it is time to clarify what their computability means.
The definitions given in this section are semiformal. All of the omitted technical details are however rather
standardor irrelevantand canbe easily restoredby anyonefamiliar with Turing machines. If necessary,the
corresponding detailed definitions can be found in Part II of [7].
As we remember, the central point of our philosophy is to require that agent ⊤ be implementable as a
computer program, with effective and fully determined behavior. On the other hand, the behavior of agent
⊥canbearbitrary. Thisintuitioniscapturedbythemodelofinteractivecomputationwhere⊤isformalized
as what we call HPM (“Hard-Play Machine”).
BeforewedescribetheHPMmodel,letusrevisitordinaryTuringmachines(TM).Oneofmanyequivalent
versions of the TM model is the one that has three separate tapes: the read-only input tape, the read/write
worktape,andtheoutputtape. Amongthereasonsforwantingtohavethethreetapesseparatemightbethat
this model easily accommodates the possibility of infinite inputs and outputs. In particular, we now think
of both input and output as (possibly infinite) sequences of finite strings rather than as individual (possibly
infinite) strings. When such sequences are represented (“spelled”) on tapes, some specially designated
symbolsare usedas‘beginning of string’markersto separatestrings. Specifically, we assumethat symbol⊤
is the beginning-of-string marker for the output tape. One may expect that the output tape be write-only.
However,anequivalentversionof ordinaryTMmodel is the one where the output tape is instead read-only.
Rather than directly printing a string ⊤α symbol-by-symbol on the output tape, the machine constructs α
atthebeginningofitsworktape,delimitsitsendbypositioningtheread-writeheadthere,andentersoneof
thespeciallydesignatedstatescalledoutputstates.4 Thisactionresultsin⊤αbeingautomaticallyappended
to the current contents of the output tape (which technically does not count as a write as there is no write
head involved), and is thought of by us as making move α by the machine. Thus, the version of “ordinary”
TMthat we havejust describedis a model ofnon-interactivecomputation, with the machinebeing the only
agent who can make moves and, this way, having full control over what output is being generated.
An HPM H is nothing but a TM in the above-described sense with one “little” difference: now it is
not only the machine that can make moves, but also the environment. That is, at any time, an arbitrary
new string ⊥β — with β thought of as environment’s move — can be nondeterministically appended to the
contents of the output tape. At any given time the output tape thus spells the “current position” of the
game, which is fully visible to the machine as it has read access to that tape. As always, the computation
proceeds in discrete steps, also called clock cycles. From the above description it is clear that H can make
at most one move per clock cycle. On the other hand, there are no limitations to the relative speed of the
environment,sothe latter canmakeany finite number of movesper cycle. This correspondsto the intuition
that not only the strategy, but also the speed of the environment can be arbitrary. For technical clarity,
we assume that the output tape remains stable during a clock cycle and is updated only on a transition
from one cycle to another, and that if, during a given cycle, H makes a move α and the environment makes
moves β 1 ,...,β n , then the position spelled on the output tape throughout the next cycle will be the result
of appending h⊥β 1 ,...,⊥β n ,⊤αi to the current position.
A configuration of H is defined in the standard way: this is a full description of the (“current”) state
of the machine, the locations of its three scanning heads, and the contents of its tapes, with the exception
that, in orderto makefinite descriptionsof configurationspossible, wedo not formallyinclude a description
of the unchanging (and possibly essentially infinite) contents of the input tape as a part of configuration.
The initial configuration is the configuration where H is in its initial state and the work and output tapes
are empty. A configuration C′ is said to be an e-successor of configuration C if, when input e is spelled
on the input tape, C′ can legally follow C in the standard sense, based on the transition function of the
machine and accounting for the possibility of the above-described nondeterministic updates of the contents
of the output tape. An e-computation branch of H is a sequence of configurations of H where the first
4Thetermsusedin[7,8]forwhatwenowcall“outputstate”,“inputtape”and“outputtape”are“movestate”,“valuation
tape”and“runtape”, respectively.
configurationis the initial configuration and every other configuration is an e-successorof the previous one.
Thus, the set of all e-computation branches captures all possible scenarios (on input e) corresponding to
different behaviors by ⊥.
Each e-computation branch B of H incrementally spells — in the obvious sense — some run Γ on the
output tape, which we call the run spelled by B. Then, for a game A, we write H |= A and say that
H wins A on e iff, whenever Γ is the run spelled by some e-computation branch of H, WnAhΓi =⊤. We
write H |= A and say that H wins (computes, solves) A iff H |= A for every input e. Finally, we write
|=A and say that A is computable iff there is an HPM H with H|=A.
The HPMmodelof interactivecomputationseemingly stronglyfavorsthe environmentinthat the latter
maybearbitrarilyfasterthanthemachine. Whathappensifwestartlimitingthespeedoftheenvironment?
The answer is: nothing as far as computational problems, i.e. static games, are concerned. The model of
computationthatwecallEPM(“Easy-PlayMachine”)takestheideaiflimitingthespeedoftheenvironment
to the extreme by giving the machine full control over when the environment can move and when it should
wait; yet, as it turns out, the EPM model yields the same class of computable problems as the HPM model
does. EPMs will be discussed later in Section 6.
5 Logic CL1
The language of logic CL1 is obtained by augmenting the language of classical propositional logic with
two additional operators ⊓ and ⊔. This language has two logical atoms: ⊤ and ⊥, and infinitely many
non-logical atoms called “propositional letters” in classical logic. Throughout the rest of this paper by a
formula we mean a formula of this language. The definition is standard: the set of formulas is the smallest
setofexpressionssuchthatatomsareformulasand,aslongasF 1 ,...,F n (n≥2)areformulas,soare¬(F 1),
). Parentheseswilloften
be omitted in accordance with standard conventions.
An interpretation is a function ∗ that sends each non-logical atom p to an elementary game p∗. This
mapping extends to all formulas by commuting with each operator. That is: ⊥∗ = ⊥; ⊤∗ = ⊤; (¬F)∗ =
¬(F∗); (F 1 → F 2)∗ = F 1 ∗ → F 2 ∗; (F 1∧...∧F n )∗ = F 1 ∗∧...∧F n ∗; and similarly for ∨,⊓,⊔. For a formula
F, we will say “∗ interprets F as A” to mean that F∗ =A.
Proposition 5.1 For any formula F and interpretation ∗, the game F∗ is unistructural and static.
Proof. Immediately fromPropositions3.5,3.9andthe factthat, by definition, F∗ isa ¬,∧,∨,→,⊓,⊔-
combination of elementary games. ✷
Definition 5.2 A formula F is said to be valid iff, for every interpretation ∗, |=F∗.
To axiomatize the set of valid formulas, we need some technical preliminaries. Understanding F → G
as an abbreviation for ¬F ∨G, a positive (resp. negative) occurrence of a subformula is one that is in
the scope of an even (resp. odd) number of occurrences of ¬. A surface occurrence of a subformula is an
occurrencethat is not in the scope of ⊓ or ⊔. A formulanot containing ⊓,⊔ is saidto be elementary. The
elementarization of formula F is the result of replacing in F all subformulas of the form G 1⊔...⊔G
⊥andallsubformulasofthe formG 1⊓...⊓G
by ⊤. A formulais saidto be stableiff itselementarization
is classically valid. Otherwise it is instable.
Definition 5.3 Logic CL1 is given by the following two rules:
(a) H~ ⊢F, where F is stable and H~ is the smallest set of formulas such that, whenever F has a positive
(resp. negative) surface occurrence of a subformula G 1 ⊓...⊓G n (resp. G 1 ⊔...⊔G n ), for each
i∈{1,...,n}, H~ contains the result of replacing this occurrence in F by G .
(b) H ⊢ F, where H is the result of replacing in F a negative (resp. positive) surface occurrence of a
subformula G 1⊓...⊓G
(resp. G 1⊔...⊔G
for some i∈{1,...,n}.
Axiomsare notexplicitly stated, butnote that the set H~ ofpremisesofRule (a) canbe empty, inwhich
casetheconclusionF ofthatruleactsasanaxiom. Eventhoughthismaynotbeimmediatelyobvious,CL1
essentially is a (refined sort of) Gentzen-style system. Consider,for example, Rule (b). It is very similar to
the ⊔-introduction rule of linear logic. The only difference is that while linear or affine logics require that
G be a ∨-disjunct of the premise, CL1 (explicitly) allows it to be any positive surface occurrence. This is
called deep inference in the calculus of structures.
In Examples 5.4, 5.5 and Exercise 5.6 below, p,q,r,s are pairwise distinct non-logicalatoms.
Example 5.4 Let us see that
(cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:1)
(cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:1)
(cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:1)
(cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:1)
Example 5.5 On the other hand, we have
(cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:1)
Indeed, the above formula is instable, so it could only be derived by Rule (b). The premise of this rule
should be either (p→q)→ p→(q∧r) or (p →r)→ p→(q∧r) . In either case we deal with a formula
that can be derived neither(cid:0)by Rule (a(cid:1)) (because the(cid:0)formula is i(cid:1)nstable) nor by Rule (b) (because the
formula does not contain ⊓,⊔).
Exercise 5.6 Verify that:
(cid:0) (cid:1)
(cid:0) (cid:1)
(cid:16)(cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:1)(cid:17) (cid:0) (cid:1)
As we probablyjust hada chance to notice, if F is an elementaryformula,then the only wayto proveF
in CL1 is to derive it by Rule (a) fromthe empty set of premises. In particular, this rule will be applicable
when F is stable, which for an elementary F means nothing but that F is a classical tautology. And vice
versa: everyclassicallyvalidformulaisanelementaryformuladerivableinCL1byRule(a)fromtheempty
set of premises. Thus we have:
Proposition 5.7 The ⊓,⊔-free fragment of CL1 is exactly classical propositional logic.
This is whatwe shouldhave expected for,as notedin Section 2, when restrictedto elementary problems
—andelementaryformulasareexactlythe onesthat representsuchproblems— the meaningsof¬,∧,∨,→
are classical. It is also rather obvious that CL1 is decidable in at most polynomial space.
Belowcomesourmaintheorem,accordingtowhichCL1 preciselydescribesthesetofallvalidprinciples
of computability expressible in its language. This theorem is just a combination of Lemmas 7.1 and 8.2
proven later.
Theorem 5.8 CL1⊢F iff F is valid (any formula F). Furthermore:
a) There is an effective procedure that takes a CL1-proof of an arbitrary formula F and constructs an
HPM H such that, for every interpretation ∗, H computes F∗.
b) If CL16⊢F, then F∗ is not computable for some interpretation ∗ that interprets all atoms as finitary
predicates.
CL1 is a fragment of the logic FD introduced in [7]. The language of FD is more expressive in that
it has (two groups of) quantifiers as well as an additional sort of atoms called general atoms. Unlike our
present type of atoms (called elementary atoms in [7]) that can only be interpreted as elementary games,
general non-logical atoms can be interpreted as any computational problems. CL1 is obtained from FD
by mechanically deleting every rule but the propositional versions of the A and B groups of rules. Those
deleted rules introduce general atoms or quantifiers that are alien to the language we now consider. Once a
general atom or a quantifier is introduced, it never disappears in any later formulas of an FD-proof. Based
onthis observation,a formulain ourpresentsense is provableinFD iffit is provableinCL1, sothat FDis
aconservativeextensionofCL1. Itwasconjecturedin[7](Conjecture 25.4)thatFDis soundandcomplete
with respectto computability semantics. Our Theorem5.8 signifiesa positive verificationofthatconjecture
restricted to the language of CL1. There were two other major conjectures stated in [7]: Conjecture 24.4
and Conjecture 26.2. A positive verification of those two conjectures restricted to the language of CL1 is
also among the immediate consequences of our Theorem 5.8.
When restricted to the language of CL1, Conjecture 24.4 of [7] sounds as follows:
If a formula F is not valid, then F∗ is not computable for some interpretation ∗ that interprets
all atoms as finitary predicates.5
The significance of this conjecture is related to the fact that showing non-validity of a given formula by
appealingtointerpretationsthatinterpretatomsasinfinitarypredicatesgenerallycoulddramaticallyweaken
suchanon-validity statement. E.g.,ifthe predicate p∗ is infinitary,then p∗⊔¬p∗ may be incomputable just
due to the fact that the machine can never finish reading all the relevant information from the input tape
necessary to determine whether p∗ is true or false. On the other hand, once we restrict our considerations
only to interpretations that interpret atoms as finitary predicates, the non-validity statement for p⊔¬p
is indeed highly informative: the failure to solve p∗ ⊔¬p∗ in such a case signifies fundamental limitations
of algorithmic methods rather than just impossibility to obtain all the necessary external information. A
positive solution to Conjecture 24.4 of [7] restricted to the language of CL1 is implied by clause (b) of our
Theorem 5.8 in conjunction with its soundness statement for CL1.
AsforConjecture26.2,itwasaboutequivalencebetweenvalidityandanotherversionofthisnotioncalled
uniform validity. Ifwedisabbreviate“|=F∗”as“∃H H|=F∗ ”,validityofF inthesenseofDefinition5.2
can be written as “∀ ∗ ∃ H H|=F∗ ”. Reversing th(cid:0)e order of(cid:1)quantification yields the following stronger
property of uniform validity:(cid:0) (cid:1)
Definition 5.9 A formula F is said to be uniformly valid iff there is an HPM H such that, for every
interpretation ∗, H|=F∗.
Intuitively, uniform validity means existence of an interpretation-independent solution: since no infor-
mation regarding interpretation ∗ comes as a part of input, the above HPM H with ∀∗(H |= F∗) will have
to play in some standard, uniform way that would be successful for any possible ∗.
The term “uniform” is borrowed from [1] as this understanding of validity in its spirit is close to that
in Abramsky and Jagadeesan’s tradition. The concepts of validity in Lorenzen’s [9] tradition, or in the
sense of Japaridze [6], also belong to this category. Common to those uniform-validity-style notions is that
validity there is not defined as being “always true” (true=winnable) as this is the case with the classical
understanding of this concept; in those approaches the concept of truth is often simply absent, and validity
istreatedasabasicconceptinits ownrights. Asfor(simply)validity, itisclosertovalidities inthe senseof
Blass [3] or Japaridze [5], and presents a direct generalizationof the corresponding classical concept in that
it indeed means being “true” (computable) in every particular setting.
Which of our two versions of validity is more interesting depends on the motivational standpoint. It is
validity rather than uniform validity that tells us what can be computed in principle. So, a computability-
theoreticianwouldfocusonvalidity. Mathematically,non-validityisgenerallybyanorderofmagnitudemore
informative — and correspondingly harder to prove — than non-uniform-validity. Say, the non-validity of
p⊔¬p,withtheabove-quotedandnowsuccessfullyverifiedConjecture24.4of[7]inmind,meansexistenceof
5The original formulation of Conjecture 24.4 imposes additional restrictions on interpretations. But those restrictions are
automaticallysatisfiedaslongaswedealwiththelanguageofCL1.
solvable-in-principleyetalgorithmicallyunsolvableproblems—the factthatbecame knownto the mankind
only as late as in the 20th century. As for the non-uniform-validity of p⊔¬p, it is trivial: of course there is
no way to choose one of the two disjuncts that would be true for all possible values of p because — as the
stone age intellectuals were probably aware — some p are true and some are false.
On the other hand, it is uniform validity rather than validity that is of interest in more applied areas of
computersciencesuchasknowledgebasesystemsorresourcebaseandplanningsystems(see Section26of[7]
or Section 8 of [8]). In such applications we want a logic on which a universal problem-solving machine can
bebased. Suchamachinewouldorshouldbeabletosolveproblemsrepresentedbylogicalformulaswithout
any specific knowledge of the meaning of their atoms, i.e. without knowledge of the actual interpretation.
Remembering what was said about the intuitive meaning of uniform validity, this concept is exactly what
fits the bill.
Anyway, the good news, signifying a successful verification of Conjecture 26.2 of [7] restricted to the
language of CL1, is that the two concepts of validity yield the same logic. If F is uniformly valid, then it
is automatically also valid, as uniform validity is stronger than validity. Suppose now F is valid. Then, by
the completeness part of Theorem 5.8, CL1 ⊢ F. But then, by the ‘Furthermore’ clause (a) of the same
theorem, F is uniformly valid. Thus, where — in accordance to our present convention— “formula” means
formula of the language of CL1, we have:
Theorem 5.10 A formula is valid if and only if it is uniformly valid.
6 Preliminaries for the soundness/completeness proof
Therestofthis paperis almostexclusivelydevotedtoaproofofourmainTheorem5.8. Thepresentsection
contains some essential preliminaries. We start with a semiformal introduction of the alternative model of
interactive computation called EPM. If necessary, detailed formal definitions can be found in [7].
AnEPMisamachinedefinedinthesamewayasHPM,withtheonlydifferencethatnowtheenvironment
can(butisnotobligatedto)makeamoveonlywhenthemachineexplicitlyallowsittodoso,theeventthat
wecallgranting permission. Technicallypermissionisgrantedbyenteringoneofthe speciallydesignated
states called permission states. The only requirement that the machine is expected to satisfy is that it
should grant permission every once in a while; how long that “while” lasts, however, is totally up to the
machine. This amounts to having full control over the speed of the adversary.
The above intuition is formalized as follows. After correspondingly redefining the ‘e-successor’ relation
— in particular, accounting for the condition that now a (one single) ⊥-labeled move may be appended
to the contents of the output tape only when the machine is in a permission state — the concepts of e-
computation branch of an EPM, the run spelled by such a branch, etc. are defined in exactly the same
way as for HPM. We say that a computation branchB of an EPMis fair iff permission is grantedinfinitely
many times in B. A fair EPM is an EPM whose every e-computation branch (for every input e) is fair.
For a fair EPM E and input e — just as in the case of HPMs — we write E |= A (“E wins A on e”) iff,
whenever Γ is the run spelled by some e-computation branch of E, WnAhΓi=⊤; and E |=A (“E wins A”,
or “E computes A”, or “E solves A”) means that E |= A for every input e.
The following fact, proven in [7] (Theorem 17.2), establishes equivalence between the two models of
computation for static games:
Proposition 6.1 Every fair EPM E can be effectively converted6 into an HPM H such that H wins every
static game that E does. And vice versa: every HPM H can be effectively converted into a fair EPM E such
that E wins every static game that H does.
The philosophical significance of this theorem is that it reinforces the thesis according to which static
games are games that allow us to make full abstraction from speed. Its technical importance is related
to the fact that the EPM-model is much more convenient when it comes to describing interactive algo-
rithms/strategies, as we will have a chance to see later. The two models also act as natural complements
6Meaningthatthereisaneffectivefunctionofthetype{EPMs}→{HPMs}thatsuccessfullydoes theconversionaslongas
theEPMtowhichitisappliedisfair.
to each other: we can meaningfully talk about the (uniquely determined) play between a given HPM and a
givenEPM,whilethisisimpossibleifbothplayersareHPMsorbothareEPMs. Thisfactwillbeessentially
exploitedinourcompletenessproofforCL1,wherewedescribeenvironment’sstrategyasanEPMandshow
that no HPM can win the given game against such an EPM.
RememberthenotationΓ¯ usedinDefinition3.2whichmeansthe resultofreversingalllabelsinΓ. Fora
runΓandacomputationbranchB ofanHPMorEPM,wesaythatB cospellsΓiffB spellsΓ¯. Intuitively,
whenmachineMplaysas⊥ (ratherthan⊤),thenthe runthatisgeneratedbyagivencomputationbranch
B of M is the run cospelled (rather than spelled) by B, for the moves that M makes get the label ⊥, and
the moves that its adversary makes get the label ⊤.
Lemma 6.2 Assume E is a fair EPM, H any HPM, and e any input. There are a uniquely defined e-
computation branch B of E and a uniquely defined e-computation branch B of H — which we respectively
call the (E,e,H)-branch and the (H,e,E)-branch — such that the run spelled by B , called the H vs.
E run on e, is the run cospelled by B .
When H,E,e are as above, Γ is the H vs. E run on e and A is a game with WnAhΓi = ⊤ (resp.
WnAhΓi=⊥), we say that H wins (resp. loses) A against E on e.
A strict proof of the above lemma can be found in [7] (Lemma 20.4), and we will not reproduce the
formal proof here. Instead, the following intuitive explanation would suffice:
Proof idea. Assume H, E, e are as in Lemma 6.2. The play that we are going to describe is the unique
play generated when the two machines play against each other on input e, with H in the role of ⊤ and E in
the role of ⊥. We can visualize this play as follows. Most of the time during the play H remains inactive
(sleeping); it is woken up only when E enters a permission state, on which event H makes a (one single)
transition to its next computation step — that may or may not result in making a move — and goes back
to sleep that will continue until E enters a permission state again, and so on. From E’s perspective, H acts
as a patient adversary who makes one or zero move only when granted permission, just as the EPM-model
assumes. And from H’s perspective, who, like a person under globalanesthesia,has no sense of time during
its sleep and hence can think that the wake-up events that it calls the beginning of a clock cycle happen at
a constant rate, E acts as an adversary who can make any finite number of moves during a clock cycle (i.e.
whileHwassleeping),justastheHPM-modelassumes. Thisscenariouniquelydeterminesane-computation
branch B of E that we call the (E,e,H)-branch, and an e-computation branch B of H that we call the
(H,e,E)-branch. What we callthe H vs. E run on e is the run generatedin this play. In particular — since
we let H play in the role of ⊤ — this is the run spelled by B . E, who plays in the role of ⊥, sees the same
run, only it sees the labels of that run in negative colors. That is, B cospells rather than spells that run.
This is exactly what Lemma 6.2 asserts.
Now back to the language of CL1. By Proposition 5.1, every game F∗ expressible in it is unistructural.
This allows us to relax our terminology and simply say “legal run of F∗” without specifying input, which
should be understood as saying “unilegal run of F∗”. Similarly for “℘-illegal”, where the input parameter
can be safely omitted. Another helpful observation to make here is that the set
of (uni)legal runs of
F∗ is fully determined by F and in no way does it depend on interpretation ∗.
We will be using the notation
for the elementarization of formula L. The following lemma can be verified by a straightforward induction
on the complexity of L:
Lemma 6.3 WnL∗ hi =⊤ iff the predicate kLk∗ is true at e (any formula L, interpretation ∗ and input
e).
Herewedefineafunctionthat,foraformulaF andasurfaceoccurrenceO inF,returnsastringαcalled
the F-specification of O, which is said to F-specify O. In particular:
• The occurrence of F in itself is F-specified by the empty string.
• IfF =¬G,thenanoccurrencethathappenstobeinGisF-specifiedbythesamestringthatG-specifies
that occurrence.
• If F is G 1 ∧...∧G n , G 1 ∨...∨G n or G 1 → G 2, then an occurrence that happens to be in G i is
F-specified by i.α, where α is the G -specification of that occurrence.
Example: The secondoccurrence of P ⊔Q in F =R∨(P ⊔Q)∨¬(P →(R∧(P ⊔Q))) is F-specifiedby
the string ‘3.2.2.’.
Based on Proposition 3.7, the following lemma can be easily verified by induction on the complexity of
F, the routine details of which we omit:
Lemma 6.4 For every formula F, move α and interpretation ∗ we have:
iffα=βi,whereβ istheF-specificationofapositive(resp. negative)surfaceoccurrence
of a subformula G 1⊓...⊓G
(resp. G 1⊔...⊔G
) and i ∈ {1,...,n}. In this case h⊥αiF∗ = H∗, where
H is the result of substituting in F the above occurrence by G .
iffα=βi,whereβ istheF-specificationofanegative(resp. positive)surfaceoccurrence
of a subformula G 1⊓...⊓G
(resp. G 1⊔...⊔G
) and i ∈ {1,...,n}. In this case h⊤αiF∗ = H∗, where
H is the result of substituting in F the above occurrence by G .
7 Soundness of CL1
Lemma 7.1 If CL1⊢F, then F is valid (any formula F).
Moreover, there is an effectiveprocedure that takes aCL1-proof of an arbitrary formula F and constructs
an HPM H such that, for every interpretation ∗, H|=F∗.
Proof. In view of Propositions 5.1 and 6.1, the present lemma — in particular, its ‘Moreover’ clause
— is an immediate corollary of the following Lemma 7.2. ✷
Lemma 7.2 ThereisaneffectiveprocedurethattakesaCL1-proofofanarbitraryformulaF andconstructs
a fair EPM E such that, for every interpretation ∗, E |=F∗.
Proof idea. Every CL1-proof of F, in fact, very directly encodes an input- and interpretation-
independent winning EPM-strategyfor F∗. Such a strategy/EPMacts depending onwhether F is obtained
by Rule (a) or Rule (b) from its premise(s).
IfF isderivedbyRule(b)frompremiseH,then,inviewofLemma6.4b,thereisa(legal)moveαbythe
machinethatbringsthegamedowntoH,inthesensethath⊤αiF∗ =H∗. E.g.,ifF =(G 1⊔G 2)∧(G 3⊓G 4)
and H =G 2∧(G 3⊓G 4), then ‘1.2’is such a move. So, in orderto win F∗, it is sufficient to make the move
α and then win H∗. This is exactly what our EPM does: since the proof of H is shorter than that of F, by
the induction hypothesis, the EPM knows how to win H∗; so, it makes the move α and then switches to its
winning strategy for H∗.
And if F is derived by Rule (a), then the machine chooses not to make any moves but rather to let the
environmentmove. Iftheenvironmentmakesamoveα—whichmustbelegalforotherwise⊥isimmediately
disqualified — then, for similar reasons as in the previous case, the resulting game h⊥αiF∗ will be nothing
but H∗ for some premise H ofF. So,in this casethe machine switches to its successful strategyfor H∗ and
eventually wins. And if the environment never makes a move, then the machine automatically wins. This
is so because F, as a conclusion of Rule (a), is stable, and the empty run of a game represented by a stable
formula, in view of Lemma 6.3, is always won by ⊤.
Proof. Assume CL1 ⊢ F. Let us fix a particular CL1-proof of F. We will be referring to at as “the
proof”, and referring to formulas occurring in the proof as “proof formulas”. We assume that the proof is a
sequence(ratherthantree)offormulaswithoutrepetitionsorotherredundancies,whereeachformulacomes
with a fixed justification — an indication of from what premises and by which rule it was derived. Based
on the proof, we (effectively) construct the EPM E whose work is described as follows. At the beginning,
this machine creates a record E to hold proof formulas, initializes it to F, and then follows the following
interactive algorithm:
Procedure LOOP: As long as E is a proof formula, act depending on which of the two rules was used in
the proof to derive E from its premises:
Case of Rule (a): Keep granting permission until the adversary makes a move α, then act depending
on which of the following two subcases holds:
Subcase (i): α= βi, where β E-specifies a positive (resp. negative) surface occurrence of a subformula
G 1 ⊓...⊓G n (resp. G 1 ⊔...⊔G n ) and i ∈ {1,...,n}. Let H be the result of substituting the above
occurrence by G in E. Then update (the content of) E to H, and repeat LOOP.
Subcase (ii): α does not satisfy the condition of Subcase (i). Then go to an infinite loop in a permission
state.
Case of Rule (b): Let H be the premise of E in the proof. H is the result of substituting, in E, a
certain negative (resp. positive) surface occurrence of a subformula G 1⊓...⊓G
(resp. G 1⊔...⊔G
G forsomei∈{1,...,n}. Letαbe the E-specificationofthatoccurrence. Thenmakethe moveαi,update
(the content of) E to H, and repeat LOOP.
Note that the above description has no mention of input or interpretation, so E and its behavior remain
the same no matter what those two parameters are.
Fix an arbitrary interpretation ∗, an arbitrary input e and an arbitrary e-computation branch B of E.
Let Γ be the run spelled by B. Our goal is to show that B is fair and that
hΓi = ⊤. Consider the
work of E along B. Let E denote the value of the record E at the beginning of the ith iteration of LOOP.
Evidently E i+1 is alwaysone ofthe premisesofE i inthe proof,whichmeans thatthe ‘As long as’condition
of LOOP is always satisfied, and that LOOP is iterated only a finite number of times. Fix l as the number
ofiterationsofLOOP,andletL=E . The lthiterationdealswith the caseofRule (a) —and, besides, not
with Subcase (i) of that case — for otherwise there would be a next iteration. This guarantees that E will
grantpermission infinitely many times during the lth iteration, so that branch B is indeed fair. Since e was
selected arbitrarily, we conclude that E is a fair EPM. And the fact that L is derived by Rule (a) implies
L is a stable proof formula. (1)
For each i with 1 ≤ i ≤ l, let Θ be the sequence of the (correspondingly labeled) moves made by the
players by the beginning of the ith iteration of LOOP.
For each 1≤i≤l, Θ
This statement can be proven by induction on i. The basis case with i = 1 is trivial. Now consider an
arbitraryiwith1≤i<l. Bytheinductionhypothesis,Θ
andhΘ iF∗ =E∗. Iftheithiterationof
LOOPdealswiththecaseofRule(b),thenexactlyonemoveαismadeduringthatiteration,andthismove
is by the machine, so that Θ i+1 = hΘ i ,⊤αi. In view of Lemma 6.4b, h⊤αi ∈ LREi ∗ and h⊤αiE i ∗ = E i ∗ +1 .
With the equalities Θ i+1 =hΘ i ,⊤αi and E i ∗ =hΘ i iF∗ in mind, the former then implies Θ i+1
thelatterimplieshΘ i+1iF∗ =E
. Supposenowthe ithiterationofLOOPdealswiththecaseofRule(a).
Then the machine does not make a move; its adversary must make a move α, for otherwise i would be the
last iteration of LOOP,contrary to our assumption that i<l. Furthermore, for the same reason, this move
α should satisfy the conditionof Subcase (i). Then, arguingas in the previouscase (only using Lemma 6.4a
instead of 6.4b), we can again conclude that Θ i+1
and hΘ i+1iF∗ =E i ∗ +1 .
Either Γ is a ⊥-illegal run of F∗, or
To prove this statement, suppose Γ is not a ⊥-illegal run of F∗. According to (2), hΘ iF∗ = L∗, which
implies that
hi. So, it would be sufficient to show that Θ = Γ. But indeed, as the lth
iteration of LOOP deals with the case of Rule (a), during that iteration ⊤ does not make any moves; if ⊥
makesamoveα—sincel isthelastiteration,—wedealwithSubcase(ii),andthenitisclearfromLemma
h⊥αi6∈LRL∗
which, taking into account that (by (2)) Θ
and L∗ =hΘ iF∗, implies that
hΘ ,⊥αi is a ⊥-illegal position of F∗; but hΘ ,⊥αi must be an initial segment of Γ, so that Γ is a ⊥-illegal
runofF∗,contrarytoourassumption. Thus,⊥doesnotmakeanymovesduringthelastiterationofLOOP
either, and hence Γ=Θ .
Now we can finish our proof of Lemma 7.2, i.e. show that
hΓi= ⊤. If Γ is a ⊥-illegal run of F∗,
we are done. Suppose now Γ is not a ⊥-illegal run of F∗. Then, by (3),
hi. But, in view
of (1), kLk∗ is a tautologicalcombinationofpredicates and hence true ate, whence Lemma 6.3 implies that
WnL∗ hi=⊤. Consequently, WnF∗ hΓi=⊤. ✷
8 Completeness of CL1
In our completeness proof for CL1 we employ the complementary logic CL1′ given by the following two
rules:
(a) H~ ⊢F,whereF isinstableandH~ isthesmallestsetofformulassuchthat,wheneverF hasanegative
(resp. positive) surface occurrence of a subformula G 1 ⊓... ⊓G n (resp. G 1 ⊔... ⊔G n ), for each
i∈{1,...,n}, H~ contains the result of replacing this occurrence in F by G .
(b) H ⊢ F, where H is the result of replacing in F a positive (resp. negative) surface occurrence of a
subformula G 1⊓...⊓G
(resp. G 1⊔...⊔G
for some i∈{1,...,n}.
Lemma 8.1 CL16⊢F iff CL1′ ⊢F (any formula F).
Proof. We prove this lemma by induction on the complexity of F. It would be sufficient to verify the
‘only if’ part, for the ‘if’ part (which we do not need anyway)can be handled in a fully symmetric way. So,
assume CL16⊢F and let us see that then CL1′ ⊢F. There are two cases to consider:
Case 1: F is stable. Then there must be a CL1-unprovable formula H that is the result of replacing in
F somepositive(resp. negative)surfaceoccurrenceofasubformulaG 1⊓...⊓G
(resp. G 1⊔...⊔G
for some i∈{1,...,n}, for otherwise F would be CL1-derivable by Rule (a). By the induction hypothesis
CL1′ ⊢H, whence, by Rule (b), CL1′ ⊢F.
Case 2: F is instable. Let H~ be the smallestset of formulassuch that, whenever F has a negative(resp.
positive) surface occurrence of a subformula G 1⊓...⊓G
(resp. G 1⊔...⊔G
), for each i∈{1,...,n}, H~
contains the result of replacing this occurrence in F by G . None of the elements of H~ is CL1-provable, for
otherwise F would be derivable in CL1 by Rule (b). Therefore, by the induction hypothesis, each element
of H~ is CL1′-provable, whence, by Rule (a), CL1′ ⊢F. ✷
Lemma 8.2 If CL16⊢F, then F is not valid (any formula F).
In particular, if CL16⊢F, then F∗ is not computable for some interpretation ∗ that interprets all atoms
as finitary predicates.
Proofidea. Ourproofofthislemmarestsonatechniquewhich,foraCL1-unprovableandhenceCL1′-
provable formula F, constructs an EPM E′ and an interpretation ∗ such that every HPM H loses the game
F∗ against E′ when H receives itself as an input. Precisely, “input H” in this context means hc,0,0,0,...i,
where c is the code of H.
Revisiting our soundness proof for CL1, the central idea in it was to design ⊤’s strategy — the EPM
E — following which guaranteed that the game would be eventually “brought down to” and stop (in the
sense that no further moves would be made) at L∗ for some stable formula L. Such a strategy was directly
extracted from a CL1-proof of F. In a perfectly symmetric way, a CL1′-proof of F allows us to extract
⊥’s strategy — the EPM E′ — that makes sure that, in every legal scenario, ⊤’s play against E′ over F∗
will be brought down to and stop at game L∗ for some instable formula L — let us call such a formula L
the limit formula of the play. In view of Lemma 6.3, stopping at L∗ implies that ⊤ will be the loser as
long as the predicate kLk∗ is false at the input. And the instability of L means that, whatever the input
e is, kLk∗ is indeed false at e for some ∗, so that ⊤ loses F∗ on e for such ∗. However, the trouble is that
⊤’s different strategies — as well as different inputs e of course — may yield different limit formulas L and
hence require different, perhaps conflicting, interpretations ∗ to falsify kLk∗ at e. Since we are trying to
show the non-validity rather than non-uniform-validity of F, the whole trick now is to find a one common
interpretation ∗ that, for ⊤’s arbitrary strategy (HPM) H, would falsify kLk∗ at some input e, where L is
the limit formula that H and that very input e yield. This is where a diagonalization-style idea comes to
save our day. We manage to define an interpretation ∗ that makes the elementarization of every instable
formula G imply the following: “When HPM H plays against E′ on input H, the limit formula is not G”.
Now, if we let any given HPM H play on input H againstE′, the elementarizationof the limit formula L of
the play — which, under interpretation ∗, claims that L is not really the limit formula — is guaranteed to
be false at H. This ultimately translates into H’s having lost the game F∗ on input H.
Proof. Assume CL1 6⊢ F. Then, by Lemma 8.1, CL1′ ⊢ F. Let us fix a particular CL1′-proof of
F, call it “the proof”, and call formulas appearing in it “proof formulas”. As in Section 7, we assume that
every proof formula appears only once in the proof and comes with a fixed justification. We construct an
EPME′ whoseworkis describedasfollows. At the beginning,this machinecreatesarecordE to holdproof
formulas, initializes it to F, and then follows the following interactive algorithm:
Procedure LOOP: As long as E is a proof formula, act depending on which of the two rules was used in
the proof to derive E from its premises:
Case of Rule (a): Keep granting permission until the adversary makes a move α, then act depending
on which of the following two subcases holds:
Subcase (i): α= βi, where β E-specifies a negative (resp. positive) surface occurrence of a subformula
G 1 ⊓...⊓G n (resp. G 1 ⊔...⊔G n ) and i ∈ {1,...,n}. Let H be the result of substituting the above
occurrence by G in E. Then update (the content of) E to H, and repeat LOOP.
Subcase (ii): α does not satisfy the condition of Subcase (i). Then go to an infinite loop in a permission
state.
Case of Rule (b): Let H be the premise of E in the proof. H is the result of substituting, in E, a
certain positive (resp. negative) surface occurrence of a subformula G 1⊓...⊓G
(resp. G 1⊔...⊔G
G forsomei∈{1,...,n}. Letαbe the E-specificationofthatoccurrence. Thenmakethe moveαi,update
(the content of) E to H, and repeat LOOP.
NotethattheabovedescriptionofE′ isliterallythesameasthedescriptionofmachineE giveninSection
7, only with the words “positive” and “negative” interchanged. In view of the perfect symmetry between E
and E′, CL1 and CL1′, and clauses (a) and (b) of Lemma 6.4, arguing as in the previous section, we can
conclude that, in each computation branch of E′, LOOP will be iterated only a finite number of times and
that E′ is fair.
Let us fix some standard way of describing HPMs, and let
H0 ,H1 ,H2 ,H3 ,...
be the list of all HPMs arranged according to the lexicographic order of their descriptions, so that each c
can be considered the code (or a code if we identify equivalent EPMs) of H . Next, throughout the rest of
this section, let e 0 ,e 1 ,e 2 ,... be the inputs defined by
=h0,0,0,0,...i, e
=h1,0,0,0,...i, ..., e
=hc,0,0,0,...i, ....
For any c ∈ {0,1,2,...}, let B be the (E′,e ,H )-branch, Γ the run cospelled by B , i.e. the H vs.
c c c c c c
E′ run on e , and L the value of the record E of E′ at the beginning of (and hence throughout) the last
iteration of LOOP in B .
For an arbitrary c ∈{0,1,2,...} and an arbitrary interpretation ∗, the following two statements can be
proven in a way fully symmetric to the way we proved (1) and (3) in Section 7:
L is an instable proof formula. (4)
Either Γ is a ⊤-illegal run of F∗, or
Let G 1 ,...,G n be all the instable proof formulas. For each such G i , let us fix a classical model M i (a
true/false valuation for non-logical atoms extended to all ⊓,⊔-free formulas in the standard classical way)
in which kG k is false. For each i∈{1,...,n}, let T be the predicate defined by
T is true at an input hc,...i iff L =G .
Now we define the interpretation ∗ by stipulating that, for each atom p,
p∗ =∨{T | 1≤i≤n, p is true in M }.
(∨S means the ∨-disjunction of all elements of S, understood as ⊥ when S is empty.)
Consider an arbitrary c ∈{0,1,2,...}. By (4), we must have L = G for one of the i∈ {1,...,n}. Fix
thisi. Itiseasytoseethat,foreveryatomp,pistrueinM iffthe predicatep∗ istrueate . Thisobviously
extendsfromatomstotheir¬,∧,∨,→-combinations,sothatthe formulakG kistrueinM iffthe predicate
kG k∗ is true at e . But, by our choice of M , the formula kG k, i.e. kL k, is false in M . Consequently,
i c i i c i
kL k∗ is false at e .7 Then, by Lemma 6.3, WnL∗ chi = ⊥. Therefore, by (5), either Γ is a ⊤-illegal run of
hΓ i=⊥. In either case
hΓ i=⊥. But, in view of Lemma 6.2, Γ is the run spelled by
ec c ec c c
an e -computation branch of H — in particular, by the (H ,e ,E′)-branch. Hence H does not win F∗: it
loses this game against E′ on input e .
Thus, no H computes F∗. This means nothing but that F∗ is not computable, because every HPM is
H for some c. To officially complete our proof of the lemma, it remains to note that p∗ (any atom p) is
finitary as it only depends on the first term c of an input. ✷
Remark 8.3 The counterinterpretation ∗ that we constructed in the proof of Lemma 8.2 for a CL1-
unprovable formula F interprets each atom p as a predicate that depends only on the first term of an
input and hence can be thought of as a unary arithmetical predicate, i.e a property (set) of numbers rather
than a property of inputs. Let us for now agree to use the word “predicate” in this traditional sense. It is
natural to ask the question about the arithmetical complexity of p∗. The answer we get is:
p∗ is of complexity ∆2 (any atom p). (6)
. Remember that an arithmetical predicate P(c) is said to have complexity Σ2 iff it can be written as
∃x∀yQ(c,x,y)for somedecidable predicateQ(c,x,y); andP(c)is ofcomplexity∆2 iff bothP(c) and¬P(c)
are of complexity Σ2.
Our proof of Lemma 8.2 defines p∗ as the disjunction of some T , that we now think of as unary arith-
metical predicates and write as T
(c). Disjunction is known to preserve ∆2 — as well as Σ2 — complexity,
so, in order to verify (6), it would be sufficient to show that each T
(c) (1 ≤ i ≤ n) is of complexity ∆2.
Looking at the meaning of T (c), this predicate asserts nothing but that the value of record E in branch
B will stabilize at G . So, T (c) can be written as ∃x∀y(y ≥ x → K (c,y)), where K (c,y) means “the
value of record E at the yth computation step of branch B is G ”. Furthermore, in view of (4), the value
of E should indeed stabilize at one of the instable proof formulas G 1 ,...,G n . Hence, ¬T i (c) is equivalent
(c) | 1 ≤ j ≤ n,j 6= i}. Consequently, in order to show that each T
(c) is of complexity ∆2, it
would suffice to show that each T
(c) is of complexity Σ2. For the latter, in turn, verifying that K
a decidable predicate would be sufficient. But K (c,y) is indeed decidable. A decision procedure for it first
constructs the machine H from number c. Then it lets this machine play against E′ on input hc,0,0,0,...i
as described in the proof idea for Lemma 6.2. In particular, it traces, in parallel, how the configurations of
thetwomachinesevolveuptothe ythcomputationstepofE′,i.e. itsythconfiguration. Thentheprocedure
looksatthe value ofrecordE inthat configuration,andsays“yes”or“no”depending onwhether the latter
is G or not.
7Wehavejustshownthat,aslongasG i=Lc,kG ik ∗ isfalseatec. Inotherwords,(truthof)kG ik ∗ (atec)impliesLc6=G i.
Thisisexactly whatwasmeantin‘Proofidea’bysayingthat∗ makestheelementarization ofeveryinstableformulaGimply
“WhenH[i.e. Hc]playsagainstE′ oninputH[i.e. ec],thelimitformula[i.e. Lc]isnotG”.