]RT.nif-q[
3v3936.2041:viXra
Prospect Theory for Online Financial Trading
Yang-Yu Liu1,∗, JoseC. Nacher2,∗, TomoshiroOchiai3,∗, MauroMartino4, YanivAltshuler5
July30,2018
∗Theseauthorscontributedequallytothiswork.
1ChanningDivisionof NetworkMedicine, BrighamandWomen’sHospital, Harvard Medical
School,Boston,Massachusetts02115,USA
2DepartmentofInformationScience,FacultyofScience,TohoUniversity,Miyama2-2-1,Fun-
abashi,Chiba274-8510,Japan.
3DepartmentofSocialInformationStudies,OtsumaWomen’sUniversity,2-7-1Karakida,Tama-
shi,Tokyo206-8540,Japan.
4Center for Innovationin VisualAnalytics, Watson Research Center, IBM, Cambridge, Mas-
sachusetts02142,USA.
5MITMediaLab,Cambridge,Massachusetts02139,USA.
Prospect theory is widely viewed as the best available descriptive model of how people eval-
uateriskinexperimental settings1–6. According toprospecttheory, peoplearetypicallyrisk-
averse with respect to gains and risk-seeking with respect to losses, known as the “reflection
effect”. Peopleareusuallymuchmoresensitivetolossesthantogainsofthesamemagnitude,
a phenomenon called “loss aversion”7–12. Despite of the fact that prospect theory has been
well developed in behavioral economics at the theoretical level, there exist very few large-
scaleempiricalstudiesandmostofthemhavebeenundertakenwithmicro-paneldata11,13–18.
Here we analyze over 28.5 million trades made by 81.3 thousand traders of an online finan-
cial trading community over 28 months, aiming to explore the large-scale empirical aspect
of prospect theory. By analyzing and comparing the behavior of winning and losing trades
andtraders,wefindclearevidenceofthereflectioneffectandthelossaversionphenomenon,
which are essential in prospect theory. This work hence demonstrates an unprecedented
large-scaleempirical evidence ofprospect theory, whichhas immediateimplicationinfinan-
cial trading, e.g., developing new trading strategies by minimizing the impact of the reflec-
tioneffectandthelossaversionphenomenon. Moreover,weintroducethreenovelbehavioral
metrics to differentiate winning and losing traders based on their historical trading behav-
ior. This offersuspotential opportunities toaugmentonlinesocialtradingwhere traders are
allowedtowatchandfollowthetradingactivitiesofothers19,bypredictingpotentialwinners
basedontheirhistoricaltradingbehaviorratherthantheirtradingperformanceatanygiven
pointintime.
We live life in the “big data” era. Many of our daily activities such as checking emails,
makingmobilephonecalls,postingblogsonsocialmedia,shoppingwithcreditcards andmaking
financial trading online, will leave behind our digital traces of various kinds that can be compiled
into comprehensivepictures of ourbehavior. The sudden influx of data is transforming social sci-
ences at an unprecedented pace 20–22. Indeed, researchers are moving in a few years from dealing
with interviewsofa few dozens ofpeopleby crafting surveyquestionnaireto experimentsinvolv-
ingmillionsofsubjectsusingsocial media23.
Theavailabilityofhugeamountsofdigitaldataalsopromptsustorethinksomefundamental
perspectivesof complexhuman behavior. In thiswork we focus on economicdecision under risk,
a key subject of behavior economics 24. Successful behavior economic theories acknowledge the
complexityof human economic behavior and introduce models that are well grounded in psycho-
logicalresearch. Forexample,prospecttheoryisviewedas thebestavailabledescriptivemodelof
how people evaluate risk 1–3. Prospect theory states that people make decisions based on the po-
tentialvalueoflossesandgainsratherthanthefinaloutcome,andthatpeopleevaluatetheselosses
and gains using certain heuristics. Despite the fact that prospect theory offers many remarkable
insightsand has been studiedfor morethan threedecades, thereexistveryfew large-scale empiri-
calresearchandrelativelyfewwell-knownandbroadlyacceptedapplicationsofprospecttheoryin
economics and finance6. The emergence of online social trading platforms and the availability of
burgeoningvolumeoffinancialtransactiondataofindividualshelpusexploretheempiricalaspect
of prospect theory to an unprecedented large-scale. Moreover, analyzing the trading behavior at
the individual level offers an excellent opportunity to develop pragmatic financial applications of
prospecttheory.
Byharnessingthewisdomofthecrowdstoourbenefitandgain,socialtradinghasbeenarev-
olutionary way to approach financial market investment. Thanks to various Web 2.0 applications,
nowadays online traders can rely on trader generated financial content as the major information
source for making financial trading decisions. This “data deluge” raises some new questions, an-
swers to which could further deepen our understanding of the complexity of human economic
behavior and improve our social trading experience. For example, many social trading platforms
allow us to followtop traders, known as gurus or trade leaders, and directly investour money like
they do. The question is then how to identify those top traders. Analyzing their historical trading
behaviorwouldbea naturalstartingpoint.
Thefinancialtransactiondatausedinthisworkcomesfromanonlinesocialtradingplatform
for foreign exchanges and commodities trading. This trading platform allows traders to take both
long and short positions, with a minimal bid of a few dollars as well as leverage up to 400 times.
Themostimportantfeatureofsocialtradingplatformisthateachtraderautomaticallyhasalltrades
uploaded to the platform where trades can be displayed in a number of statistical ways, such as
by the amount of profit made. Traders can then set their accounts to copy one or more trades
made by any other traders, in which case the social trading platform will automatically execute
the trade(s). Accordingly, there are three types of trades: (1) Single (or non-social) trade: Trader
A places a normal trade by himself or herself; (2) Copy trade: Trader A places exactly the same
trade as trader B’s one single trade; (3) Mirror trade: Trader A automatically executes trader B’s
every single trade, i.e., trader A follows exactly trader B’s trading activities. Both (2) and (3) are
hereafter referred toas social trading.
Thereareabout3millionregisteredaccountsinthisonlinesocialtradingplatform. Someof
them are practice accounts, i.e., trading with virtual money. Our data are composed of over 28.5
million trades made by 81.3 thousand traders trading with real money from June 2010 to October
2012. There are 31.8% single trades, 0.6% copy trades and 67.6% mirror trades. Apparently,
social trading dominates over this trading platform during the time window of our data. It will
be desirable to learn how to select the best traders to follow so that we can further improve our
socialtrading experience—a pragmaticmotivationofourcurrent work. Quantitativelyanalyzing
trading activities of traders within the framework of behavior economics naturally fits the goal.
Ultimately, we would like to be able to predict potential winners based on their historical trading
behaviorsothatwecan takefull advantageofthesocialtradingparadigm.
We first need to demonstrate if social trades really help. In Fig. 1 we compare the fraction
ofwinningtrades(N /N)andreturnoninterest(ROI(%):= netprofit/investment×100)ofthe
threedifferenttradetypes. Wefindthatallthreetradetypeshavemorethan50%chancetogenerate
positivenet profit (see Fig. 1a). Among them,mirrortrade has thehighestchance (≈ 83%), much
higher than that of single or copy trade. This indicates that in average social trades (especially
mirror trades) indeed help traders win more frequently than non-social trades. Interestingly, not
all the trade types have positive average ROI (see Fig. 1b). In fact, only mirror trade has positive
averageROI(≈ 0.03%),i.e.,itgeneratesprofit,consistentwithpreviousresults19. IntermsofROI,
socialtradesdonotnecessarilyperformbetterthannon-socialtrade. Wenoticethatcopytradeeven
has higher negativeROI than non-social trade, which simplyimplies that copying someonebased
on pastperformancecan bedangerous.
Overall,mirrortradeoutperformsbothsingleandcopytrades. Yet,thebetterperformanceof
mirrortradecomes atthepricethatitswinningtradeshavemuchlowerROI(≈ 0.177%)than that
of copy and single trades (see Fig. 1c); while its losing trades have significantly higher negative
ROI (≈ −0.9%) than that of copy and single trades (see Fig. 1d). In other words, mirror trade
typically does not generate high profit for winning positions but generate high loss for losing
positions. Since mirror trade has very high chance of winning, the average ROI of mirror trade
turns out to be positive. This implies that there is still much room to improve our social trading
experience.
To furtherunderstand thedifference between social and non-socialtrade types,we calculate
their duration distributionsP(τ) (see Fig. 2). Here the duration τ of a trade or position is defined
tobeitsholdingtime(inunitofmillisecond),i.e.,τ := t −t wheret andt are
closed opened opened closed
the position opened and closed time, respectively. Interestingly, P(τ) displays similar fat-tailed
distributionfor all different trade types. There are very few positionsthat were held for very long
time (more than one month). Most of the positions were held for less than half an hour. We also
noticethatforlosingpositions,manyofthemare heldforlessthanonesecond,whileforwinning
positions they are most likely held for longer than one second. This might be due to the so-called
bid-askspread. Thepricewecan sell (bid)and thepricewecan buy(ask)is differentat each time
point. It is almost impossible for traders to overcome the spread within very short holding time
interval (e.g., one second) by using online financial trading platforms. For τ ∈ [103,105], we find
that for all different trade types P(τ) ofpositivetrades is much lowerthan that of negativetrades,
i.e., winning probability is much less than 50% in this particular holding time window. Although
the duration distributions of different trade types share many similar features, we do observe a
noticeable difference in the regimeof τ > 105, i.e., longerthan one minute. We find that for non-
social trades with τ > 105, P(τ) of positivetrades is roughly the same as that of negativetrades.
In other words, if the holding time of a non-social trade is longer than one minute, the winning
chance is about 50%. For copy trades with τ ∈ (105,108), P(τ) of positive trades is slightly
higher than that of negative trades. For mirror trades with τ ∈ [105,109], P(τ) of positive trades
is significantly higher than that of negativetrades. In other words, if the holding time of a mirror
trade is longer than one minute and less than one week, then its winning chance is much higher
than50%.
We also calculate the trade duration as a function of the net profit for different trade types
(seeFig.3). Wedrawthebox-and-whiskerplotofduration(τ)fortradeswithnetprofit(p)binned
logarithmically. (For negative trades p < 0, we bin them using |p|.) We denote the median value
of durations as τ . We find that for all trade types τ shows asymmetric behavior: τ of losing
positions with loss −p is generally higher than that of winning positions with profit p. This is a
reflection of the so-called “disposition effect”: investors tend to sell financial assets whose price
has increased while keeping asserts that have dropped in value 25–27. In other words, investors are
lesswillingtorecognizelosses,butaremorewillingtorecognizegains. Thisisatypicalirrational
behavior that can be partially explained by the “loss aversion” phenomenon and the “reflection
effect”inprospecttheory. Wealsonoticecleardifferences betweenmirrortradeandtheothertwo
trade types. For both non-social and copy trades τ generally increases as |p| increases in either
positive or negative direction, and τ of losing trades increases much faster as |p| increase than
τ of winning trades increases as p increase. While for mirror trade, τ increases very slowly
as p increases for positive positions. For mirror trades with negative p, τ increases initially as
|p| increases, but quickly reaches a plateau. In other words, the disposition effect is lessened in
mirrortrade. Ithasbeenshownthatmoreexperiencedinvestorsarelessaffectedbythedisposition
effect 28. Thismightexplainthegood performanceofmirrortrade.
To characterize thetrading behavioroftraders and identify potentialtradeleaders, we intro-
duce four behavioral metrics: (1) Risk-reward ratio r := hp+i , where hp i represents the average
profit of positive/negative trades made by each trader. r > 1 means that traders in average gain
more in positivetrades than the loss in negativetrades. (2) Win-loss holding time ratio s := hτ+i,
where hτ i represents the average holding time of positive/negative trades made by each trader.
s > 1 means that traders in average hold positivepositionlonger than negativeposition. (3) Win-
loss ROI ratio u := hROI+i , where hROI i represents theaverage ROI of positive/negativetrades
h|ROI−|i ±
made by each trader. u > 1 means that traders in average have larger absolute ROI in positive
trades than in negative trades. (4) Winning percentage w := N+ , where N represents the
number of positive/negative trades made by each trader. w > 1/2 simply means that traders in
averagehavelargerchance ofwinningthanlosingatrade.
Note that if all traders trade pure randomly without any human emotions we would expect
that the distributions of all the four metrics show symmetric behavior around r = 1, s = 1,
u = 1 and w = 1/2, respectively. Yet, inreality traders behavequitedifferentlyfrom random (see
Fig. 4). We find the risk-reward distribution P(r) displays strongly asymmetric behavior around
r = 1 (black dotted line in Fig. 4a). For r > 1, P(r) follows a power law over almost 3 decades,
which means it is extremely difficult to find traders with very large r; while for r ≤ 1, P(r) is
almost a constant, which means traders with r ≤ 1 are almost uniformly distributed. By splitting
thetradersintotwogroups: winningandlosingtraders(i.e.,traderswithfinalnetprofitornetloss)
and calculating their P(r) with appropriate normalization based on the fractions of winning and
losing traders (14.7% and 85.2%, respectively), we find that the two groups behave in drastically
differentways(seeFig.4b). Winningtraders’r-rangespansover[10−2,103];whilelosingtraders’
r-range is given by [10−4,101]. The uniform P(r) for r < 1 is largely due to losers; while the
power-lawofP(r)forr > 10ispurelyduetowinningtraders. Wealsonoticethatforr < r∗ = 4
(pink line), P(r) of losing traders is significantly higher than that of winning traders; while for
r > r∗, itisin theoppositecase.
We find the win-loss duration ratio distribution P(s) also displays strongly asymmetric be-
haviorarounds = 1(blackdottedlineinFig.4c). Fors > 1,P(s)almostfollowsapowerlawover
5 decades, which means it is extremely difficult to find traders with very large s; while for s ≤ 1,
P(s) decays very slowly as s decreases, which means traders with s ≤ 1 are almost uniformly
distributed. This indicates that most traders hold losing positions for a longer time than winning
position,a typicaldispositioneffect. Comparing winningand losingtraders’ P(s)is also interest-
ing (see Fig. 4d). Though their s-ranges are almost the same, we notice that for s < s∗ = 100
(pink line), P(s) oflosers is significantlyhigherthan that of winners; whilefor s > s∗, it is in the
oppositecase.
Thewin-lossROIratiodistributionP(u)showsastrongpeakaroundu = 0.2andastrongly
asymmetric behavior around u = 1 (black dotted line in Fig. 4e). For u > 0.2, P(u) follows a
power law over 3 decades, which means it is extremely difficult to find traders with very large u.
Interestingly, for u ≤ 0.2, P(u) also follows a power-law over almost 2 decades. We find P(u)’s
of winningand losingtraders are also very different (see Fig. 4f). Winning traders’ u-range spans
over [10−1,300]; while losing traders’ u-range is given by [5×10−4,300]. For u < u∗ = 2 (pink
line), P(u) of losing traders is significantly higher than that of winning traders; while for u > u∗,
itis intheoppositecase. Foru < 0.06,almostalltraders are losingtraders.
Notethatalargeportionoftraders(85.2%)arelosingtraderswithfinalnetloss. Thefactthat
those losing traders typically have r < 1,s < 1 and u < 1 could be explained by the “loss aver-
sion”phenomenonandthe“reflectioneffect”inprospecttheoryasfollows. Forpositivepositions,
traders tend to be risk-averse and will close the position quickly to take a small profit or a small
ROI. Whileforlosingpositions,traderstendtoberisk-seekingandreluctanttoclosethepositions
as quick as they should. Instead they keep waiting and hoping to recover the loss. If indeed this
happens, then theybecomerisk-averseand tend to closethepositionquicklyto takea smallprofit
and resultinasmallROI. If unfortunatelythisdoes nothappen,theywastenotonlyvaluabletime
but also a lot of money,rendering large negativeROI. Thus, the losing traders have to suffer from
theirirrationaltradingbehaviorthat can bedescribedby prospecttheory.
One may naively consider the winning percentage type of behavioral metrics will help us
identifygurus. Hereweshowitisnotthecase. Fig.4gdisplaysthewinningpercentagedistribution
P(w), which is asymmetric around w = 1/2. (Note that P(w) has significant peaks around
somesimplerationalnumbersw = 0,1/2,1/3,2/3,...,1,whichareduetotraders whomadevery
few transactions.) Again, we find winning and losing traders’ P(w) show dramatically different
behavior(seeFig.4h). Forw < w∗ = 0.95,P(w)oflosingtradersissignificantlyhigherthanthat
of winning traders; while for w > w∗ winning traders dominate. The value of w∗ is so high that
using it to select trade leaders is almost infeasible. We also notice that for w < w∗, losing traders
actually dominate for a wide range of w. Yet, they are still losing money eventually due to their
very low risk-reward ratio r. In other words, they win many times with small positive profit, but
oncetheylosetheylosealot.
In principle large values of those metrics do not imply net profit at all. For example, traders
with r ≫ 1 could be simply due to a few trades with very large profit, but many trades with very
smallloss. Yet,theaboveanalysisyieldsthreecharacteristicvalues(r∗ = 4,s∗ = 100,u∗ = 2)that
can be used to statistically predict potential winning traders with high probability. We admit that
those characteristic values may slightly depend on the particular dataset or trading platform. We
emphasize that the strategy of using characteristic values of novel behavioral metrics to identify
potentialwinningtradersshouldbeapplicabletogeneralsocialtradingplatforms. Furthermore,the
existence of characteristic values (r∗, s∗, u∗) of these behavioral metrics indicates the importance
ofcontrollinghumanemotionto minimizetheimpactofthereflection effect and thelossaversion
phenomenonforbettertrading performance.
Discussion
The dynamics of financial trading is governed by individual human decisions, which implies that
the trading performance could be significantly improved by understanding better the underlying
human behavior. In this work we systematically analyze over 28.5 million trades made by 81.3
thousand traders of an online financial trading platform. By analyzing and comparing the per-
formance of social and non-social trades, winning and losing traders, we find clear evidences of
the reflection effect and the loss aversion phenomenon, which are essential in prospect theory of
behavior economics. Many losing traders have very small risk-reward ratio (r), win-loss duration
ratio (s), and win-loss ROI ratio (u), suggest that we should develop new trading strategies by
systematically minimizing the impact of the reflection effect and the loss aversion phenomenon,
e.g., through intentionally controlling s,u and/or r to fight over our human nature and rationalize
ourtradingbehavior.
To provide traders many preferences in discovering gurus or trade leaders, social trading
platformsranktradersonmanydifferentmetrics,e.g.,popularity(numberoffollowers),profitable
weeks, and the personal return of rate calculated from the modified Dietz formula 29, etc. Those
differentmetricstypicallyyielddifferentrankinglists,whicheffectivelyrenderschoosingthegurus
somethingof an inspirationalaffair or a delicate trick. Moreover, traders should take into account
the risks taken by these gurus in order to obtain the returns that they make. Unfortunately, not all
the metrics rank the performance of traders on a risk-adjusted basis. Here we propose three novel
behavioral metrics (risk-reward ratio r, win-loss holding time ratio s, and win-loss ROI ratio u),
which reveal the essence of prospect theory, the best available descriptive model of how people
evaluate risk in behavioral economics. These metrics are defined for each trader by comparing
his/her typical behavior in winning and losing trades, and hence are naturally risk-adjusted. Our
analysis suggests that these metrics can be used to statistically predict potential winning traders,
offeringpragmaticopportunitiesto furtherimproveoursocial tradingexperience.