]hp-tsih.scisyhp[
1v9470.1111:viXra
Pursuit of Wisdom and Quantum Ontology
Peter Kleinert∗
(Dated: October 30, 2018)
In his late work (De venatione sapientiae), Cusanusunfolded basic ideas of his brilliant theology.
After a long period, this ingenious teaching became clearly recognizable especially in our time.
Forward with his face to the back, modern scientific theory adopts nowadays a course to which
Cusanus had already pointed centuries ago. Modern thought revolves with unexpected precision
and unexpected mysteriousness around two issues of his doctrine of wisdom: (i) The possibility-
of-being-made is not a figment of the human brain by which it organizes one’s thoughts, but a
fundamental and indispensable manifestation of reality. (ii) The possibility-of-being-made refers
tosomethingantecedent bywhichboththefeasibility andthebeing-madeget theircommonshape.
This ultimate ground embodies the omnipotent oneness in the form of an infinite fund in which
the cause of all reality and of all possibility is timelessly stored. Comparisons with the quantum
ontology and the theory of quantum gravity impose themselves.
Keywords: Cusanus; wisdom; possibility-of-being-made; omnipotent oneness; quantum ontology; quantum
gravity; infinite sets; Chaitin’s number
I. INTRODUCTION
De venatione sapientiae is a late work of Nicholas of Kues (1401-1464), who is also known
under the name Nicolaus Cusanus. With this scripture, he invites the reader to follow him
in the hunt for wisdom. Accordingly, he shows the hunting ground, speculates where one
can catch a lot of booty, sneaks up to wild animals, and finally presents his prey. The most
eminent objective for his pursuit of wisdom was to gain an understanding of the given by
means of its relationship to the giver. This concern corresponded in his day to the spirit of
the time. What could not be doubted in the Middle Ages, was the belief that the ultimate
truth of all beings rests in God. In line with this holy belief, Cusanus compared the universe
with an organism, in which all parts cooperate under a divine plan. Without this divine
providence, which has its origin in the absolute organizer, nothing can exist. Consequently,
the hunter never could kill God, because otherwise neither hunting nor hunters would have
existed.
During the centuries, the seemingly consistent medieval metaphysics eroded more and
more. Let us mention only a few stages represented by influential opponents. First, there is
the pioneer and founder of positivism in sociology, the French mathematician and philoso-
pher Comte, who designated each religion as a childhood disease at an early stage in the
history of mind, while Feuerbach unmasked the faith as self-delusion. But that was not
enough, there’s more. According to Marx, religion was nothing more than opium for people
and Freud speculated that any religion has its root in infantile longing, which feels itself safe
in the bosom of an omnipotent father. Finally, according to Nietzsche, God has died after a
long andagonizing illness. The gesture of the believer who believes in the marvelousness was
for the ”philosopher with the hammer” beyond imagination. The most painful attack, how-
ever, came from the mechanistic philosophy of nature, which inexorably went from triumph
to triumph. This attitude reached its culmination in the physical atomism, which came up
at the beginning of the last century. According to this very successful scientific theory there
are indestructible, eternal building blocks of matter, which can arrange in different ways to
create a specific appearance of the world at each moment. To look for a mysterious substra-
tum on which this mindless game with building blocks is founded proves to be completely
pointless. Within a giant world machine there is no place for God. This opinion has become
so hardened that even the soul is reduced to the world of things. The mechanistic world
outlook is the natural philosophy of everyday activities, where each moment contributes to
a history, which is once and for all being present with all its details, being fixed and in
retrospect unchangeable. This experience is so overwhelming that religious speculations are
only credible if they refer to the netherworld. In this context the hunt for wisdom originally
initiated by Cusanus can no longer be accepted as an invitation to participate, but it is an
old story, about which one can only gossip. The content of the analysis developed by one of
the most deepest thinker of the world in his famous text seems already outdated. Thereby,
Cusanus finished his hunting expedition with the hope that all his captured wisdom serves
”for one’s better speculating on these lofty matters.”1 However, for a long time scientists
and philosophers were convinced that there is no kill in the hunting ground shown by Cu-
sanus. In contrast to this opinion, let us ask: Is this disparaging assessment still valid? Our
conclusion in this paper is amazing: The main ideas captured by Cusanus in his pursuit
of wisdom can be regarded as a theological speculation which is consistent with modern
quantum ontology that has been proven to be valid in countless experiments all over the
world. De venatione sapientiae is therefore not only a document with reference to other old
historical writings, but also a valuable proposal which serves as a promising starting point
when trying to extend fundamental scientific knowledge into theological visions.
II. ABOUT THE POSSIBILITY-OF-BEING-MADE
A. The hunting ground shown by Cusanus
Cusanus founded his studies of wisdom on a firm basis, because he was convinced that
”whichisunknown cannotbeknownthroughthatwhich iseven moreunknown.”2 Therefore,
he started from scratch by capturing ”something that is most certain - something presup-
posed and undoubted by all pursuers [of wisdom]...”3 This self-evident base is a simple
tautology in his scripture: Nothing will be done that cannot be done. From this compre-
hensible diagnosis, he concluded that the possibility-of-being-made precedes everything that
has ever been made. While this statement still sounds convincing, we cannot help to wonder
about his next step in the reasoning, when he attributed to the feasibility an ”ontological
status”. However, the possibility-of-being-made cannot have been made so that its ”exis-
tence” should have something heavenly in itself. Nevertheless, according to Cusanus this
mode of existence is an essential, indispensable, genuine part of the whole world. In his
hunt for wisdom, the ”ontological status” of the feasibility shows him the secret path to
the fruitful game reserve, namely to something like the absolute beginning, ”which is the
Beginning and Cause of the possibility-of-being-made.”4 This preexistence cannot be made,
because it precedes the possibility-of-being-made. Therefore, it is an unchangeable eternal
source of all possibilities and realities. Just at this step, we arrive at the central idea of his
teaching of wisdom: The Creator, who precedes the possibility-of-being-made as well as all
existence ”is the absolute and incontractible Beginning, for it is all that can be.”5 As the
feasibility is neither feasible nor destructible, its beginning has a special character insofar as
it ”has not been made but, nevertheless, has a beginning, we speak of it as created, for it
does not presuppose anything, from which it exists, except its Creator.”6 The possibility to
make the world either way has its root in the eternal mind of God, who creates both being
and nonbeing. From the almighty God (who is exactly what Cusanus called the possibility-
of-making), the possibility-of-being-made was created from nothing. However, this creation
is peculiar in the sense that its beginning and its end are indistinguishable. Everything
can change - not God. He precedes each difference also the difference between possibility
and reality. Only He is the actualized possibility-of-making, because He is what He can
be. Whatever exists due to the possibility-of-being-made, exists actually only because it
imitates the actuality of the possibility-of-making, which is the ultimate existence. All that
has been made and all that could have been made ”is subsequent to its own Actuality, which
is Eternity.”7 Both features of the entire world, namely all that really exists and all that
really can exist, coalesce within the eternal Creator. All life is only a shadow of Eternal
Life.
B. There is still large quarry
The everyday experience deals with a world of hard-hitting and unchangeable facts that
step forward for a brief moment to enlarge the realm of the non-varying past and to prepare
the terrain for future tangible events. This succession has apparently no beginning and
no end. The development is largely regular so that there is a whole universe of scientific
questions that should be answered. Whether it is the anatomy of ants or the formation of
stars after a supernova - the field of scientific research is almost boundless. The tremendous
knowledge itself that is collected and stored in different ways, has a curious ontological
status, since it is neither temporal nor palpable. This form of existence is not written in
stone but nebulous. It would be an obvious assumption that the cognitive ability emerges
somehow from the reality of objective facts within the human brain. However, this modern
attitude breaks with a long theological tradition, for which the world of relentless facts
was incomplete and in itself not consistent. Indeed, the mechanistic world outlook is a
shortcut, because the possibility-of-being-made seems to exist somehow, however, without
any real ontological status. A consequence of this mechanistic bias is that all transcendental
reflections about the specific suchness of existence are stigmatized as pointless. Inadmissible
questions ofthiskindare, forinstance: Wasthefeasibility created? Istheworldacreationor
part ofa multiverse, inwhich almost everything canhappen? However, if we pursue wisdom,
then our question has an entirely different character: Does a transcendental principle reign
behind the facade of seizable facts so that people must reconsider, what reality actually
means? Cusanus answered in the affirmative by referring to the possibility-of-being-made as
well as the possibility-of-making and by delegating true existence exclusively to the creator.
It is amazing that modern science itself returns to the very same path. Thereby, science
has absolutely nothing in mind with transcendence, although one concedes willingly that
the new ontology is puzzling. In fact, the possibility-of-being-made is the focus of quantum
ontology (see, for instance, Ref. 8 and Appendix A). Possibilities are ubiquitous in quantum
theory. Mysteriously they arrive at their destination solely in our completely atypical, quasi-
classical quantum world. The existence ofconcretefactsislinked toconditions, which canbe
precisely identified in quantum physics. Thus, the understanding of the possibility-of-being-
made as an essential part of reality has nowadays taken a definite shape, which is known in
details namely by quantum physics. In addition, also the origin of the specific possibility-
of-being-made in our quasi-classical world can be investigated from a scientific point of
view, although the solution of this problem is extremely difficult. Within the framework
of the conventional quantum mechanics, the study must take into account not only the
quantum dynamical laws, but also the initial quantum state. From this analysis it becomes
evident that the quasi-classical world is not based on itself. Rather, one has to accept some
overriding principle (theologically said: something transcendental), which is timeless, full
of unimaginable possibilities (namely the many conceivable quantum universes) so that it
can explain, how the world of tangible facts could emerge by means of a suitable initial
state (by a ”free volitional decision”). In conclusion, we admit that the prey of wisdom,
which Cusanus presented in his scripture, gives us considerable food for thought. All his
fundamental ontological problems have become nowadays a subject of scientific research (of
course only in a specific unilateral form). A theological upgrading of all these scientific ideas
was already anticipated by Cusanus so that a recollection to him is highly recommended.
III. WHAT CAN WE KNOW ABOUT GOD?
A. The faceless oneness
All real things and phenomena are anticipated by the possibility-of-being-made, which
points to an origin, which itself is not made, but by which the feasibility gets its contours.
What precedes existence and possible existence should be free from any intrinsic difference,
since it is the indivisible cause of diversification. This profound oneness cannot be explained
exhaustively, because it is the definition of itself. Everything that is definable has its origin
init. Thisultimateground, whichpermitstodefineeverything aswell asitself isnothingelse
but the not-other or the one. Just like God, the absolute eternal oneness is generally shaped
by that what it can be. The omnipotent one is the beginning and the end of the unqualified
possibility-of-being-made, whose singular contraction determines the essence of all things
that are actually made. The oneness itself ”is not essence, since it is the Cause of essence,
for essence is something caused by it.”9 As God allows the understanding of all phenomena,
he himself cannot be understood entirely. Rather, everything that is understandable is due
to the possibility-of-being-made and is a representation of the eternal oneness that precedes
understandability. Consequently, nothing fundamental can be learned about the omnipotent
one. The true nature of God remains eternally hidden, not because our power to understand
will never be sufficient, but because there is simply nothing to recognize. God is not an
object of perceptibility. The divine ”knowledge” of God is gained through ignorance that
is the prerequisite for the pursuit of wisdom. Nevertheless, we see God’s order, which is a
sign of his government. At least, we realize that ”the Divine Mind creates all things and
always harmonizes all things and is the indestructible Cause of the order and harmony of all
things.”10 The confusing ambiguity of our holy wisdom, its helplessness, is not a deficiency
but the logical abandonment of pretensions to decrypt the divine origin of all phenomena.
Enlightened people, who are educated about the limitations of the conceivability, find peace
in the certainty to participate in the order and intention of the universe. All phenomena are
integratedintheeternalharmonicorganism, inwhichbothrealityandpotentialityhavetheir
origin and which is worthy of praise beyond all limits. This confidence gets its completion
by the religious faith in Jesus, who promises immortality of the soul. The humanity in Jesus
is not only the unification of the lower with the higher nature, the timeliness with eternity,
but simply the humanity of the Creator. We seek wisdom to become immortal. However,
no wisdom can free us from death - this is the wrong route to wisdom. True ”wisdom will be
wisdomthroughwhichthatnecessity ofdying ismadeintoavirtueandwill bewisdomwhich
becomes for us a sure and safe passage unto the resurrection of life. This [passage] happens
only by the power of Jesus and only for those who remain steadfastly on His pathway.”11
B. A maximally unknown miraculous number
Indeed, the omnipotent one is an odd construction. On the one hand, it is some kind of
divine knowledge, the cause of the possibility-of-being-made and of all thoughts by which
phenomena become understandable. On the other hand we must admit that the oneness
itself is neither understandable nor rooted in this world. Hence, our thoughts about the
ultimate truths peter out. We must recognize: The last answers, which our heart desires
so much, cannot reach us in principle. Therefore, Cusanus preached the learned ignorance,
which plays an essential role in his philosophy.
This central idea of his teachings can be well illustrated by an unusual, irrational num-
ber Ω, which is precisely defined, but, nevertheless, not computable. The ominous Chaitin
number Ω denotes the probability that a randomly generated string of bits proves to be a
program that runs on a computer and eventually halts after a finite time. As the halting
problem cannot always be decided in advance, this number is fundamentally not count-
able. Moreover, Ω is not only maximally uncomputable, but also maximally unknowable
and maximally random (some further information is compiled in Appendix B). What is
most interesting for our purpose: Chaitin’s number Ω ”is also the diamond-hard distilled
and crystallized essence of mathematical truth.”12 It is amazing: The answer to every math-
ematical question is written down in omega, even though, we basically cannot distill the
universal mathematical wisdom from Ω. Like a cabalistic number, the digits of Ω encode
the secrets of the whole mathematical universe. Unfortunately, this digit sequence is always
uncomputable so that we finally know nothing more about Ω than its maximal indefiniteness
(its maximal randomness). Our talking about Ω is nothing more than learned ignorance.
Only God knows whether a given randomly generated computer program will eventually
halt or not. For Him, Ω is both palpable and understandable, just as the sum of all possible
mathematical theorems. Somewhat boldly, we can assert: ”... if you believe in Ω, then you
believe in God,”13 and vice versa. As according to modern quantum physics true random-
ness governs our quantum universe, we live in a world that is infinitely complex (like the
incompressible random number Ω) and, therefore, is unknowable in its entirety by intellec-
tual beings. By this mathematical example, the learned ignorance, preached by Cusanus,
becomes certainly more apperceptible.
IV. ON THE ORIGIN OF THE POSSIBILITY-OF-BEING-MADE
A. Creation of feasibility
The design by which the possibility-of-being-made is predetermined is not made, since
it is in fact the foundation of feasibility. This eternal omnipotent design is all that it can
be in as much as it is not itself a form, but the source of all forms, which determine what
actually could happen via the possibility-of-being-made. But what can specify the variety
of forms if not mind and wisdom? From the intrinsic predetermination of all forms by the
divine mind, all things obtain their suchness by means of the delimitation. By creating
the feasibility, the divine wisdom arranges the world in such a way as it was predefined by
eternity. The possibility-of-being-made was created so that it produces this and no other
world. The creation owes its occurrence to the free will of the divine mind, whose foundation
is nothing else than spirit. This holy wisdom is the origin of all possible and real forms,
which all have a natural affinity to Godin accordance to their ancestry. The true nature, the
genuine forms of all phenomena are exclusively present in God. Only due to His intellect all
things exist. In contrast, the human intellect assimilates intelligent things and looks for his
own understanding by constructing his own images. Employing the intelligent assimilation,
people gain a vague insight of the world. However, the divine essence of all things and
therefore also the real essence of rationality cannot be considered.
B. Generalized quantum ontology
Cusanu’s ingenious speculation about the predetermination of the possibility-of-being-
made finds a striking illustration by modern discussions aimed at generalizing quantum
physics.
With respect to phenomena occurring in nature, the possibility-of-being-made is ex-
pressed by fundamental physical laws, which are all quantum mechanical, and which look
for universal regularities in physical systems. Fundamental is the state vector, which is
defined on a space-like Cauchy surface and which contains all information of the quantum
system (a Cauchy surface is a three-dimensional surface in four-dimensional space-time with
the property that no point is the future or past of a point of the very same surface). The
quantum mechanical state vector shifts along a family of space-like surfaces via an unitary
evolution or state reduction. Due to the one-parametrical foliation of Cauchy surfaces, the
notions of time and history become extraordinarily essential in the conventional formula-
tion of quantum physics. As mentioned in Appendix A, consistency limits the prediction
of the theory to probabilities of decoherent sets of alternative histories. The quasi-classical
predictability, which is ubiquitous in our universe, is an emergent feature of the particular
initial condition and the particular dynamical laws. Other sets of decohering histories may
have the same source, but may differ, nevertheless, profoundly from the well acquainted
quasi-classical realm. These uninhabitable alternatives correspond to complementary ways
of speaking about the unfolding of the same initial condition.
Cusanus did not finish his pursuit of wisdom with this whole entangled conception of
reality, possibility, and timeliness. Rather, he thought of something, what precedes timeli-
ness so that he has to answer the difficult question: How can temporality originate without
time? The same problem tantalizes modern theoretical physics, which gives a remarkable
and interesting general answer, although important details are still unsettled. It turns out
that the usual framework with unitarily evolving states on space-like surfaces is not the
most fundamental formulation of quantum theory. In quantum gravity, the existence of a
fixed background space-time geometry with a well defined causal structure is only ensured
in special situations when quantum fluctuations of space and time are smooth in the vicinity
of a saddle point of the Euclidean action functional.14 Space and time are notions that apply
only to special circumstances in the much wider realm of quantum gravity so that space-
time is in fact emergent. In general, quantum histories ”do not have to represent evolution
in space-time. Rather, they can be histories of space-time.”15 What the unitary quantum
evolution on a fixed quasi-classical background geometry precedes is a timeless theory of
quantum gravity, in which all the glory of the physical universe is once and for all present
without any change and without any possibility to add or remove something. Scientists can
approach this holy physical wisdom only step by step by designing appropriate pictures of
the divine essence of the physical world. The ultimate knowledge is not deducible, because
it is not knowledge as we know it but in a composite knowledge and the prerequisite of
knowledge together, as Cusanus speculated in his famous hunt for wisdom. In addition,
the sequence of the scientific progress points to a vision of the world, which is much more
complex than deepest thinkers could ever imagine. What in this way vaguely shows up on
the horizon that religious people always have called God.
V. THERE IS NO PLURALITY OF INFINITY
A. Infinity and oneness
In his study of equality, Cusanus clarified an issue which is important for the understand-
ing of his conviction. He argued that nothing real existing is exactly repeatable so that there
are no real phenomena all over the world which are precisely equal. Exact equality is not of
this world, because it would be all what it can be. Therefore, equality is prior to inequality
and has the status of eternity. By contrast, what ”can be made more equal is subsequent to
the possibility-of-being-made.”16 The equality in and of itself, which is only approximated
by the equality of real things, cannot be increased, because it is once and for all being given
in the same manner as all archetypical, eternal, primordial shapes. ”For just as goodness,
beauty, truth, etc., which in eternity are Eternity itself, are also so equal that they are
Equality, which is Eternity: so they are not more than one. Likewise, there cannot be a
plurality of eternal things, since the Eternal is Actualized-possibility, i.e., is [actually] that
which unqualifiedly can be. And likewise all eternal things are not more than one eternal
thing, even as eternal Goodness, eternal Greatness, eternal Beauty, eternal Truth, eternal
Equality are not more than one eternal thing. Similarly, they are not a plurality of equal
things, because they are so equal that they are most simple Equality itself, which precedes
all plurality.”17 From the uniqueness of eternity, a fundamental existential dualism arises.
On the one hand, there are finite images which all differ from each other and are therefore
never that what they might be. On the other hand, there is the domain of eternity, in which
we project different beings, although there exists only the omnipotent oneness, namely God.
”But Equality itself is the Word of Not-other, i.e., of God the Creator, who defines and
speaks of both Himself and all things.”18
B. About the heaven of infinities
The infinite is not a biblical term, because appearently no positive assertion is attached
to it. The infinite became important for the first time in the doctrine of God, which was
proposed by Gregory of Nyssa (335-394). According to Gregory, infinity no longer meant
formlessness andindefiniteness, butfullnessandglory. Unfortunately, aninfiniteGodcannot
be perceived so that people cannot uplift on him. The resulting fatalistic piety, which was
especially advocated by Dionysius Areopagita, leads to a dead end. Cusanus, who stood
in the tradition of Dionysius, was able to avoid the crash into the fatalism of the mystic
theology. Admittedly, also Cusanus was teaching the learned ignorance with great emphasis.
But he was convinced that through an elevated talking, the preacher becomes aware of some
ciphers of God.
The theology of Nicholas of Cusa implies an infinite God, who unfolds itself (via the
possibility-of-being-made) and secretes itself (as the infinite oneness, which is beyond recog-
nition) at the same time. Everything that is being made is already prefigured in the fea-
sibility. The feasibility itself is an endless fund, which is partly reflected in the made and
which occupies an ontological status even more than ”reality”. Very impressively Cusanus
illustrated his thoughts through a meditation about seeing (De visione Dei). His findings
were summarized as follows: Seeing is at the same time a being seen. All the functional
principles of seeing - physical, chemical, biological, and physiological - as well as all cognitive
activities by which the vision fulfills its objective, are pre-formulated in the endless reservoir
of possibilities of seeing. This fund, which extends to the Big Bang when the habitable
universe was born, has its true counterpart in the actuality of the possibility-of-making (in
God). Here, the authentic watching is found with all its infinite wealth, which cannot help
but watches too, however, in an unprecedented manner. Our seeing is based on a holy see-
ing, which cannot be further perfected and which watches at us with the divine eye. This
heavenly seeing is inexplorable as it is absorbed in the ethereal oneness, where all the divine
idealities are united, namely in God.
The parallel to the quantum ontology is obvious. Above all, quantum physics deals
with possibilities, in which all what is feasible is pre-formulated. The actually being made
is the ”realization” of these possibilities in a strange quantum universe, namely in our
quasi-classical world. The seeing, the thinking, the feeling, etc. have an equivalent in the
possibility-of-being-made (in quantum-mechanical probabilities), which cannot increase or
decrease and which all together create, therefore, the holy unity (God).
For Cusanus, it was quite natural to assume that there could not be a hierarchy of infini-
ties. Anything that cannot be bigger, smaller, better, smarter, etc. merge into the divine
oneness without distinction. It is completely obvious that his vision of God would be de-
stroyed by accepting a plurality of infinities. A heaven with infinitely many heavens was
unthinkable. First Cantor (1845-1918), the founder of modern set theory, demonstrated the
conceivability of an infinite hierarchy of infinities within mathematics. Appendix C provides
a brief overview of big andvery big infinities inset theory. The construction of this hierarchy
is so problematic that famous mathematicians strictly disagreed. Nevertheless, the adven-
turous ideas about hierarchical infinities appeared already in philosophy, for instance, in the
philosophy of world ages by Schelling. It would be an intellectual adventure of particular
kind to extend Nicholas of Cusa’s theology so that it can handle infinities of different nature.
Such ideas would certainly found their counter part in a speculative quantum ontology.
VI. CONCLUSION
What Cusanus occupied in his day, namely the pursuit of wisdom, seems to be inexpli-
cable for many contemporaries. Their world view is crucially shaped by the mechanistic
materialism, which is encouraged by the glorious findings of classical physics. Reality means
for those people the totality of all tangible things that change with time. Possibilities as well
as the whole reality of spirit have no ontological status in this ideology. Perhaps, it is as-
sumed that these phenomena are emergent oddities, which exist only in the mind of people.
In any case, the strict atomism does not open any free room to integrate both potentiality
and mind into a unified world view. Where Cusanus once went on the hunt, there are now
allotments and tenements. A hunt can no longer be organized there. Is this gloomy picture
the final counsel of the scientific progress that the hunt for wisdom is futile? Does our en-
lightenment ruin the hunt? Many signs speak for the conclusion that these questions must
be answered with yes. To mention just an example: Numerous popular scientific writings
(for instance: L. Susskind, ”The Cosmic Landscape”, A. Vilenkin, ”Many Worlds in One”,
S. Lloyd, ”Programming the Universe”) paint a grandiose picture of the world, whereby they
distinctly disassociate themselves from wisdom (respectively from the glorious theological
tradition). However, this ignorance will not endure. With respect to physical reality, mod-
ern theoretical physics step by step approaches ideas that find a counterpart in the inspired
theology of Nicholas of Cusa and other famous theologians. We must realize: Reality is not
only the material world, but at the same time also the possibility-of-being-made. Reality
without possibility is incomprehensible. This more fundamental point of view concerns not
only the future but also the past.19 Moreover, the tangible reality is nothing more than a pe-
culiar potentiality, which allows observations of compact entities in a very special quantum
world. But it goes even further: Modern theoretical physics meets Cusanus in the convic-
tion that the total world affairs of possibility and reality, of the possibility-of-being-made is
not the final answer. There must be something that orchestrates the whole spectacle. And
this source is neither finite nor temporal but infinite and timeless. The theory of quantum
gravitation seeks to discover such a rigid frame, in which our transient world has its very
special place. To speak of God in this scientific thoughts is obviously inappropriate. Never-
theless, we must recognize that the grandiose findings of modern physics find a much better
theological appreciation by the wisdom of Cusanus than by the narrow-minded mechanistic
materialism. The turntothewisdom of theancients isnot onlyjustified by modernscientific
thinking, but also urgently required for several reasons.
Appendix A: Consistent quantum theory
In the course of the last century, an exciting new fundamental conception of the physical
world was discovered that has been verified by numerous experiments. Strictly speaking,
there are up to now no conflicting observations, which jeopardize the progress of quantum
physics. This revolutionary development enforces a rigorous rethinking not only in sciences
but also in philosophy and theology. In order to successfully promote this reformation,
a consistent interpretation of quantum physics is indispensable. Recent publications (for
instance Refs. [20and 21]) give anwell understandable presentation ofthe matter. However,
a reader without any interest in physics will have some trouble to accept many of the
discussed unfamiliar thoughts. Since the reevaluation of Cusanu’s pursuit of wisdom relies
on a familiarity with the new material, namely the quantum ontology, let us illustrate the
basic findings by a simple picture. The cartoon in Fig. 1 shows a head with its characteristic
FIG. 1. In the quasi-classical world, all features of an object (face) are clearly observable at each
moment. Consequently, in hindsight there is only one unique history.
features namely ears, eyes, mouth, and nose. According to classical physics and the common
sense, at any moment of time, the face exhibits all its peculiarities so that it is everything
that it can be at each instant. Consequently, the past is an unchangeable but non-existing
”reality” and only the future is subject to the possibility-of-being-made. Hence, the origin of
the feasibility remains fundamentally inexplicable and beyond of our tangible world. Based
on this classical ontology, the hunt for wisdom proposed by Cusanus cannot be more than a
daydream.
It turned out, however, that reality is by nature completely different. To get an idea
of what is the fundamental true face of reality, lets switch to Fig. 2, which illustrates the
mysterious ghost story about the quantum world. It is essential to realize that the quantum
face can never exhibit all its features at a given time. To give an example lets say that
having a mouth and having ears is mutually incompatible so that it will never happen
that we see a face exhibiting both a mouth and ears at a given time. According to this
basic complementarity principle of quantum theory, there are always more features that a
quantum object or phenomenon could possibly exhibit than those which actually constitute
reality at any time. Consequently, from a strict quantum mechanical point of view, there
is no thing in reality which is all that what it can be. The classicality is excluded by
quantum mechanical complementarity. To understand the ”reality” of a quantum object,
we must account its possibility-of-being-madeby determining the probabilities foritsvarious
FIG. 2. The quantum face is different. In the quantum world there are always much more features
ofanobject(face)thancaninprincipleemergeataninstant. Consequently, thehistoryisbasically
ambiguous.
possible manifestations. Strictly speaking, we are never able to say this or that will happen,
but only this or that could happen. What is surprising, however, we live in a very special
world in which decoherence permanently leads to the appearance of a classical universe
with an extremely peaked probability distribution and a blurring of incompatibilities. Up
to now there is no final theory by which one can conclusively explain the occurrence of
the quasi-classical world. Nevertheless, there is no doubt that the quasi-classical realm of
every day experience is due to the early quantum state of the universe together with the
quantum dynamical laws.22 It remains in force that the possibility-of-being-made has a strict
ontological status in our world as it was claimed by Cusanus long ago in his famous pursuit
of wisdom. In addition, we see from Fig. 2 that there are always many different incompatible
histories in quantum universes, a fact that has illuminating implications for the concept of
time.
The following comments arecloser to the seriousness of the well-funded scientific findings.
The orthodox quantum physics finds its natural description by a Hilbert space H, which
is a linear complete metric vector space. In this abstract mathematical structure there are
orthonormal sequences ofbasis vectors |ψ i, which arecomplete so that theidentity operator
I of H can be represented by orthogonal projections P = |ψ ihψ | on the Hilbert space by
means of the equation I = P P . The state vectors are eigenfunctions of the projection
operators P |ψ i = δ |ψ i with the eigenvalues 0 or 1. Therefore, the projectors P have the
j i ij j j
functiontodecide whether thesystemisinthestate|ψ iornot. However, thedecomposition
of the I-operator is not unique, since the set of basis vectors that span the Hilbert space
is not unique. Two decompositions I = P P and I = P Q are called compatible if all
projectors commute [P ,Q ] = 0 for all i,j, because commuting hermitian operators have
the same basis. What is most essential: inquantum theory, physical quantities are expressed
by operators that do not necessarily commute with each other. Non-commuting operators,
which have no equivalent in classical physics, give rise to incompatible representations,
which should be strictly separated in order to avoid serious paradoxes. Consequently, what a
physicist figures out about a given quantum system depends on his question. The evaluation
ofagivensnapshotrequiresafixingoftheviewpoint, becausetherearealwaysmanydifferent
incompatible possibilities to think about the same thing, a situation which would be simply
absurd in classical physics. What the quantum physicist is concerned with is nothing else
than the possibility-of-being-made. He cannot say: this or that will happen, rather he
has to specify his questioning (the specific representation for his study, which he decides
to prefer compared to other incompatible possibilities) in order to get nothing more than
probabilities for many things that could happen. The possibilities-of-being-made are not
superficial conditions of existence which dictate the motion of divine, eternal elementary
particles, but are intrinsically entangled with that what is called reality. In this general
sense, we are really forced to agree with the texts of Cusanus.
The principle ambiguity of scenarios that refer to one and the same phenomenon at a
given time has implications for the understanding of quantum histories, too. Since at any
given time t (i = 1,2...,n), a specific viewpoint (set of basis vectors) has to be chosen to
answer meaningful questions about future evolutions, the Hilbert space of histories H has to
be a tensor product H = H ⊗H ⊗...H where H is a copy of the Hilbert space that refers
to the instant t . Now, we can repeat our above considerations to explain what a quantum
history actually can be. As the projectors P
of a temporary decomposition of the Hilbert
space H at time t form a complete set, we have I = P P
αj.
The tensor product of these
j j j αj j
projectors Yα = Pα1 ⊗ ··· ⊗ Pαn (with α = {α }) is a projector in the Hilbert space H,
from which the identity operator I in the space of histories can be constructed I = P Yα.
Again, the principle of complementarity comes into play, as the incompatibilities in the
original Hilbert space H carries over to the Hilbert space H of histories. That means, the
decomposition I = P Yα, which characterizes a viewpoint that allows the appreciation of
each history Y by exploiting Y = P c Yα (with c being complex numbers), is not unique.
There are always many incompatible possibilities to tell a story about the same thing. But
what actually are inconsistent histories? To assign probabilities to possible events requires
that all histories in question are mutually consistent so that the decoherence functional
D(α′,α) = Tr(Yα′ ρYα†) becomes diagonal. Only in this case (if D(α′,α) = 0 for α′ 6= α),
we are able to say something about current and future events. Under these circumstances,
our research terminates with the conclusion: the history Yα could possibly be happen with
probability p(α) = D(α,α). But there are also incompatible histories Yα′ and Yα for which
D(α′,α) 6= 0 holds true. All what we can say about the combination of such inconsistent
histories is simply: nonsense. The principle variety of parallel histories is an undeniable fact
discovered by modern physics, which, however, is completely intolerable for the common
sense. Nevertheless, there are already imprints in the history of philosophy that came close
to that findings (an example is the philosophy of world ages by Schelling).
The density matrix ρ, which enters the definition of the decoherence functional, is crucial
for the determination of historical processes that could occur. The possibility-of-being-
made with respect to histories is determined not only by equations of motion (from which
the eigenstates |ψ i and therefore the projectors P = |ψ ihψ | are calculated), but also by
the ”initial condition” expressed by the density matrix ρ. For the simple case that there was
an initial pure quantum state |ψ i, we have ρ = |ψ ihψ |. The determination of the initial
condition is a serious and complicated problem. A self-consistent solution proposed by J.
Hartle, S. Hawking, and T. Hertog is particularly promising.14
Appendix B: The mysterious number Ω
Any scientific law, any information about technological processes, historical events, psy-
chological abnormalities and so on can be expressed in terms of binary numbers. Therefore,
the general study of strings, which digitally encode information, essentially contributes to
the epistemology. It is surprising that these more formal analysis conveys deep insights
into what cognition means. A famous example is Chaitin’s number Ω. The idea is pretty
simple. Let us generate a long disordered binary string by chance and interpret the result
as a random computer program. The probability to obtain a string with n bits amounts
(1/2)n. Among the variety of randomly produced binary strings there are countless com-
puter programs that could initiate real computations. The seemingly simple question is:
Can we decide in a finite amount of time, whether or not the respective computer program
consisting of n bits ever halts? The general answer is: No. This counterintuitive finding,
proved by Turing, allows the definition of a number that is not countable, namely the proba-
bility Ω that a randomly generated program ever halts. The formal expression for Chaitin’s
number is Ω = P 2−|p|, where |p| represents the length of the computer program p in
bits. The irrational number Ω exhibits some remarkable peculiarities. Because Ω is based
on an unsolvable problem, namely Turing’s halting problem, its complexity is really infinite.
It’s infinitely many digits have a ”divine origin”, because their determination would require
infinite resources, which are not available. So Ω is really a very complex number. That
means that the smallest computer program that generates Ω cannot be shorter than Ω itself
(however, there is no algorithm which can decide, whether a programis as small as possible).
As there is no redundancy in the digit stream of Ω, there is also no mathematical recipe (no
finite binary string), by which Ω could be calculated (as it is the case for other irrational
numbers). The inventory of Ω is not preserved in an elegant theory, which is encoded by a
finite binary sequence. The absolute complexity of Ω means complete lawlessness and pure
arbitrariness. About Ω one cannot speak in pictures and metaphors. This number is max-
imally unknowable and random. The best one could say about Ω would be a transmission
of all its digits what is impossible.
Appendix C: Infinite sets
The set of all rational numbers is infinite, but countable, whereas there is another infinity,
namely the set of all real numbers, which has a greater ”power”, because it is not countable
due to the additional infinite (not countable) set of irrational numbers (an assertion, which
was critizised recently, c.f., Ref. 23). Consequently, not all infinite sets have the same ”size”.
But how can we distinguish infinite sets from each other? The famous mathematician,
Georg Cantor (1845-1918), solved this problem by establishing modern set theory. General
counting is not based on integers, but on well-ordered sets, which are totally ordered with
the addition that every nonempty subset has a least member so that a unique successor can
be identified in each infinite set. A well-ordered set A :≡ hA,< i encompasses both the
finite or infinite set A and the well-ordering relation < . According to the well-ordering
theorem, each set can be well-ordered. This finding suggests the introduction of ordinal
numbers α, which are strictly well-ordered and transitive so that every element of α is also
a subset of α. It is the key feature of ordinals that each well-ordered set is order isomorph
to exactly one ordinal number. Therefore, generalized counting can exploit the isomorphism
between well-ordered sets hA,< i and hα,< i with an unique ordinal α. There is an endless
supply of ordinals, such that (i) one ordinal is the first, (ii) each ordinal has a successor,
(iii) for each set of ordinals there is another ordinal, which succeeds them all. The collection
O of all ordinals is an inconsistent, absolutely infinite multiplicity. The smallest infinite
ordinal number ω represents countable infinite sets. At the next step, we encounter the set
of real numbers (the continuum) and the Euclidean space , the ”measure” of which is the
power set P(ω) (the set of all subsets of ω). All sets at this level are no longer countable in
the conventional sense. Its binary representation is a function from ω to {0,1}, which are
elements of the power set {0,1}ω. What sounds amazing, the equivalence relation Rω ∼ R
holds true, which means that an arbitrarily short part of a straight line can be mapped onto
an Euclidean space with countable infinite dimensions. An even bigger infinity accounts for
all functions, which map R onto R : RR ∼ P( R ) ∼ P(P(ω))). Usually, sets with higher
cardinality are not treated in mathematics. To proceed further in the hierarchy of infinities,
lets introduce the notion of cardinals. Based on the axiom of choice, we identify the cardinal
number with the initial ordinal. Cardinals are, therefore, special ordinals that are not
equipotent to any smaller ordinal. Cardinal numbers, usually expressed by the aleph ℵ,
are particularly suitable for counting. The set Cn of all infinite cardinal numbers has
as its smallest element ℵ ∼ ω the cardinality of natural numbers. The aleph function
generates an isomorphism between hOn,< i and hCn ,<i so that for each cardinal κ
there exists an index α with κ = ℵ . What is astonishing, the set Cr(Cn ) of all critical
alephs, which satisfy the fixed-point relation κ = ℵ , has the same size (cardinality) as
the set O of all ordinals. Moreover, if A is an unbounded, closed set of ordinal numbers
than the set Cr(A) of all critical cardinals is also an infinite, unbounded and closed set of
ordinals. Consequently, the universe of sets expands explosively by collecting all sets with
critical cardinals: Θ , Θ ,...Θ , Θ ,...Θ ,...Θ ,... It is a special feature of these
uncountable, weakly inaccessible cardinals that they cannot be generated from below by
formations of power sets. These inaccessible cardinals have such a large cardinality that
they contain the entire classical set theory. The existence of inaccessible cardinals is not
guaranteed by ordinary axioms of set theory. It is the universe axiom (or equivalently the
inaccessible cardinal axiom) that ensures the existence of an infinite tower of inaccessible
cardinals. And on top of the entire mountain reside the inconsistent, absolutely infinite
sets, which Cantor identified with God. However, the idea of an actual infinity (formally
proposed by the axiom of infinity) has attracted a lot of hostility, first of all by mathematical
schools such as constructivism and intuitionism.
1 N. of Cusa, in NICHOLAS OF CUSA: METAPHYSICAL SPECULATIONS,edited by J. Hop-
kins (The Arthur J. Banning Press, Minneapolis, Minnesota, 1998) p. 124.
2 Cf. Hopkins (1998), p. 6.
3 Cf. Hopkins (1998), p. 6.
4 Cf. Hopkins (1998), p. 7.
5 Cf. Hopkins (1998), p. 7.
6 Cf. Hopkins (1998), p. 7.
7 Cf. Hopkins (1998), p. 36.
8 R. B. Griffiths, e-print arXiv:quant-phys/1105.3932v1 (2011).
9 Cf. Hopkins (1998), p. 115.
10 Cf. Hopkins (1998), p. 89.
11 Cf. Hopkins (1998), p. 96.
12 M. Chown, in Randomness and Complexity. From Leibniz to Chaitin, edited by C. S. Calude
(World Scientific, New Jersey, London, Singapore, 2007) Chap. 19, p. 329.
13 D. Zeilberger, in Randomness and Complexity. From Leibniz to Chaitin, edited by C. S. Calude
(World Scientific, New Jersey, London, Singapore, 2007) Chap. 23, p. 385.
14 J. B. Hartle, S. W. Hawking, and T. Hertog, Phys. Rev. Lett. 100, 201301 (2008).
15 J. B. Hartle, e-print arXiv:gr-qc/0602013v2 (2006).
16 Cf. Hopkins (1998), p. 68.
17 Cf. Hopkins (1998), p. 96.
18 Cf. Hopkins (1998), p. 70.
19 J. B. Hartle, e-print arXiv:gr-qc/9712001v1 (1997).
20 R. B. Griffiths, Consistent Quantum Theory (Cambridge University Press, 2003).
21 P. C. Hohenberg, Rev. Mod. Phys. 82, 2835 (2010).
22 J. B. Hartle, e-print arXiv:quant-phys/0806.3776 (2008).
23 A. A. Zenkin, The Review of Modern Logic 6, 27 (2004).