Quantum Computing with Neutral Atoms in an Optical Lattice
Ivan H. Deutsch and Gavin K. Brennen
Dept. of Physics and Astronomy, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, NM 87131
Poul S. Jessen
Optical Sciences Center, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85721
Abstract: We present a proposal for quantum information processing with neutral atoms
trapped in optical lattices as qubits. Initialization and coherent control of single qubits
can be achieved with standard laser cooling and spectroscopic techniques. We consider
entangling two-qubit logic gates based on optically induced dipole-dipole interactions,
calculating a figure-of-merit for various protocols. Massive parallelism intrinsic to the
lattice geometry makes this an intriguing system for scalable, fault-tolerant quantum
computation.
I. The Tao of Quantum Computing
The end of the twentieth century has seen a remarkable synergy of two of its most important
scientific achievements: information science and quantum physics. Following the pioneering
work of Benioff [1], Feynmann [2], Deutsch [3], Bennett [4], Shor [5] and others, we are just
beginning to appreciate the tremendous potential of devices that represent and process
information according to the laws of quantum mechanics. Much attention is currently focussed
on the idea of “quantum computation”, according to which algorithms can be carried out as
unitary transformations on a many-body quantum system [6], sometimes with enormous savings
in computational resources compared to any classical device. Examples of the impact of
quantum information science (QIS) in other areas include improved precision measurements [7],
quantum simulations [8] and quantum communication [9].
While there has been rapid progress in developing the fundamental notions of QIS, it remains
a grand challenge to bring its promises to fruition in the laboratory. In the prevalent paradigm, a
unitary transformation (computation) is performed by a quantum circuit consisting of a sequence
of quantum gates acting upon a collection of qubits (two-level quantum systems). To allow this,
a physical implementation of quantum computing must satisfy two requirements:
Special Issue of Forschritte der Physik
• The constituent particles must be strongly coupled to one another, to the external coherent
fields which drive the unitary evolution, and to an external T » 0K bath that provides for
qubit initialization.
• The constituent particles must be weakly coupled to the incoherent noisy environment which
leads to decoherence and ultimately reduces quantum-information to classical-information.
This inherent conflict, which we call the "Tao of Quantum Computing", highlights the daunting
realities of laboratory experiments. The key challenge of QIS is then to find or engineer a
quantum many-body system so that coherent evolution and decoherence can take place on very
different time scales. There are of course further requirements for implementing a general
purpose quantum computer, including input-output and error-correction, as discussed by
DiVincenzo in the introductory chapter to this volume. The diverse proposals discussed within
this special issue all make different compromises with these various demands in mind. For
example in the ion trap geometry (see article by Wineland in this volume), strong coherent
coupling is provided by the repulsive Coulomb interaction, but this interaction also couples
strongly to the perturbing effects of the noisy environment [10]. A very different compromise is
made by NMR (see Cory in this volume) which employs the much weaker magnetic dipole-
dipole interactions between nuclei in molecules. This system has intrinsically long coherence
times and weak coupling to the environment. However, these natural systems come at a price.
Such weak interactions between nuclei occur only at very short distances in which case
addressing and distinguishing qubits for a large collection becomes problematic. An alternative
is to engineer an artificial system for which addressing and preparing qubits is built into the
design (see articles by Kane and also Tanamoto). The decoherence properties for these systems
are promising but have so far been measured only for non-interacting qubits. In accordance with
the Tao of Quantum Computing one can expect that coupling qubits to each other will bring with
it stronger coupling to the environment (e. g. the host silicon lattice) and faster decoherence. As
such implementations of QIS move to the laboratory, it will be interesting to see what new
compromises can be worked out for each case.
We have recently considered in some detail how to encode and process quantum information
using trapped neutral atoms as qubits. This approach has several appealing features. Neutral
atoms in their electronic ground state couple extremely weakly to the environment, allowing
potentially very long coherence times [11]. In most situations neutrals also couple very weakly
to each other, but interatomic couplings can be created on demand by induced electric dipole-
dipole interactions [12, 13], ground state collisions [14, 15], or by real photon exchange [16].
The ability to turn interactions “on” only when needed is highly advantageous because it reduces
coupling to the environment and the spread of errors during computation. The weak atomic
Special Issue of Forschritte der Physik
interactions also make it relatively straightforward to trap and cool neutrals in large numbers,
with favorable implications for scaling to many qubits and perhaps parallel processing.
We discuss in this paper several different protocols to carry out quantum logic operations,
focusing on one possible entangling mechanism, laser induced electric dipole-dipole interactions.
Quantum information is encoded in a pair of internal states in the atomic hyperfine ground
manifold, and the excitation of a dipole moment is made conditional on the state of each atomic
qubit. Radiative damping of the dipoles brings with it a fundamental mechanism of decoherence
(the Tao of Quantum Computing), which must be suppressed by performing all manipulations
rapidly compared to the rate of spontaneous emission. A simple scaling argument shows that
one can in principle obtain the necessary separation of timescales. Consider two atoms separated
at a distance r <<l , with an interaction energy that scales as V ~ d 2/r3, where d is the
mean induced dipole moment per atom. The induced dipoles can spontaneously emit photons,
but this process is bounded above by the Dicke-superradiance cooperative decay rate, which is
equal to twice the single atom scattering rate G ¢ ~ k3 d 2/h, where k is the wave number of the
driving laser. We can characterize the performance of a quantum “gate” by a figure of merit that
measures the ratio of the coherent interaction energy of two qubits to their collective
decoherence rate, k =V /hG ¢ ~ ( k r )- 3 . For sufficiently tight atomic confinement, k r <<1 (the
Lamb-Dicke regime), the dipole-dipole level shift can be much larger than the scattering rate and
the interaction effectively becomes coherent.
At this time, the best prospects for such tight confinement is offered by a type of neutral atom
trap known as an optical lattice [17]. Optical lattices are periodic arrays of micron-sized traps
created by the ac-Stark shift in the interference pattern of a set of intersecting laser beams. Using
lattice light detuned far from atomic resonance it is possible to greatly reduce the rate of photon
scattering, while at the same time a large intensity allows us to maintain a strong trapping
potential. Some of the building blocks of quantum computing have already been demonstrated in
this system, including cooling to the vibrational ground state of the lattice microtraps [18], and
coherent control of the combined center-of-mass and ground hyperfine degrees of freedom [19].
A wide range of properties characterizing the lattice potential can be controlled in real time
through changes in laser beam geometry, polarization, intensity and frequency, and through the
addition of static electric and magnetic fields. Of particular interest is the ability to design
trapping potentials that are very nearly identical for the two hyperfine spin states used to encode
an atomic qubit, thereby largely decoupling the internal degrees of freedom which store the
qubits from the center-of-mass motion. It is even possible to encode distinct subsets of atomic
qubits, trapped on lattice grids that can be moved independently of each other. This provides a
mechanism to superimpose and couple any two qubits from the two grids, and additionally lends
Special Issue of Forschritte der Physik
itself naturally to moving and operating on blocks of qubits in a highly parallel fashion, as
required for quantum error correction [20].
The remainder of this chapter is organized as follows. In Sec. II we give an overview of the
atom/optical lattice system, defining the qubits and discussing how to prepare, manipulate and
measure their state. In Sec. III we discuss the fundamental physics associated with our proposed
entangling mechanism – optically induced dipole-dipole interactions. In Sec. IV we outline
protocols for a universal set of quantum logic gates, and estimate a figure of merit for each
member. Strategies for measuring and minimizing the gate error-probability are discussed in
Sec. V. Finally in Sec. VI we given an outlook for near-term studies based on existing
technology and towards future prospects of this system for robust, fault-tolerant operation.
II. The Alkali/Optical Lattice System
When we choose an atomic species and design a neutral atom trap for use in QIS we must
pay attention to several requirements:
• The intrinsic decoherence rate of the trap must be low.
• The trap must provide confinement on a scale much smaller than the optical wavelength.
• The trap must be compatible with the encoding of quantum information in an atomic internal
and/or motional degree of freedom.
• The interaction between atomic qubits must be precisely controlled and programmable.
Two major classes of neutral atom traps are routinely used in the laboratory: magnetic traps
based on the interaction -m(cid:215) B between an atomic magnetic moment and a magnetic field, and
optical traps based on the interaction - d(cid:215) E/2 between an induced electric dipole moment and a
laser field. Magnetic traps provide very long coherence times, as evidenced by the remarkable
coherent dynamics of Bose-Einstein Condensed atomic vapors [21], but do not lend themselves
easily to encoding and controlling large numbers of atomic qubits. By contrast, optical traps are
intrinsically dissipative at some level due to photon scattering, but this disadvantage is more than
compensated by the tremendous flexibility with which one can design the trapping potential
through choice of atomic species and optical field parameters. So far, we and others have
focussed on optical lattices, whose central feature compared to other types of optical traps is the
ease with which one can trap large numbers of atoms and move them physically with precise
Special Issue of Forschritte der Physik
control so that qubits can be pairwise superimposed and quantum logic operations carried out
between them.
In the large detuning, low saturation limit of interest here, the light shift (ac Stark shift) of an
atomic ground state is readily calculated using perturbation theory. For a monochromatic field,
E(x,t)= Re E (x)e (x)e - iw L t , and atomic tensor polarizability a one has the essentially
classical expression,
E (x) 2 r t r
This equation indicates that the optical potential can be designed through judicious choice of the
field amplitude E (x), polarization e (x), and atomic species whose internal state dictates the
t (cid:229) ( )
polarizability tensor a = - Re d d / h D + G i /2 . Here d is the dipole operator
e ge eg eg e eg
connecting states e and g, D =w -w is the detuning from the corresponding transition
frequency, and G is the excited state natural linewidth. Dissipation in the potential is
characterized by the imaginary part of a , and arises due to spontaneous photon scattering which
occurs at a rate G ¢ = (cid:229) sG 2, where s =W 2 ( D2 ) 2 is the saturation parameter for a given
e eg e eg eg eg
Rabi frequency W = d (cid:215) E h. Since the scattering rates scale as E2 D 2 and the trap depth
scales as E2 D (Eq. (1)), a trap using intense light detuned far from any resonance can provide
substantial confinement with minimal dissipation.
In the remainder of this paper we restrict our discussion to alkali atoms, which have become
the staple of the atomic physics and quantum optics community due to the ease with which they
can be laser cooled and trapped. The common isotopes of Na, Rb and Cs have nuclear spin and
hyperfine structure, with nS F = I – 1 ground states and nP F = I – 1 , nP F = I – 1,3
12 2 12 2 32 2 2
excited states (the well known D1 and D2 resonance lines). To provide an idea of the
appropriate physical scales, consider a Cs atom trapped near a node of a linearly polarized
standing wave with a peak intensity of 500W cm2 and tuned 50 GHz blue of (i. e. above) the
D2 resonance. This configuration forms a very simple one-dimensional (1D) optical lattice, with
a potential U ( x )=U cos2 ( k x ) , where k is the laser wavenumber and the maximum light shift
at the standing wave anti-nodes is U ~104E ~1 mK. The single-photon recoil energy
2m , where m is the atomic mass, is used as a natural energy scale for the problem.
The atomic center-of-mass oscillation frequency along the standing wave is w ~200E / h ~
Special Issue of Forschritte der Physik
500 kHz and the rms spread of the vibrational ground state is x ~l 100~10 nm. In the
following we will characterize atomic confinement by the Lamb-Dicke parameter h ” k x ,
which is here ~0.07. By comparison, the rate of photon scattering is G ¢ ~65s- 1 and
w G ¢ ~6· 103, i. e. the vibrational level structure is highly resolved and the atom undergoes
many thousand oscillations between spontaneous emission events. Different compromises
between oscillation frequency/confinement and photon scattering rate can be made according to
Eq. (1), limited chiefly by the lattice intensity as dictated by available laser power.
Numerous extensions of the above 1D lattice to two and three dimensions have been
explored in both theory and experiment [17]. Typically, these lattices have been loaded with
atoms through a combination of standard laser cooling in a magneto-optic trap, precooling in a
near-resonance optical lattice, and adiabatic transfer to the far-off-resonance lattice [22]. Due to
the low heating rate and tight confinement the atoms can be further cooled to the quantum
mechanical vibration ground-state of the far-off-resonance lattice with near unit efficiency, using
the method of resolved-sideband Raman cooling [23], originally developed for ion traps [24]. A
major shortcoming of this approach is that the initial laser cooled sample is relatively dilute and
the eventual atom distribution over available lattice sites is correspondingly sparse and random,
with perhaps one atom per ~100 lattice sites. Very recently, experiments have succeeded in
loading from much denser samples, demonstrating both near-unit occupation of the lattice sites
[25] and resolved-sideband cooling at correspondingly high atomic density [26].
For our implementation of quantum logic in this system we consider a three dimensional
(3D) optical lattice geometry such as the one shown in Fig. 1, consisting of blue detuned
standing waves aligned along the three Cartesian axes. Interference effects can be eliminated by
choosing slightly different optical frequencies for beams propagating along different axes, so that
the total lattice potential becomes the simple sum of three 1D lattice potentials. The two lattices
in the x-y plane are formed by linearly polarized standing waves and confine atoms in a square
array of potential wells corresponding to “tubes” along the z axis. In the z direction, we allow for
a variable angle q between the counterpropagating linear polarizations (lin-q -lin configuration
[27]). These beams produce a pair of s -s standing waves with antinodes separated by
d z = Dtan- 1 [( tanq ) /2 ] . The resulting optical potential permits us to trap two distinguishable sets
of atoms according to Eq. (1): those in internal states most light-shifted by s light, and those in
states most light-shifted by s light. We refer to these as the “(–) -species”. The ability to
dynamically control the angle q between polarizations, and thus vary the distance between the
nodes of the interleaved standing waves, allows us to separate and move atoms of the (–) -species
relative to each other – one of the central features of our proposal. Two atoms of different
Special Issue of Forschritte der Physik
species, initially separated along the z-axis by a distance D z, can be made to overlap by rotating
q by 2p D z l . If this angular rotation is made adiabatic with respect to the oscillation
frequency, then the center of mass wave functions of the atoms are unchanged.
Once the atoms have been brought together they can be made to interact. We focus in this
paper on the possibility of employing optically induced electric dipole-dipole interactions by
applying an auxiliary laser pulse, referred to as the "catalysis field", for a time necessary to
achieve the desired two-qubit logical operations (for an alternative coupling scheme based on
elastic collisions in a closely related proposal, see Briegel et al. in this volume). After a logical
operation, the atoms can be separated by further adiabatic rotation of the lattice polarizations so
that they no longer interact. The catalysis field is assumed to be tuned closer to resonance than
the lattice fields and induces stronger dipoles (though still with s<<1), so that the dipoles
induced by the lattice fields can be neglected in their contribution to the atom-atom interactions.
To make this discussion more specific we must choose a proper set of logical basis states for
our atomic qubits. To do so it is useful to express the optical potential, Eq. (1), in terms of its
irreducible components. For alkali atoms excited near the D2 resonance line, at a detuning much
larger than the hyperfine splitting but less than the fine structure splitting in the excited state, the
light shift can be cast in the form [19]
)(cid:215)
2 r i [r r ]
U ( x )= U e ( x )2 , B ( x )= - Ue *( x )e· ( x ) ,
J 3 1 L eff 3 1 L L
where U is the single-beam light shift. Expressing the light shift in terms of a scalar potential
U x independent of Fand M , and an effective magnetic field B x serves as a powerful
guide for encoding quantum information. For example, if the trap polarization is everywhere
linear then e ( x ) is real and B ( x )” 0, and the light shift operator is simply a scalar potential.
The preceding discussion shows that this situation is too restrictive for our purposes since we
lose the ability to move atoms relative to one another via polarization rotation. Instead, we seek
a finite B and choose to encode a qubit in two hyperfine ground states whose the g -factors
have equal magnitude (to within 10-3) and opposite sign, so that states F = I + 1,M and
F = I - 1-, M have nearly identical light shifts. There are several reasons why two such
states form a robust basis for an atomic qubit. First, fluctuations in the light shift and/or Zeeman
shift from ambient real magnetic fields will be common mode, and cause minimal phase
accumulation between the qubit states. Second, an individual qubit always remains spatially
Special Issue of Forschritte der Physik
localized as the lattice polarization is changed – the entanglement created by quantum logic
operations occurs solely between the spins of different atoms. There is never any entanglement
within a single atom between its internal and external degrees of freedom. This is in contrast to
the proposal of Jaksch et al. [14], whereby the logical- 1 and logical- 0 of a given atom follow
different potentials, leading to the formation of nonlocal entangled “Schrödinger-cat” states of
individual atoms. Such states could potentially be highly susceptible to phase errors caused by
fluctuations or spatial inhomogeneities in the trapping potential and/or ambient magnetic fields.
With these considerations in mind we can define suitable computational basis sets for the (±)-
species atoms in our optical lattice. For example, we can choose
1 = F ,M = – 1˜ y , 0 = F ,M = m1 ˜ y (3)
– › F 1 ext – fl F 0 ext
where y are the motional quantum states. In this basis, rotations on the single qubit Bloch
sphere can be performed using coherent Raman pulses and ac-Stark shifts, with the (+) and (- )
species addressed separately via the polarization of the Raman pulses. Projective measurements
of the qubit state can be performed with conventional fluorescence spectroscopy. The
spectroscopic tools for these tasks are equivalent to those demonstrated in ion traps [28].
Based on these ideas we can envision how an ideal optical lattice quantum computer might
function. The interleaving "+" and "–" lattices of Fig. 1 are occupied in a well defined pattern by
single atomic qubits in pure internal and vibrational ground states. This initializes the system in
accordance with the first requirement of DiVincenzo. With no manipulation to bring atoms
together in the x-y plane, each tube of atoms along z represents a separate quantum register.
Within each register two-qubit logic gates are operated by bringing targeted pairs together
through polarization rotation, applying an appropriate catalysis pulse which induces a
cooperative interaction, and then separating the atoms again. In the following section we discuss
the fundamentals of the dipole-dipole entangling mechanism and then protocols for
implementing two-qubit logic gates such as CPHASE or SWAP. These, together with our
ability to carry out arbitrary single qubit manipulations, constitute the requisite universal set of
logic gates. Finally, read out is performed as a projective measurement on individual qubits.
III. Dipole-Dipole Interactions
The dipole-dipole interaction at the heart of our proposed two-qubit logic gate depends on
both the internal electronic states of the atoms, as dictated by the tensor nature of the interaction,
Special Issue of Forschritte der Physik
and the external motional states, which determine the relative coordinate probability distribution
of the dipoles. We consider a system of two atoms trapped in harmonic wells, interacting
coherently with a classical field and with each other via the dipole-dipole interaction.
Decoherence may occur via cooperative spontaneous emission. We seek expressions for the
interaction matrix elements and the resulting selection rules (for details see [13]).
Consider two alkali atoms with nuclear spin I and center of mass positions r , r , excited on
the D2 transition S ( F ) « P ( F¢ ) , where F and F¢ belong to the ground and excited state
hyperfine manifolds. The atoms interact with the vacuum field and a classical monochromatic
laser field, detuned by amount D, large compared to the excited-state hyperfine splitting. Since
the quantum information will be stored in the ground-state hyperfine sublevels, it is important for
us to include the complex internal structure in calculating the interaction matrix elements. After
tracing over the vacuum modes in the usual Born-Markov and rotating wave approximations, one
obtains the effective Hamiltonian for the atom-laser interaction, together with a dipole-dipole
interaction between atoms [29],
(cid:230) G (cid:246) ( ) Wh ( r r )
H = - h D + i D†(cid:215) D + D†(cid:215) D - D(cid:215)† e (r+) D(cid:215)†e (r+) h.c. , (4a)
AL Ł 2 ł 1 1 2 2 2 1 L 1 2 L 2
hG Gh ( t t )
H =V - i dd= - D(cid:215) † T k r (cid:215) D + D†(cid:215) T k r (cid:215) D . (4b)
dd dd 2 2 2 L 1 1 L 2
The dimensionless dipole raising operator associated with absorption of a photon is defined as
(cid:229) P dP
where J¢ d J is the reduced matrix element andP are projectors on the excited and ground
manifolds of magnetic sublevels. The second rank tensor, T= f +ig, describes the strength of
the two-atom interaction as a function of atomic separation r = r - r . The Hermitian part of
the effective interaction Hamiltonian, V , determines the dipole-dipole energy level shift,
whereas the anti-Hermitian part, G , gives rise to cooperative spontaneous emission, so that the
total decay rate is given by the expectation value of G =G D†(cid:215) D + D†(cid:215) D G + . In the near
tot 1 1 2 2 dd
field, taking the limit k rfi 0, one finds V (cid:222) d(cid:215) -d (cid:215) 3(rˆ d(cid:215) )(rˆ d ) /r3, the quasi-static
L dd 1 2 1 2
dipole-dipole interaction, and G (cid:222) G D(cid:215) D+† D(cid:215) D† , the Dicke super- (or sub) radiant
dd 1 2 2 1
interference term for in (or out of) phase dipoles. Because the level shift diverges for small r
Special Issue of Forschritte der Physik
whereas the cooperative emission remains finite, the time scales for coherent and incoherent
interactions separate, providing a mechanism for controlled entanglement of the atoms, as
discussed in Sec. I.
As a first estimate of the interaction matrix elements we will make a rather extreme
simplifying approximation. We will assume that the strength of the excited dipole is
independent of the internuclear coordinate separating the atoms. This will allow us to calculate
the figure of merit analytically for some geometries. We will point out the range of validity of
this approximation as we proceed and consider extensions in Sec. VI. Consider then a product
state of two atoms, each described by a pure separable state of internal and external degrees of
freedom Y = y f , where the internal state possesses a mean dipole moment vector
oscillating along the spherical basis vector e . The figure of merit for coherent dipole-dipole
level shift follows from Eq. (4),
V - hG D†D f - f
k = dd = q q (int qq ext ) = ( qq ext ). (6)
hG 2hG D†D 1+ g 2 1+ g
tot q q qq qq
int ext ext
This factor depends only on geometry, the external states and the direction of polarization. It is
independent of the strength of the dipole, since the same matrix element for the atoms’ internal
states appears both in the numerator and denominator. The average over the external state is
carried out with respect to the relative coordinate probability density, having traced over the
center of mass of the two-atom system.
It is necessary to devise interactions that minimize gate errors due to photon scattering and
coherent coupling outside the logical basis. We will focus here on weak excitation of the
dipoles. Adiabatic elimination of the excited states follows from second order perturbation
theory in the limit of small saturation of the atomic transitions. When the detuning is large
compared to the excited state level shifts, we can neglect the change of the level structure due to
the dipole-dipole interaction, and consider saturation of the atomic levels, independent of the
external motional states. For the case of alkali atoms the effective Hamiltonian on the ground
state manifold is [30]
H =V - i dd
= - s f + ig D (cid:215) e *(r) D†e(cid:215) De (cid:215) * De† (cid:215) r +h.c. ,
2 qq¢ qq¢ 1 L 1 1 q 2 q¢ 2 L 2
Special Issue of Forschritte der Physik
with saturation s<<1. The coupling tensor is written here in the spherical basis. Physically, Eq.
(7) represents a four photon process: absorption of a laser photon by one atom followed by
coherent exchange of the excitation between the atoms via a virtual photon emission and
absorption, and finally stimulated emission of a laser photon returning both atoms to the ground
state. Because the virtual photon can be emitted in any direction, it is not an eigenstate of
angular momentum with respect to the space-fixed quantization axis of the atoms. The quantum
numbers q and q¢ represent two of the possible projections of its angular momentum on that
axis.
We are left to consider the geometry of the trapping potentials and resulting external
coordinate wave functions whose overlap with the dipole-dipole operator determines the level
shifts. For deep traps we can approximate the motional states as harmonic oscillators. For the
particular case of an isotropic trap, the spherical symmetry allows explicit evaluation of the
interaction matrix elements. Consider two atoms in a common well, each described by a set of
radial and angular momentum vibrational quantum numbers n,l,m , with energy
E = 2n+l+3/2, degeneracy g =( 2n+l+1 )( 2n+l+2 ) /2, and an internal state denoting one
of the ground magnetic sublevels of a given hyperfine state F,M . We have evaluated the
matrix element,
F,M ;nlm ˜ F,M ;n l m V F,M¢ ;n¢ ¢lm¢ ˜ F,M¢ ;n¢ ¢l m¢ , (8)
F1 11 1 F2 2 2 2 dd F1 11 1 F2 2 2 2
in [13], from which we arrived at important selection rules. One finds that neither M ,M , nor
the total M +M is a conserved quantity, but rather that M¢ + M¢ = M + M +(q- q¢ ).
F1 F2 F1 F2 F1 F2
The fact that these are not good quantum numbers can be seen immediately from the form of the
interaction Hamiltonian, Eq. (4), which is neither a scalar with respect to rotations by hyperfine
operators F ˆ , F ˆ , nor F ˆ +F ˆ . Classically this is reflected in the fact that the dipole-dipole
interaction is not a central force, and therefore the angular momentum of two classical dipoles
about their center-of-mass is not a conserved quantity. Generally, internal angular momentum
can be converted to rotational energy of the molecule if the atoms have multiply degenerate
energy levels, obeying the selection rule, m¢ +m¢ – (q- q¢ )= m +m . In addition, the quantum
numbers in Eq. (8) are restricted to conserve the total mechanical energy,
tot 1 2 1 2 CM rel CM rel
1 2 1 2 1 2 1 2
Special Issue of Forschritte der Physik
These selection rules impact the design of quantum logic gates. Besides decoherence, errors
can occur due to coherent "leakage" to states outside the computational basis set. For example,
without steps to suppress it, we can couple from two-qubit states within the logical basis to other
degenerate, two-atom internal states through the exchange of virtual photons. Symmetry
breaking must be employed through either magnetic fields and/or ac-stark shifts [13]. Leakage
can also occur in the external quantum states for excited vibration modes of a common spherical
well. For instance, the product state of two atoms, each with one quanta of vibration along z, can
couple to the seven dimensional degenerate subspace of two quanta shared between the atoms,
nlm ˜ n l m= {010˜ 010 ,- 01˜ 1 011˜, 01- 1 01 1,
11 1 2 2 2 (10)
020 ˜ 000 , 000˜ 020 , 1˜00 000 , ˜ 000 100}.
We will consider an alternative protocol in Sec. IV employing excited vibrational states, but
avoids this large degenerate subspace.
One final leakage channel we must address is coherent coupling into the excited state
manifold. We must ensure that all population returns to the ground states after the logic gate is
completed. One means to achieve this is to adiabatically connect the ground-manifold to the
field-dressed levels. Adiabatic evolution is achieved when the level splitting between the two-
atom ground and first excited eigenstates is sufficiently large compared to off-diagonal coupling
caused by the changing catalysis excitation. An alternative approach is to work in the opposite
limit, and apply sudden pulses, fast compared to V / h. A real excitation is then coherently
exchanged between the atoms. A similar protocol in the form of a CNOT has been proposed by
Lukin and Hemmer [31] for dipole-dipole interacting dopants in a solid state host.
IV. Quantum Logic Gates
The quantum circuit model of quantum computing reduces the problem to precise operation
of a universal set of quantum logic gates. Assuming reasonable fidelity in carrying out single
qubit operations, the main challenge is to design and implement two-qubit gates. Though almost
any entangling operation will give a universal set [32], we will consider two specific gates. A
CPHASE gate can be implemented with the following protocol. If the catalysis field is tuned
near the S ,F fi P resonance with detuning small compared to the ground-state hyperfine
splitting, then nonnegligible dipoles are induced only for atoms in the logical- 1 states (Fig. 2a).
If there are no off-diagonal matrix elements of the dipole-dipole interaction in the chosen logical
Special Issue of Forschritte der Physik
basis, and assuming the gate is performed on a time scale much faster than the photon scattering
rate, this causes only a non-zero cooperative level shift of the logical basis state 1 ˜ 1 , and
zero cooperative level shift of all other logical basis states (see Fig. 2b). Of course single atom
light-shift interactions cause logical states to accumulate phase as well, but these can be removed
through appropriate light-shift pulses acting on the separated individual atoms before and after
they are made to interact. If the atomic pair is allowed to evolve in the presence of the catalysis
field for a time t = hp / V we obtain 1 ˜ 1fi - ˜ 1 1 with no change to the other
dd + - + -
logical basis states, as required for a CPHASE. The gate can be easily transformed into the
familiar CNOT gate with single qubit Hadamard transformation before and after the cooperative
phase [33]. A similar protocol can also be constructed to implement a SWAP gate [34].
Through an appropriate choice of logical basis and catalysis field, one can induce dipole-dipole
couplings which are only off-diagonal in the logical basis, of the type 1 ˜ 0 « ˜ 0 1 .
Applying the interaction for a time such that a p /2 rotation occurs in this subspace, we obtain the
desired gate (Fig. 2c-d).
In the following we consider four examples which demonstrate the flexibility available for
designing quantum logic gates. Except where otherwise noted, we will assign a logical basis set
such as that given in Eq. (3). When the atoms are excited by p -polarized catalysis light, the
figure of merit is given by Eq. (6), with q = 0, and the atoms are superradiant, G =G2 . To
complete our quantum logic protocol, we must choose the external coordinate wave function for
our qubits to maximize the figure of merit.
IV.A CPHASE Gate
Let us first consider the case of two atoms in the vibrational ground state sharing a common
well. Though spherical wells maximize the radial overlap for atoms in their ground state, the
dominant term in the interaction tensor is f ~Y0(q )/(k r)3, which is orthogonal to the
isotropic relative coordinate Gaussian wave function. This multipole component is nonzero,
however, for nonspherical geometries and for higher motional states of the atoms in spherical
wells.
One suitable design is to use ellipsoidal wells. Consider an axially symmetric harmonic
potential with two atoms in the vibrational ground state, each described by a Gaussian wave
packet with widths s =s = x and s = z . The figure of merit can be calculated numerically
including radiation terms, as a function of h = k x and h = k z as presented in [12]. In order
^ L 0 || L 0
to optimize the figure of merit, we consider an approximate analytic expression for k for tight
localization. The external coordinate wave function separates into center of mass and relative
Special Issue of Forschritte der Physik
coordinates, with RMS widths of the latter given by s = 2x and s = 2z . Taking only
x,rel 0 z,rel 0
the near field contribution to H , where g » 1 and f »- 3 P(cosq )/(kr)3 , we have
dd 00 ext 00 ext 2 ext
from Eq. (6)
1 3 P(cosq )
k » - f (rq, ) = - (cid:242) dy3x q (r, ) 2 2
4 00 ext 4 rel (k r)3
1 Ø h 2 (cid:230) h 3 h (cid:246) (cid:230) h (cid:246) ø
Œ - 2- 3 + 3(cid:231) + (cid:247) tan- 1(cid:231) ^ (cid:247) œ ,
16 phh 2 º h 2 Ł h 3 h ł Ł h ł ß
^ || ^ ^ ^
where h - 2 =h - 2h - - 2. Keeping h fixed while maximizing with respect to the ratio h h/
gives k » - 8·.5 10- 3h/ 3 for a ratio h h/ » 2.18. The relatively small prefactor can be
max ^ || ^ max
attributed to two sources: the RMS width of the relative coordinate Gaussian wave function in
three dimension is at least 6 times the RMS for a single particle in 1D, and the overlap of the
angular distribution of the dipoles and P ( cosq ) is imperfect. As an example, given tight
localizations z =l /60, x = l /120, corresponding to Lamb-Dicke parameters h =0.1,
h =0.05, we have k » - 68.
A disadvantage of using two atoms in a common ellipsoidal well is that the interaction
potentials for different orientations of the relative coordinate destructively interfere with each
other. For instance, for parallel dipoles aligned along z, V ~ - 2d2/r3 when the internuclear
axis is along the polarization, and V ~ d2/r3 for perpendicular separations. A possible solution
is to use non-overlapping spherical wells, separated along z. We know that as this separation
goes to zero, the dipole-dipole interaction goes to zero. We also know thatV ~1/
zero as the separation goes to infinity. Thus at some intermediary value of atomic separation, the
interaction must be maximum. For the case of two spherical wells separated by D z, we can write
the two particle external wave function as a product of isotropic ground state single particle
Gaussians. The figure of merit follows as in Eq. (11),
Ø e - (D z/2)2 (cid:230) 1 3 (cid:246) 3erf (D z/2 )ø 1
ºŒ p Ł 8 4D z2 ł 4D z3 h ßœ 3
where D z =D z/ x , and h = k x with x the single particle 1D localization. The form of Eq.
(12) can be verified in two limits. For D z>> x , k fi - 0.75(k D z)- 3, the expected figure of
merit for two point dipoles separated by distance D z, with dipole vectors aligned with the relative
Special Issue of Forschritte der Physik
coordinate vector. For D z<< x , we find k fi- (D z)2/(80ph 3), vanishing quadratically as the
separation between wells goes to zero. A plot of k is shown in Fig. 3. The figure of merit is
maximized at D z /x » 2.5 where k » - 0.015h/ 3. For example, at h = 0.05, k » - 123.
max 0 max max
This is almost twice as good as the scheme using overlapping ellipsoidal wells with the same
minimum localization.
Separated wells also have the advantage of reducing unwanted elastic and inelastic scattering
processes which are significant for atomic separations on the order of a few Bohr radii. Given
the relative coordinate wave function, the probability for two atoms to be separated by r <a is
1 ( ) 1(cid:230) (cid:230) D z - a(cid:246) D(cid:230) z +a(cid:246) (cid:246)
P(a)= e- (D +z a)2/4 - e- D(- z a)2/4 - (cid:231) erf - erf (cid:247) , (13)
D z p 2 Ł Ł 2 ł Ł 2 ł ł
where a ” a/x . Proper design of the logic gate will require that within the radius of inelastic
processes, this probability is sufficiently small. We will elaborate on this and other collisional
issues in Sec. VI.
IV.B SWAP Gate
Higher vibrational states of overlapping spherical wells can also be used to encode the qubit
for controlled logic. For instance one quanta of vibration along z in each atom could be
considered to code for the logical-1 . This is ill suited as a logical basis, however, because of
the problem of coherent leakage. The couplings given by the selection rules connect the logical
basis to a seven dimensional degenerate subspace of two vibrational quanta shared between the
atoms given in Eq. (10). Many of these couplings can be avoided, however, if instead we choose
the so-called stretched states of vibration. Consider the logical basis
1 = F ,M = – 1˜ =n 0=,l 1,=m 1,
0 = F ,M = – 1˜ =n 0=,l 0,=m 0 .
The logical- 1 states are circularly oscillating vibrational states. This induces nearly equal
dipoles for atoms in logical- 1 and 0 states (see Fig. 2c).
Matrix elements of the dipole-dipole operator can then be calculated using Eq. (9). Unlike
the previous cases discussed, the interaction operator is not diagonal in the computational basis
set, 0 ˜ 0 , 0˜ 1 , ˜1 0 ˜, 1 1 , but instead has the form [13]
Special Issue of Forschritte der Physik
(cid:230) 0 0 0 0 (cid:246)
7 (cid:231) 0 1 - 1 0 (cid:247)
V = hc (cid:231) (cid:247) . (15)
dd 4 (cid:231) 0 - 1 1 0 (cid:247)
(cid:231) (cid:247)
Ł 0 0 0 4/ 7ł
In addition, as dictated by the selection rule Eq. (9), the dipole-dipole interaction couples the
logical basis states to a subspace of states with two shared quanta, nml ˜ n m l=
1 11 2 2 2
011 ˜ 011, 022˜ 000 , 0˜00 022 . The matrix elements are
022 ˜ 000V 011˜ 0=11 0˜00 022V ˜ 011 = - 011 hc / 2
022 ˜ 000V 022˜ 00=0 0˜00 022V ˜ 000 = 022 9hc /4 (16)
022 ˜ 000V 000˜ 02=2- 5hc /4.
The couplings within the degenerate vibrational subspace of Eq. (16) describe an effective two-
level system with coupling between the state 011 ˜ 011 and the symmetric state
022 ˜ 000+ 000˜ 022 / 2. The antisymmetric state is uncoupled and “dark” to the
interaction. The effective Rabi frequency within the coupled subspace is exactly c , thus there is
a recurrence time t =p c / for population in the vibrational state 011 ˜ 011 . For this
interaction time the unitary operator in the logical basis is
(cid:230) 1 0 0 0(cid:246)
( ) (cid:231) 0 eip /4 (cid:230) 1 - i(cid:246) 0(cid:247)
U = exp - iV t / h = (cid:231) (cid:231) (cid:247) (cid:247) (17)
dd 0 2 Ł - i 1ł 0
(cid:231) (cid:247)
Ł 0 0 0 1ł
This is the SWAP gate universal to quantum logic [?]. The figure of merit for this gate is
1 1 4.02· 10- 3
k » - 1 1 f 1 1= - » - , (18)
4 + - 00 + - 140 ph 3 h 3
which for h = 0.05 gives k » 32. This figure could be improved by a factor of 3.5 if atoms
oscillating along z were used instead. However, an anisotropy would have to be introduced into
the trapping potentials to suppress couplings to degenerate states outside the logical basis.
Special Issue of Forschritte der Physik
V. Logic-Gate Error-Probability
V.A. Optimizing the fidelity of a given protocol
For each of the quantum logic protocols examined in Sec. IV, the value of the figure of merit
k implies an absolute lower limit on the logic-gate error-probability P . This limit can be
regarded as “fundamental”, in the sense that it derives from a decoherence mechanism intrinsic
to our scheme. In all cases we find a figure of merit k =ch - 3, as expected from the simple
scaling law discussed in Sec. I, where the magnitude of the numerical constant c describes the
“quality” of the protocol. With this knowledge it is possible to examine how the lower limit on
P might in general be optimized through proper lattice design, and how it will scale as function
of the most important lattice parameters. Even though it is unclear if we have at this time
identified the most efficient protocols (see Sec. VI), it is instructive to estimate the P that might
be achieved using the best c found in Sec. IV. Ignoring for the moment the possibility of
inelastic atomic collisions, the gate fidelity is limited by spontaneous light scattering not just
from the catalysis field, but also from the lattice field. The probability of scattering a catalysis
photon during one operation of the gate can in principle be suppressed to an arbitrary degree
(large |k |) by tight localization of the wave packets. Tighter localization, however, requires a
deeper lattice. Because there will always be a finite amount of laser power available to form the
lattice this can be accomplished only at the cost of decreased lattice detuning, which in turn
increases the probability of scattering a lattice photon during the gate operation. There exists
then an optimum choice of lattice detuning, where the overall probability of error due to
spontaneous light scattering is minimized.
We take the duration of a gate operation to be the time required to bring a pair of atoms
together, perform the entangling operation, and return the atoms to their original positions. The
catalysis field is present only during the entangling operation, of duration t = hp / V . It then
follows from the definition of the figure of merit, k = V hG , that the probability of
scattering a catalysis photon is P =1- exp- ( G t ) =1- exp-(p k/| | ) . The lattice can induce
spontaneous photon scattering at any time throughout the duration of the gate, T =t +t , where t
is the time needed to transport the atoms together and apart again. The probability of scattering a
lattice photon is then P =1- exp- G T , with G the rate of scattering from the lattice.
Because the lattice and catalysis detunings are very different we can treat scattering from the two
fields as independent processes. The overall error-probability is then
P =1- 1- P 1- P =1- exp- p k exp - G T . (19)
Special Issue of Forschritte der Physik
Whatever protocol is used, it seems likely that the time required to translate and superimpose
atoms will be much longer than the duration of the cooperative interaction. We will express the
total duration of the gate as T » n2pw - 1, where the vibrational oscillation frequency w sets
the natural "clock speed" of the computer.
We can estimate the error probability for scattering a catalysis or lattice photon at a given
intensity and detuning. Using the known relationships between intensity, well depth, wave
packet extent and scattering rates [17], and assuming that the error rates are small, we find after
some algebra that
p p (cid:230) 12E (cid:246) 34(cid:230) I (cid:246) - 34 (cid:230) D (cid:246) 34
P » = R (cid:231) 1(cid:247) L , (20a)
C k 8c Ł hG ł Ł I ł Ł G ł
3p (cid:230) 2 1 (cid:246) hG (cid:230) I (cid:246) 12D(cid:230) (cid:246) - 32
P L » G L T= 8 Ł (cid:231) 3 - 3F ł (cid:247) E n Ł (cid:231) I 1 ł (cid:247) Ł G L ł , (20b)
where I I is the single-beam intensity in units of the saturation intensity, and D is the lattice
detuning. In deriving Eq. (20b) we have assumed that an atom of e. g. the (+) species remains
trapped at a node of the s lattice, and during the “transport phase” sees light from the s lattice
at an average intensity roughly equal to half its value at the antinodes, making the s lattice by
far the dominant source of photon scattering. Substituting Eqs. (20) into Eq. (19) and
maximizing with respect to D yields a minimum error-probability of
Ø (cid:230) (cid:246) ø 13
P » p Œ (cid:231) - (cid:247) R 0œ (21)
at a detuning of
D c49 (cid:230) 2 1 (cid:246) 49 (cid:230) hG (cid:246) 59 (cid:230) I (cid:246) 59
L = k (cid:231) - (cid:247) (cid:231) (cid:247) n49 (cid:231) 1(cid:247) . (22)
G ( 12 )19 Ł 3 3F ł Ł E ł Ł I ł
For example, for cesium with F = 4, hG /E = 2.5· 103, excited with a large but not unrealistic
intensity of I =105 I (0.5 W of optical power in a beam with spotsize w = 0.6 mm), and for
the protocol of optimally separated spherical wells, with c = 0.015 and n=2 [15], we estimate a
Special Issue of Forschritte der Physik
maximum error-probability of P » 0.08 at an optimal detuning D » 6· 10G3 . This is
sufficient to permit a non-trivial number of gate operations in initial experiments, and to produce
entangled states with multiple atoms. Improvements in fidelity can be made with increased laser
intensity, though from the scaling in Eq. (21) it is clear that very high-Q build-up cavities are
required if substantial improvements are to be achieved. Ultimately, significant improvement of
the fidelity will depend on improving both the scaling parameter c and the localization h , as we
discuss in Sec. VI.
V.B Measuring gate fidelity
To develop better quantum logic protocols with higher fidelity it is crucial to obtain feedback
from experiments. Fortunately this can be accomplished even with the sparse, randomly filled
lattices routinely available in the laboratory today, without first solving the hard problems of
lattice filling and single qubit addressing. Characterization of a quantum gate requires only
ensemble measurements of the fidelity with which it achieves its truth table. In a sparse lattice
this is complicated by the fact that only a small fraction of the qubits will be paired, i.e. have
nearest neighbors on the lattice, compared to the much larger background of unpaired qubits.
Nonetheless, it is possible to isolate the desired signal due to paired qubits from the background
by first using the gate itself to identify the accidentally paired atoms, and then using radiation
pressure to clear unpaired atoms from the lattice. Repeated application of the gate will then
allow us to measure the error probability.
To emphasize this important point, we show here how to perform an ensemble measurement
of the truth table of a CPHASE gate. In practice it is much easier to detect changes in atomic
populations than phase shifts, so the CPHASE gate is converted to a CNOT in the standard
fashion. For the purpose of illustration we will consider a specific input state 1 ˜ 0 for the
CNOT gate, where the (+) and ()- species act as control and target bits, respectively. Only qubits
with a nearest neighbor are brought together and acted upon by the CNOT operation; we will
assume the gate leaves the majority of unpaired qubits behind in their original state. For the
paired qubits, the gate succeeds with probability 1 - P , flipping the target bit to the 1 state
while leaving the control bit unchanged. There are three types of processes that can lead to gate
errors: (i) the control or target qubit ends up in the correct state, but its partner is lost outside the
computational basis; (ii) both qubits are lost; (iii) the control and/or target qubit ends up in the
wrong logic state. For a 1 ˜ 0 input, correct operation of the gate leaves population in the
1 ˜ 1 state of the F manifold, while errors populate the logical 0 and/or 0 states of the
F manifold, or states outside the computational basis. We can “flush” qubits in the F manifold
with near unit efficiency from the lattice with radiation pressure from a laser beam tuned to the
Special Issue of Forschritte der Physik
F « F- 1 cycling transition, transfer population of the F manifold outside the logical basis to
the F manifold by Raman pulses, and flush once more. After we have flushed the failure modes
of the gate in this fashion, all the failed gate operations have similar outcomes: one or both of the
original, paired qubits are lost. The flushing also serves to remove all qubits of the target species
which were originally unpaired.
The error probability can be determined through a repeated measurement. If we start out
with N pairs of qubits, the first CNOT/flushing cycle leaves (1- P )N qubits of the target
species in pairs. In addition a P N new unpaired qubits of the target species have been created
by gate errors that affect the control, but not the target, a being the fraction of such errors. If we
rotate the target qubits back to the logical-zero state and carry out the CNOT/flushing cycle once
more, there will be ( 1- P )2N paired and a P ( 1- P ) N unpaired qubits of the target species. The
success-probability 1 - P is then the fractional decrease in the number of target species qubits
between the first and the second CNOT/flushing cycle. Similar sequences of CNOT/flushing
cycles and single-qubit rotations allow to determine gate truth tables with other logical states as
input. Even if a small fraction of the unpaired qubits are flipped by the CNOT gate, it is still
possible to extract the error-probability, though it may require one or more additional gate
operations to eliminate a sufficient number of the original unpaired atoms. It is also
straightforward at any step to measure populations of hyperfine ground states outside the
computational basis, in order to help distinguish between different failure mechanisms such as
spontaneous emission and inelastic collision processes. Ultimately, we would need to measure
the full process-fidelity of different quantum logic implementations [35], which is necessary to
characterize fully how well each protocol preserves quantum coherence, by using control qubits
in superpositions of the logical basis states. This requires a tomographic measurement of the
entire density operator for the four-dimensional Hilbert space for each of 16 inputs, which can in
principle be performed through single-qubit rotations and ensemble measurements of the
populations in the two-qubit logical basis states, as demonstrated in NMR (see Cory in this
volume).
VI. Outlook
With recent advances in laser cooling and trapping technology, neutral atoms in optical
lattices comprise an intriguing system for the exploration of quantum information science. In the
short term development of quantum gate protocols can proceed using ensemble measurements on
today’s sparsely filled lattices, as discussed in Sec. V. In the longer term one must solve the
dual challenges of filling the lattice in a controlled fashion, and addressing individual qubits
Special Issue of Forschritte der Physik
during logic operations and readout. An interesting proposal by Jaksch et al. [36] have
considered loading a Bose condensed atomic vapor into an optical lattice, showing that the
system undergoes a Mott phase transition whereby the distribution of atoms might be frozen into
uniform designer patterns. It is not yet known if this or any other preparation method will prove
reliable enough to permit large scale “computations”. It also remains to develop methods
whereby individual qubits can be addressed for manipulation and readout. Direct spatially
resolved imaging will likely prove impossible in standard lattices, where individual atoms are
spaced by half an optical wavelength. It may be possible to separate qubits further, e. g. by
filling the lattice with a sparse but regular array of atoms or by using CO laser light for trapping
[11], and to increase the spatial resolution by using a near-UV transition for the Raman and
catalysis lasers. One can also envision tomographic methods akin to Magnetic Resonance
Imaging wherein the Zeeman shift from a non-uniform magnetic field is used to correlate qubit
position and frequency, thus mapping coordinate space into the spectral domain. Considering for
example atomic Cs, a magnetic field gradient of order 100 Gauss/cm would lead to a barely
resolvable differential Zeeman shift between magnetic sublevels of order 10 KHz per
wavelength. These and other solutions to the addressing problem must all be explored in more
detail. Also, one should carefully consider what kinds of information processing tasks, might be
performed with quantum cellular automata [37] or special codings where one has only limited
local control over the qubits [38].
Even if these technical challenges can be met, it remains to be seen whether this system can
meet the stringent requirements for universal quantum computing. The error-probability of the
two-qubit logic gate we have considered, finite due to spontaneous emission, is sufficient to
allow us to create entangled-states of multiple atoms. This holds promise for a variety of
applications in precision measurement [7] and quantum simulations [39]. Such applications are
possible in the short term, based on ensemble preparation and measurement on the sparse,
randomly filled lattices that are available in today’s laboratory experiments. In the much longer
term, the promise of universal fault-tolerant quantum computing places very strong constraints
on the physical system. Specifically, fault-tolerant quantum computation demands an extremely
low error-probability, e.g. P <10- 4 [40]. Particularly intriguing is the prospect for exploiting
the intrinsic geometry for error correction. Assuming control to move atoms along any of the
three orthogonal directions, blocks of qubits may be coded and then made to interact in parallel
as required for fault-tolerant processing [40]. An example of such coding has been considered
by Briegel et al. [15]. Fortunately we see possibilities for substantial improvement in gate-
fidelity by extending the theoretical analysis beyond the simplifying assumptions considered up
to this point.
Special Issue of Forschritte der Physik
Given the scaling arguments of Sec. I, the dipole-dipole figure of merit has the form
k ~ch - 3. One may consider the ultimate limits on these parameters. The localization h
depends on the quality of the trap and possible implementations of wave packet control, such as
squeezing [27]. The parameter c is specific to the details of the protocol and the
approximations of our analysis. Under the assumptions of our model, c is determined solely by
geometry and might also benefit from wave packet engineering to maximize the relevant dipole-
dipole multipole component of the relative coordinate probability distribution. More
importantly, we must address the limitations of our model. Implicitly we have assumed that the
strength of the excited dipoles is independent of the relative coordinate between the dipoles.
This approximation is valid when the detuning of the catalysis laser is very large compared to the
dipole-dipole energy level shifts of the excited state over the range of internuclear distances
supported by the relative coordinate probability density. However, this approximation will break
down for smaller detunings, especially for closely overlapping wave packets where the catalysis
and/or trapping fields will be resonant with the excited manifold for some internuclear
separations (the “Condon points”). Stated in other terms, when the internuclear separation
becomes smaller that the optical wavelength one must consider the molecular rather than atomic
energy level structure of the excited states.
Extending our model to include molecular resonance may have substantial impact on the
dipole-dipole figure of merit. For example, we have argued that for atoms in the vibrational
ground state of a common isotropic spherical well, the dipole-dipole coherent interaction is zero
due to destructive interference when integrating over all angles of the relative coordinate vector.
However, at finite detuning, e.g. red of atomic resonance, the catalysis field will preferentially
excite the attractive potential, leading to finite interaction, and an increase in the parameter c .
Another example is the use of subradiant states. We have implicitly assumed that our dipoles are
excited in phase, leading to Dicke superradiance. However, molecular resonances exist for
dipoles oscillating out of phase, which might be excited with a sufficiently intense catalysis field.
This too would impact the maximum possible value of c in the figure of merit.
Besides providing a more accurate model for calculating the interaction strength, inclusion of
the molecular potentials is crucial to account for possible inelastic collisional processes [41]
which have been neglected in the basic treatment. If Condon points exist, atoms will likely
photo-associate, accelerate rapidly on the excited potential curves and be ejected from the trap.
Less catastrophic, but detrimental to the operating fidelity of the quantum logic gate, is "leakage"
of population outside the computational basis set through spin couplings or a strong perturbation
of the motional states. These phenomena must be modeled if we are to assess the capability of
Special Issue of Forschritte der Physik
the logic gate. Careful choice of the parameters may avoid these resonances over the extent of
the relative coordinate probability density.
Viewing this issue from the reverse perspective, molecular resonance can act as a resource
for designing logic gates. A possible route to coherent two-qubit interactions is to make use of
bound molecular states. In the mechanisms discussed above, atoms in a particular logical basis
state are connected adiabatically to a dressed-state, and thereby accumulate a cooperative phase
shift. Alternatively, one can work in the opposite limit and rapidly induce a coherent Rabi 2p -
rotation between the target two-bit and an auxiliary molecular resonance and thereby accumulate
a conditional p- phase shift. For example, through application of a magnetic field, a bound-state
of two atoms associated with one hyperfine state can be made resonant with a scattering state
associated with the other. Coherent control of this so called Feshbach free-bound transitions has
recently been studied by Mies et al. [42]. Another option is to use an excited bound molecular-
state as the auxiliary two-atom state. A particularly intriguing choice is a bound-state of the so-
called “purely long-range” potentials observed in photo-association spectroscopy in ultra-cold
collisions [43]. These states have the unique property that their inner turning point is well
beyond the range of most chemical binding processes where inelastic collisions (such as fine-
structure changing collisions) dominate
Whichever protocol ultimately holds the greatest promise, the rich structure of the neutral-
atom/optical-lattice system provides new avenues for explorations of quantum control and
information processing. The potential payoff in new understandings of the foundations of
quantum mechanics, improvements in precision measurement, novel collision physics, and the
promise of quantum computing makes this an exciting arena for new interdisciplinary research.
We gratefully acknowledge helpful discussions with Carlton Caves, Paul Alsing, John
Grondalski and Shohini Ghose, and Gary Herling. IHD and GKB acknowledge support from the
National Science Foundation (Grant No. PHY-9732456). PSJ was supported by the NSF (Grant
No. PHY-9503259), by the Army Research Office (Grant No. DAAG559710165), and by the
Joint Services Optics Program (Grant No. DAAG559710116).
Special Issue of Forschritte der Physik