1v9507020/hp-tnauq:viXra
QUANTUM COMPUTING WITH ELECTRON
SPINS IN QUANTUM DOTS
L.M.K. Vandersypen, R. Hanson, L.H. Willems van Beveren, J.M.
Elzerman, J.S. Greidanus, S. De Franceschi and L.P. Kouwenhoven
Dept. of Applied Physics, DIMES, and ERATO Mesoscopic Correlation Project,
Delft University of Technology
PO Box 5046, 2600 GA Delft, the Netherlands
lieven@qt.tn.tudelft.nl
Abstract We present a set of concrete and realistic ideas for the implementa-
tion of a small-scale quantum computer using electron spins in lateral
GaAs/AlGaAs quantum dots. Initialization is based on leads in the
quantum Hall regime with tunable spin-polarization. Read-out hinges
on spin-to-chargeconversion viaspin-selective tunnelingtoorfrom the
leads, followed by measurement of the number of electron charges on
the dot via a charge detector. Single-qubit manipulation relies on a
microfabricated wire located close to the quantum dot, and two-qubit
interactionsarecontrolled viathetunnelbarrierconnectingtherespec-
tive quantum dots. Based on these ideas, we have begun a series of
experiments in order to demonstrate unitary control and to measure
the coherence time of individual electron spins in quantum dots.
Keywords: quantum computing, quantumdots, electron spin resonance
1. Introduction
The spin of a single electron placed in a static magnetic field B~ 0
provides a natural two-level system suitable as a qubit in a quantum
computer [1]. Loss and DiVincenzo proposed to isolate individual elec-
trons in a quantum dot array and showed that the electron spins can in
principle be initialized, coherently manipulated and read out [2]. While
there has been continued theoretical work in this area [3, 4], the Loss-
DiVincenzo proposal has not yet been realized experimentally. We have
recently begun such experiments and present here the concrete and re-
alistic path we are taking, towards the experimental demonstration of
single- and two-qubit gates and the creation of entanglement of spins in
quantum dot systems.
The qubit is represented by the spin of a single electron in a quan-
tum dot defined by electrostatic gates on top of a GaAs/Al
heterostructure. The spin ground state and excited state are
separated in energy by the Zeeman splitting ∆E
B0, with g
thedimensionless g-factor inthe dot, µ
the Bohr magneton andB0 the
static magnetic field strength. Taking g = 0.44, the bulk value in GaAs
(we neglect the sign), we have ∆E
25µeV per Tesla in B0.
For comparison, the charging energy of a dot, e /C, with C the total
capacitance of the dot, is typically a few meV, much larger than the
Zeeman energy. The discrete energy level spacing is about a meV in
small dots, also larger than ∆E [5, 6]. In what follows, we will assume
that the electron always remains in the orbital ground state.
Although it may not be strictly necessary to work with few-electron
dots, operation with one electron in each dot makes the experiment
much more transparent. Following other groups [7, 8], we have recently
realized lateral, split-gate quantum dots with a controllable number of
electrons down to ...2,1,0 electrons [9].
3. Initialization
The primary goal of initialization is to place the qubit in a pure (i.e.
well-known) state, say , as this is the desired initial state for most
quantum algorithms [1]. The additional ability to initialize the qubit to
, or alternatively to a mixed state where the spin is probabilistically
in or , would be very useful for testing whether the read-out
schemes of Section 4 can distinguish from . We first present
two methods for initialization to the pure state , and then discuss a
variant for initialization to a mixed state.
Initialization to the ground state occurs naturally when we allow the
electron spin to reach thermal equilibrium at high B0 and low tempera-
ture T. Pr[ ], given by the Boltzman factor, is over 99% when
with k Boltzman’s constant. This condition is easily satisfied at, e.g.,
5 Tesla and 300 mK (g = 0.44). Thermal equilibration on the dot is a
very simple and robustinitialiation approach, which can beused for any
B0 orientation and doesn’t require spin-polarized leads. It takes about
5T1 to reach equilibrium, which may be on the order of 1 ms (T1 is the
spin relaxation time).
Alternatively, we can let an electron tunnel to an empty dot from
-polarized leads. This gives a qubit initialized to , as long as the
Quantum Computing with Electron Spins in Quantum Dots 3
Figure 1. The chemical potential for a single ↑ or ↓ electron in a quantum dot,
coupledtoleadsinthequantumHallregimewith(a)fillingfactorν =1and(b)ν =2.
ThedashedlineindicatestheFermilevelE F andthesolidlinesintheleadsrepresent
the lowest spin-split Landau level. Note that a self-consistent (in)compressible edge
state picturedoes not affect thearguments in this paper.
spinis conservedduringtunneling, whichisplausiblebasedontransport
measurements in two-dimensional electron gases (2DEGs) [10]. Highly
polarized leads can be obtained in the quantum Hall regime with filling
factor ν = 1 (Fig. 1 a). Only the lowest spin-split Landau level is then
occupied,providedg
T,analogoustoEq.1(g
istheg-factor
in the leads). In fact, magnetotransport measurements in 2DEGs with
oddν have shown that for an electron in the leads to go from to ,
it must overcome not only the single-particle Zeeman energy but also
the many-body exchange energy between the electrons in the leads [11].
We can describe this situation via an effective g-factor g l,eff, which can
be as large as ten times g . The leads are thus spin-polarized as long
as g l,effµ
T. Tunneling from spin-polarized leads also offers a
way to robust pure-state initialization, and the tunnel time can easily
be tuned under 1µs.
Initialization to a mixed state can be obtained by letting an electron
tunnel to an empty dot from unpolarized or partially polarized leads.
The probabilities for and electrons to tunnel to the dot depend on
the spin-polarization in the leads, on the Fermi level in the leads E
relative to the and levels in the dot and on the distance between
the dot and the and edge states in the leads [7, 12, 13] (Fig. 1
b). These parameters can be tuned via electrostatic gates which control
the electron density in the leads and the potential of the dot (Fig. 2 a).
4. Read-out
Theidealread-outschemeoffershigh-fidelity,single-shot,strongquan-
tum measurements [1]. This implies that the measurement must be
switched off completely during the computation stage in order to avoid
rapiddecoherence. Furthermore, themeasurement time mustbeshorter
than T1. Finally, the distinction between the and states must
be very sharp.
Figure 2. SEM images of (a) a single quantum dot and (b) two coupled quantum
dots. A quantum point contact placed opposite the quantum dots permits detection
ofthenumberofelectronsonthedots. Thelargesquaregatesservetolocallycontrol
theelectron density in theleads right nextto the tunnelbarriers to thedots.
The magnetic moment of a single electron spin is so weak that it has
never been detected directly. Previous measurements of single electron
spins were based on optical techniques [14, 15, 16]. Also, various pro-
posals exist for conversion of spin information to electrical charge [17] or
current [4], both of which can be measured with high sensitivity. Here,
we propose to use spin-to-charge conversion: the electron on the dot
quickly leaves the dot if it is, say, in , whereas it stays on the dot
if it is in . Next, the number of charges on the dot is measured. If
there still is one electron charge on the dot, we know the qubit was in
, and if there is no charge left, the qubit was in .
Spin-selective tunneling could in principle be realized using tunnel
barriers made from magnetic materials [18]. However, such materi-
als cannot yet be integrated with GaAs/Al
Ga1−x As heterostructures.
Therefore,weproposeinsteadtooperatewithspin-polarizedleads(quan-
tum Hall regime with ν = 1), which provide a reference spin orientation
against which the qubit spin orientation can be compared.
In order to motivate our proposed scheme, let us start with some
approaches which will not work. First, if both the and levels
in the dot lie below E , the electron can never escape from the dot.
Second, if E lies above the but below the dot level, the qubit
electron can only tunnel out if it is in ; however, as soon as the qubit
electron leaves the dot, another electron will enter the dot and occupy
, so we always end up with one electron charge on the dot and no
information about the spin state. Third, if E lies below the and
levels of the dot and g l,eff = g d , the tunnel process out of the dot is
not spin-selective.
However, if g l,eff = g d , the tunnel process is spin-selective (Fig. 3).
We recall from section 3 that in ν = 1 leads, the exchange interaction
Quantum Computing with Electron Spins in Quantum Dots 5
Figure 3. (a) When g l,eff > g d, the dot-lead tunnel rate can be significantly lower
for|↓i electrons thanfor|↑i electrons, because ofthedifferencein tunneldistances.
(b) When g l,eff ≫g d, the|↓i states in the leads are unreachable energetically for an
electron in thedot.
increases the total energy of electrons with respect to electrons and
thussuppressesthe probability. Similarly,weexpectthattheincreased
energy of the level in the leads reduces the probability that a
electron will tunnelto the leads fromthe quantum dot, while electrons
can tunnel to the leads easily.
An alternative spin-selective tunneling process, inspired by [4], con-
sists of allowing a second electron to tunnel onto the dot from ν = 1
leads. This electron will form a singlet state with the qubit electron if
the qubit spin was in , whereas they will form a triplet if the qubit
was in . Since the singlet and triplet energies can be made very dif-
ferent [19], the second electron will or will not enter the dot depending
on the qubit state. As before, subsequent single-shot measurement of
the charge on the dot will reveal the qubit state.
We expect both read-out schemes to be very robust: g l,effµ
much as 1 meV (11 Kelvin) for B0 = 5 T and g l,eff = 5 [11]. The singlet-
triplet energy difference can also be of order a meV [3, 19]. Read-out
schemes based on the Zeeman splitting ( 0.1 meV) are likely less reli-
able.
Measurement of the number of electron charges on the dot must be
completed in a time T
short compared to T1. Furthermore, if the elec-
tron is supposed to tunnel, it should do so in a time T short compared
to T . Ifthe electron is notsupposedto tunnel, it shouldnot doso for a
long compared to T
. In summary, we need T
.
Taking T1 100µs [20] and T
0.1µs, we must measure the charge in
a time T of 1 10µs.
Avarietyofhighlysensitivechargemetersexist,suchassingle-electron
transistors (SETs), RF-SETs and quantum point contacts (QPCs) [8,
21]. We have opted to use a QPC (Fig. 2), since it is easy to fabri-
cate and integrate with lateral quantum dots, and because we expect
its charge sensitivity to be sufficient to determine the number of elec-
tron charges on the dotwithin 1-10 µs (usingalow temperaturefollower
stage with output impedance of a few kΩ).
Finally, we point out that the qubit measurement can be switched off
by going to the Coulomb blockade regime with the number of electrons
on the dot fixed to one. At this point, charge read-out contains no
information about the spin state, and does not cause back-action on the
qubit. Thequbitmeasurementisswitchedonbysettingthedotpotential
so that spin-selective tunneling becomes possible, and spin information
is converted into charge information.
5. Electron spin resonance
AmicrowavemagneticfieldB~ 1 oscillatingintheplane toB~ 0atafre-
quency f0 = g
B0/h, in resonance with the spin prece ⊥ ssion about B~ 0,
will cause the spin to make transitions between and . Evidently,
ifg = g ,thespinsintheleadswouldalso beon resonance, andthespin
polarization intheleads would disappear. Fortunately, g varies with B0,
n and the geometry of the structure [22], thus we expect g = g . The
choice of B0 strength is a trade-off between reliable initialization and
read-out (strong B0 is better) and experimental convenience (low f0 is
easier). A field of 5 Tesla seems reasonable: with g = 0.44, high-fidelity
initialization and read-out should be within reach (Sections 3 and 4),
and f0 30 GHz.
Properly timed bursts of microwave power tip the spin state over a
controlled angle, e.g. 90 or 180 . In order to observe Rabi oscillations,
theRabiperiodmustbeatmostoftheorderofthephaserandomization
time constant T2. The T2 of a single electron spin in a quantum dot
has never been measured, but based on experiments with electrons in
2DEG’s, we expect that T2 may be > 100 ns [10]. For a Rabi period of
150 ns (f1 = 6.66 MHz), we need a microwave field strength B1 of 1
mT. For single-qubit rotations much faster than T2, a much stronger B1
is needed.
In order to just observe electron spin resonance (ESR), however, B1
can be much smaller. Steady-state solution of the Bloch equations with
a continuous wave (CW) microwave field B1 applied on-resonance with
the spin transition, gives Pr[ ] = [1 + 1/(1 + (2πf1) T1T2)]/2 [23].
Thus, in order to disturb Pr[ ] an observable amount away from 1,
we need f1 1/(2π√T1T2). Taking T1 = 100µs and T2 = 100 ns, we
need f1 50 kHz, and thus B1 = 0.01 mT, one hundred times less than
needed to observe Rabi oscillations.
Quantum Computing with Electron Spins in Quantum Dots 7
Figure 4. Schematic drawing of a microfabricated wire deposited on an insulating
layer on top of thesubstrate. (a) Top view and (b) cross-section view.
Excitation of ESR microwave magnetic fields commonly relies on mi-
crowave cavities, butunfortunately, alotof power isdissipatedin metal-
lic cavities: over 1 Watt for B1 = 1 mT at f0 = 30 GHz and still about
100 µW for B1 = 0.01mT [24]. Superconducting cavities are not an
option since B0 is too large.
The alternative we pursue is to send an alternating current through
a wire running close by the dot. The wire can be seen as a lumped
element if it is much shorter than the wavelength, which is a few mm
at 30 GHz near the surface of a GaAs substrate. If the wire terminates
a 50Ω transmission line and has an impedance 50Ω, it represents a
shorted termination and the current is maximum at the wire (Fig. 4 a).
If the wire is placed well within one wavelength λ from the quantum
dot, the dot is in the near-field region and the electric and magnetic
field distribution produced by the AC current is the same as for a DC
current [24]. At a distance r λ from the center of the wire, a current
I through a wire with circular cross-section thus produces a magnetic
field B1 = µI/2πr, and no electric field. If the wire is located off-chip,
say, 200µm away from the dot, and µ equals the magnetic susceptibility
in vacuum µ0, we need a current of about 1 A to produce a 1 mT
microwave field, and 10 mA to get 0.01 mT. A wire integrated on-chip
could be placed much closer to the dot, say 200 nm away, so the current
needed is only 1 mA or 10 µA respectively.
Energy dissipation by high frequency currents in transmission lines
takes place through ohmic, dielectric and radiation losses [24]. For the
on-chip section of the transmission line (a coplanar waveguide or copla-
nar striplines) and for the wire termination, radiation losses can be kept
lowbyplacingthesampleinsideacavitywithlowestresonancefrequency
above the operating frequency (longest dimension below 5 mm). At 30
GHz, dielectric losses are typically of the same order as ohmic losses,
but in the on-chip section, the wire cross-section is so small that ohmic
losses dominate. The off-chip section of the transmission line is a semi-
rigid coaxial connection, which has relatively low loss and is thermally
anchored to the higher temperature stages of the cryostat.
Theohmiclossesintheon-chiplinesthusdominate; weestimatethem
to be of order 10 µW for I = 1 mA. Even considering additional power
dissipation due to dielectric and other losses, the total dissipated power
should be well below the thermal budget at the mixing chamber of a
dilution refrigerator (a few 100 µW at 100 mK), especially if the duty
cycle is kept low. Nevertheless, local and instantaneous heating of the
device is still a concern so we will keep losses down by maximizing the
cross-section of the metal lines, by minimizing r, and by constructing a
good heat-link from the chip to the mixing chamber.
For B~ 0 to the surface (needed for operation in the quantum Hall
regime), B~ 1 must run through the dot in a direction parallel to the
surface, so we must place the wire above the dot, and not to its side. It
can be located on top of an insulating dielectric layer (Fig. 4 b).
Finally, individual addressing of one among several qubits could be
achieved, in principle, via local gate electrodes, which push the individ-
ualelectronwavefunctionstowardsasemiconductorlayerwithadifferent
composition and hence a different g-factor (in Al
Ga1−x As, g changes
from 0.44 to 0.4 when x varies from 0 to 1). In this way, the electrons
can be shifted into or away from resonance with the applied microwave
field as desired [25, 26].
6. The √swap gate
Two electron spins S1 and S2 in neighbouring quantum dots are cou-
pled to each other by the exchange interaction, which takes the form
J(t)S1 S2. The result of this interaction is that the states of the two
spinsareswappedafteracertaintime. Aninteraction activeforhalfthis
timeperformsthe√swapgate, whichhasbeenshowntobeuniversalfor
quantumcomputation whencombined withsinglequbitrotations [3]. In
fact, the exchange interaction is even universal by itself when the state
of each qubit is encoded in the state of three electron spins [27].
The strength J(t) of the exchange interaction depends on the overlap
oftherespective electron wavefunctions, whichvariesexponentially with
the voltage applied to the gate controlling the tunnel barrier between
the two dots. For very small dots with interdot distance of a few tens of
nm, J may be as large as 100 GHz [3]. For current sizes of dots and an
interdot distance of 200 nm, J may still correspond to a frequency of
a few tens of GHz, so two-qubit gates could be performed in < 100 ps.
Wecanexploretheoperationoftheswapgateassoonasinitialization
and read-out are reliable, without requiring ESR [2]. Imagine qubit 1
is prepared in a pure state and qubit 2 is prepared in a statistical
mixture of and . Measurement of qubit 1 should then always
Quantum Computing with Electron Spins in Quantum Dots 9
give while measurement of qubit 2 should give probabilistically
or |↑ . i After application of the swap gate, in contrast, measurem | en ↑i t
of qubit 2 should always give , while measurement of qubit 1 should
give a probabilistic outcome.
7. Outlook
Insummary,wehavepresentedaprocedureforinitialization withtun-
able spin-polarization, for reliable single-shot spin-to-charge conversion
and charge measurement, for electron spin resonance with a microfabri-
cated wire and for two-qubit gates using the exchange interaction. All
these schemes can be realized with current technology and we have be-
gun experiments using the devices shown in Fig. 2.
The estimated quantum gate duration achievable at present is a few
tens of ns. This requires T2 > 100µs in order to reach error probabili-
ties per operation below 10 , needed for fault-tolerant quantum com-
putation [1]. Speeding up single-spin rotations requires much stronger
microwave fields, which probably means that alternative ways for exci-
tation must be found which dissipate less power than cavities or wires.
Thelong termpromiseofelectron spinqubitsinGaAs/AlGaAs quan-
tum dots clearly depends crucially on the coherence times T2 and T1.
Theoretical studies of decoherence of electron spins in quantum dots
have focussed mostly on energy exchange with the bath, i.e. T1 [28].
The decay time for an electron in an excited orbital state to the ground
orbital state has been measured to exceed 200 µs when a spin flip was
involved in the transition [20], so this gives hope that the T1 (spin re-
laxation time for an electron in the Zeeman split orbital ground state)
may also be > 100µs. The T2 for isolated electron spins has never been
measured — it is one of the primary objectives of our work.
Acknowledgments
We thank C.J.P.M. Harmans, W.G. van der Wiel, M. Blaauboer, S.
Tarucha, and D. Loss for useful discussions. We acknowledge finan-
cial support from the DARPA grant DAAD19-01-1-0659 of the QuIST
program, the Dutch Organization for Fundamental Research on Matter
(FOM), and the European Union through a TMR Program Network.