Quantum Biology at the Cellular Level – elements of the research
program.
Michael Bordonaroa and Vasily Ogryzkob*
aThe Commonwealth Medical College, Scranton, PA USA
bCNRS UMR-8126, Universite Paris-sud 11, Institut de Cancerologie Gustave Roussy, Villejuif,
*Corresponding author: Vasily Ogryzko, CNRS UMR-8126, Universite Paris-sud 11, Institut de
Cancerologie Gustave Roussy, 114 rue Edouard Vaillant, 94805, Villejuif, France Tel: 33 (1) 42 11
65 25 Fax: +33-1-42-11-65-25 Email: vogryzko@gmail.com
Quantum biology is emerging as a new field at the intersection between fundamental physics
and biology, promising novel insights into the nature and origin of biological order. We
discuss several elements of QBCL (Quantum Biology at Cellular Level) – a research program
designed to extend the reach of quantum concepts to higher than molecular levels of biological
organization. We propose a new general way to address the issue of environmentally-induced
decoherence and macroscopic superpositions in biological systems, emphasizing the ‘basis-
dependent’ nature of these concepts. We introduce the notion of ‘formal superposition’ and
distinguish it from that of Schroedinger’s cat (i.e., a superposition of macroscopically distinct
states). Whereas the latter notion presents a genuine foundational problem, the former one
contradicts neither common sense nor observation, and may be used to describe cellular
‘decision-making’ and adaptation. We stress that the interpretation of the notion of ‘formal
superposition’ should involve non-classical correlations between molecular events in a cell.
Further, we describe how better understanding of the physics of Life can shed new light on
the mechanism driving evolutionary adaptation (viz., ‘Basis-Dependent Selection’, BDS).
Experimental tests of BDS and the potential role of synthetic biology in closing the
‘evolvability mechanism’ loophole are also discussed.
Key words: Schroedinger‟s cat, density operator, decoherence, nano-biology, systems biology,
synthetic biology, eigenstate, adaptive mutation, apoptosis, cellular decision-making
1. Introduction. Two views on Quantum Biology and its scope.
The recent progress of quantum information science and nanotechnology, together with the
increased interest in the role of quantum nonlocality in living systems (Arndt et al, 2009; Ball,
2011), provide fresh impetus to Quantum Biology, a field at the intersection of non-classical
physics and biology. This paper explores some theoretical and experimental aspects of the research
program we propose to expand the scope of this discipline to the cellular level.
The attempts to implicate quantum physics in biology date back to the founding fathers of quantum
mechanics (Bohr, 1996; Schroedinger, 1944). Although the belief that classical physics alone is
sufficient to fully describe biological systems has dominated molecular biology for decades, the
work of McClare, Matsuno and Blumenfeld on energy transduction in biomolecular machines
(McClare, 1972; Matsuno, 1985; Kukushkin, 2003), Hameroff, Liberman, Conrad and Igamberdiev
on quantum information processing in living cells (Hameroff and Schneiker, 1987; Liberman et al.,
1989; Conrad, 1990; Igamberdiev, 2004), studies on biophotons (Beloussov et al, 1997; Popp and
Belousov, 2003), discussion of quantum coherence in biological systems, spear-headed by
Froehlich (Froehlich, 1968; Del Giudice et al., 1983) and application of quantum statistics to study
allometric scaling relations in cells (Demetrius, 2002; Demetrius and Tuszynski, 2010) were
noteworthy, albeit speculative at times, attempts to apply quantum concepts to biological problems.
More recently, the impressive confirmation of the universality of quantum laws, as demonstrated by
superposition of fullerenes (Arndt et al., 1999) and by the detection of quantum entanglement
between systems separated by km distances (Salart et al., 2008), extends the reach of quantum
mechanics beyond the microworld, increasing the appeal of Quantum Biology as a reputable field
of study.
Our hope to extend Quantum Biology to the cellular level is predicated on the overwhelming
success of quantum theory as a strikingly accurate representation of physical reality. No
experimental violations from its predictions have yet been found. If sufficiently well isolated, all
systems studied so far behave according to quantum principles. Even simple viruses might soon be
tested to demonstrate the universality of quantum laws (Romero-Isart et al., 2010). The rising „new
orthodoxy‟ (Zurek, 2003) in the physics foundations presumes all nature quantum (i.e., that all
natural phenomena are most completely and adequately described quantum-mechanically), whereas
classical physics provides only a rough approximation.
In accordance with this view, one may define Quantum Biology as the study of those biological
phenomena that are challenging to explain with classical approximations and thus require going
back to the „first principles‟ of quantum physics1. With this in mind, we can apply quantum theory
to the study of biological processes on two distinct scales:
Quantum Biology at the Macromolecular Level (QBML). One application of quantum theory is to
consider possible quantum-mechanical effects at the level of biological macromolecules (typically
proteins or nucleic acids) and macromolecular complexes. This approach extends the reach of
quantum chemistry to objects larger than ordinary molecules. Quantum effects, such as tunneling,
using new approximations derived from the 'first principles' quantum description (Ogryzko, 2009a)
entanglement, etc, are generally known from studies of inanimate nature and small molecules,
especially their electronic structure, electron/energy transfer kinetics, and the analysis of non-
classical forces in chemical reactions and bonding. Notably, electron tunneling has been established
as a common mechanism in enzymatic reaction. Particularly striking is the apparent role of
tunneling of the much heavier proton in enzyme action (Liang and Klinman, 2004). Albeit more
controversial, the potential role of solitons in protein dynamics (Davydov, 1973; Cruzeiro-Hansson
and Takeno, 1997) belongs to this category. Recently, the near-perfect efficiency of photosynthesis
was indicated to owe to quantum effects (Engel et al., 2007), spawning a flood of publications in
this area (Mohseni et al., 2008; Sarovar et al., 2010; Scholes, 2010; Chin et al., 2013).
Quantum Biology at the Cellular Level (QBCL). The main subject of this work is a more ambitious
way to implicate quantum physics to biology. It corresponds to the description of the living
organisms themselves – rather than their (macro)molecular parts – with the formalism of quantum
theory. This research program (QBCL) takes the view, shared by many students of quantum theory
(Peres, 1995), that this discipline can serve as a general language to predict and describe the results
of measurements performed on natural systems2. And due to such generality, quantum theory
warrants a broader scope than it presently enjoys.
More specifically, the quantum formalism supplies a universal set of rules to deal with probabilities
that takes into account the context of a particular experimental setup (viz. the sampling space
depends on what property is measured). Importantly, it covers the cases when different
measurement setups are not compatible with each other – a situation often encountered when
experiments are performed on an individual object-to-object basis. These rules should not be limited
to „physics proper‟, a priori – as there are many instances in other sciences where different
measurement contexts are incompatible (and/or the sampling space depends on the conditions of
experiment). Accordingly, application of the quantum formalism should be extended to the entire
natural world, including living systems. From such a perspective, the current restriction of
quantum-theoretical formalism to the description of the micro-world has mostly historical roots,
owing to the relative simplicity of the experimental and theoretical models (such as the hydrogen
atom, photoelectric effect, etc.) that physics could provide at the beginning of the 20th century.
In regards to the cellular level, quantum formalism can help to describe relations between different
properties of individual cells and single-cell level events. Importantly, by such events we mean
changes at the level of the whole cell (e.g., reproduction, death, differentiation, and other instances
of cellular decision-making), and not the molecular events inside the cells3. A priori, these events
can be divided to two classes: i) „Measurements‟ performed on biological objects by a researcher in
a laboratory (e.g., testing if a bacterial cell can grow and form a colony on a Petri plate, which, if
successful, denotes the positive result of this measurement), or ii) The responses of biological
systems to various environmental challenges in their natural habitats. Importantly, events of the
second type, despite the absence of a human observer, can also be viewed as „measurements‟, given
i.e., in terms of generalized probabilistic theories (Hardy, 2001), the classical probability theory is more restrictive
than the quantum one
by molecular events we mean, e.g., transformation of a substrate to a product by a particular enzyme. It is an essential
feature of the quantum description that changes in parts of a system do not necessarily translate to (observable) changes
at the level of the whole system – so called „envariance‟ (Zurek, 2005)
that one can consider the environment itself as an observer4. Accordingly, formalism-wise, QBCL
implies that the properties of biological systems (e.g., cells) are represented by linear operators5,
acting on the states of the system and corresponding to different 'measurement' scenarios (i.e.,
experimental and/or environmental contexts) – and, most importantly, that these operators do not
necessarily commute6 (see Section 3 (ii)).
The question whether macroscopic systems can manifest quantum effects still remains under debate
(Tegmark M, 2000; Davies, 2004; Wiseman and Eisert, 2007; Abbott et al., 2008). We need a better
understanding of what exactly defines a macroscopic quantum system, which has been a subject of
recent studies (Dür et al., 2002; Björk and Mana, 2004; Korsbakken et al., 2007; Marquardt at al.,
2008). Some researchers (Aerts and Aerts, 1995; Khrennikov, 2009) take an easy road and choose
to separate (i) the potential usefulness of quantum formalism in biology from (ii) the actual
existence of true quantum effects in biological systems (e.g., resorting to the notion of „quantum-
like‟ properties). Debating such a „stay above the fray‟ strategy would open a host of philosophical
and methodological issues, worthy of a separate paper. Here, we only clarify that our vision of
QBCL is different. We believe that real quantum physics7 has to be involved, albeit applied in a far
more challenging context.
Moreover, in keeping with Einstein‟s observation that „One can best feel in dealing with living
things how primitive physics still is‟, we even expect that, given the high complexity of biological
systems, their open nature and multi-scale organization, fundamental physics itself will be affected
(Ogryzko, 1994; Ogryzko, 2009a). This conceptual development will require taking into account the
much more nuanced role of environment in biology. The 'physics proper': (i) typically limits itself to
very simple environments, represented by a thermal bath of some kind, and (ii) finds the notion of
„isolated system‟ very convenient. To the contrary, for biology: (i’) it is natural to study much richer
and less trivial environments, and (ii’) it makes no sense (and is practically impossible) to isolate
biological systems from their environment.
Due to the high complexity, it is clearly beyond the scope of this paper to develop a full-blown
formalism to describe the state space of biological systems and their dynamics in quantum
theoretical terms. Here, we focus on several more tractable elements of this program. Our goal is to
provide arguments for: (i) how QBCL approach becomes plausible in terms of physics, and (ii) why
it could have potentially important implications for biology.
this is position taken in environmentally-induced decoherence approach (Zurek, 2003)
so that a property can only have values determined by the eigenstates of the operator representing this property. Linear
operator here is a linear map F of state space to itself, so that for any two elements of the state space x, y and any scalar ,
the following is true: F(x+y) = F(x)+F(y); F(x) = F (x). See Peres 1995 for the introduction into quantum mechanical
i.e., the result of their joint action on a state x depends on the order of operator action: FG(x) GF(x).
with experimentally testable consequences, such as non-classical correlations between molecular events in living cells
Our paper is structured as follows. In section 2 we discuss the problem of decoherence, which
challenges quantum biological research at any level (Tegmark, 2000). Section 3 discusses how the
notion of quantum superposition can be applied to the description of biological systems. For both of
these concepts we emphasize their „basis-dependent‟ nature, which should play a significant role in
biology. For brevity‟s sake, our discussion will address the cellular level alone. The reader is
nonetheless advised to keep in mind that our arguments are applicable to scales larger than
individual cells; arguably to the level of the fully functioning organism8.
Section 4 argues that, biology-wise, the most intriguing promise of QBCL lies in its furnishing a
new perspective on biological adaptation (including evolutionary one) – which, for lack of a better
word, we call ‘basis-dependent selection’ (BDS).
The later sections clarify what we mean by testing BDS. Several experimental approaches are
discussed, all – to varying degrees – motivated by the phenomenon of adaptive mutations (Cairns et
al, 1988).
2. How quantum biology at the cellular level is possible. ‘Decoherence’
argument.
The title of this section has two meanings. First, biological systems are immensely complex. Thus
one would not expect direct quantum mechanical calculations starting 'from first principles' to be
very useful. This is not an insurmountable problem, however. In physics, an appropriate
approximation will often suffice. We believe the same to be true of quantum biology at the cellular
level. We need an approximation „from first principles‟ that (i) captures the relevant information
about the biological system in question, but (ii) incorporates some characteristic features of the
quantum-theoretical description9.
This section will focus on the flip side of the same question. How can quantum mechanics, the
physics typically used to describe phenomena on (sub)atomic scales, be relevant for the description
of Life? Biological systems are „large‟ (i.e., macroscopic) and „warm‟ (i.e., never isolated from their
environment). Common wisdom insists that the interaction of large systems with their
uncontrollable environment will effectively suppress all characteristic features of quantum
mechanical description. This is the so-called ‘decoherence’ argument, which is usually invoked to
explain why the macroscopic world around us is manifestly classical (Tegmark, 2000; Wiseman and
Eisert, 2007; Abbott et al., 2008). Heisenberg, in an early expression of this idea, said:
“It must be observed that the system which is treated by the methods of quantum mechanics is
in fact a part of a much bigger system (eventually the whole world); it is interacting with this
bigger system; and one must add that the microscopic properties of the bigger system are (at
least to a large extent) unknown.. . . The interaction with the bigger system with its undefined
microscopic properties then introduces a new statistical element into the description . . . of the
8 accordingly, this approach could be more appropriately termed “QBCL+”. We thank Lloyd Merriam for this
suggestion. This level of consideration would be relevant for morphogenesis, as supported by, e.g., (Cifra, 2012; Pietak,
2012; Igamberdiev, 2012)
9 see for example, the arxiv posting (Ogryzko, 2009a), where the information about catalytic activity is taken as the most
relevant for the description of intracellular dynamics
system under consideration. In the limiting case of the large dimensions this statistical element
destroys the effects of the “interference of probabilities” in such a manner that the quantum-
mechanical scheme really approaches the classical one in the limit (Heisenberg, 1989, pp.121-
The implication here is that starting 'from first principles' won‟t help. Even if we accept that, when
sufficiently well isolated, all physical systems are governed by quantum physics, biological systems
can never be truly isolated. Whatever reasonable approximation we may choose, will result in a
classical description of Life.
Before addressing this problem, we note one independent reason to be interested in decoherence. As
shown below, this concept can be formulated in coordinate-free terms10, using only the abstract
notions of a 'system' and its 'environment'. It might, therefore, reflect or capture something more
fundamental about Nature than even the notions of space and time. We are guided here by
Einstein‟s words to the effect that a deeper understanding of Life will require further conceptual
development of physics itself (section 1). Accordingly, when formulating the principles of Quantum
Biology, it is preferable to begin with the most basic physical notions possible. Decoherence could
be one such concept.
That said, how best to deal with the decoherence argument against nontrivial quantum effects in
biology (Tegmark, 2000)? Instead of defending quantum coherence in a specific biological system
(as in, e.g., Hagan et al., 2002), we will propose a much more general counter-argument against
decoherence, pointing to limitations of this concept and its relative (i.e., basis-dependent) nature. As
it will turn out, the very fact of interaction with environment does not preclude the need for
quantum mechanical formalism in understanding the behavior of a particular system. This is a
crucial point. To illustrate it at the most simple and elementary level possible, we need to discuss
the notions of density operator (or density matrix) and that of preferred states, which play an
important role further on.
(i) Density operator.
The density operator formalism was introduced by von Neumann (von Neumann, 1932). He wanted
to deal with situations in which the quantum state of our system is ambiguous, i.e., one that cannot
be represented by a vector in a Hilbert space. Such an ambiguity can result, for example, from our
incomplete knowledge of how the system under study has been prepared (e.g., due to uncontrollable
effects of the system‟s environment).
It is indeed relatively straightforward to prepare simple systems (such as an electron or an atom) in
a well-defined state. However, this is not the case for large and complex systems. Controlling how
these systems are prepared is more challenging, in part because it is practically impossible to isolate
them from their environment. Thus one must include this additional uncertainty into the description
of such systems. This is what the density matrix accomplishes. It is a more general way than the
wave function (an element of Hilbert space) to describe the state of the physical system, and takes
this additional uncertainty into account.
In quantum biology, in other words, the density operator description is more appropriate, because
without reference to any particular space-time coordinate system
biological systems are sufficiently large that their environment – unlike that of individual electrons
or molecules – cannot be precisely controlled. Nevertheless, the additional uncertainty in our
description will not suffice to destroy all quantum effects, i.e., taking the environment into account
does not necessarily lead to the emergence of effectively classical behavior.
To explain this crucial point, we need to talk now about the basis of a density matrix. For the
benefit of the reader with a biological background, we will keep to as mathematically elementary a
description as possible. One can visualize a density matrix describing a physical system as a table
with matching numbers of rows and columns N = N = N (this is so called square matrix). The
basis of the density matrix labels every row and column, and corresponds to alternative states of the
system under consideration. The cells of this table can be divided to two classes. Those that
correspond to instances where the label for the row and column coincide are called „diagonal
elements‟; the remaining cells are referred to as „off-diagonal' elements (or terms). The diagonal
terms encode information about the probability of finding the system in a particular basis state (i.e.,
its contribution to the overall state), whereas the off-diagonal terms describe interference between
alternative basis states. The presence of off-diagonal terms is another way of saying that the system
is in a state of „superposition‟ relative to the chosen basis.
Now, three crucial points regarding density operators must be noted:
1. The given state of the system can be described using different bases. Moreover, an important
property of a density operator is that, for any state, one can always find a basis in which there will
be no off-diagonal terms. Representing the state in such special basis is called 'diagonalization', as
only the diagonal elements will remain (Figure 1A). Since no interference between the basis
elements are present, the state of our system in this representation can be thought of as a classical
'mixture' of these special basis states. It might also happen that, after diagonalization, only one basis
state will remain. In this case, the state of the system is called 'pure' – as opposed to the more
general 'mixed states‟, which contain more than one element in their diagonalized representation,
and thus could be thought of as being a statistical ensemble of these states.
2. The second important point about density matrices is that a mixed state can be prepared by
combining several pure states. However, there are many independent ways to prepare the same
mixed state, and knowledge of the density matrix will not tell us which way was, in fact, used.
Sometimes this serves to argue that the density matrix description is more fundamental than the
Hilbert space description, because the density matrix encodes all information about the state of the
system that could possibly be relevant.
3. Finally, there is also the important notion of a „reduced density matrix‟. Given a density matrix
describing a state of a complex system (A+B), one can obtain a description of one part of the
system (say, A), by a procedure of 'tracing out' the information about B. This procedure is
somewhat similar in spirit to coarse-graining, where certain degrees of freedom are deemed non-
relevant and averaged out.
Von Neumann used the formalism of density operators for several purposes: first, to tackle the
problem of measurement, and secondly, to lay the foundation for quantum statistical mechanics.
More recently, the language of (reduced) density matrix was used to describe the quantum to
classical transition, via so-called „environmentally-induced decoherence (EID)‟ (Zurek, 2003; Joos
et al., 2003; Schlosshauer, 2007). The EID notion recasts Heisenberg's idea regarding the role of the
uncontrollable environment in more modern terms. It describes how the off-diagonal elements
(responsible for superposition and quantum behavior) of a density matrix can disappear (if the
system is immersed in an environment), leading to its effectively classical behavior11.
In this approach, the physical system is described by a reduced density matrix  , obtained from the
density matrix  of the total system (S+E) (including system S coupled to its environment E):
by tracing out the environmental degrees of freedom:
Starting from an arbitrary state of the joint system (S+E), and choosing some basis for a description,
the reduced density matrix of S:
i j i j i j
will in general contain off-diagonal terms |ss| 12.
Decoherence refers to the fact that these off-diagonal terms, representing quantum aspects of the
system's behavior, will quickly vanish with time, because the dynamic evolution of the joint system
(S+E) will generally lead to states of the environment corresponding to the different basis states of
the system, rapidly becoming orthogonal, so that . As the  becomes effectively
diagonal, the resulting absence of interference between different basis states is proposed to explain
why macroscopic superposition states (such as Schroedinger‟s cat) are never observed, or, in other
words, why typical macroscopic systems, which are only rarely isolated from their environment,
behave classically. The states of the system that survive the action of decoherence are called
„preferred states‟.
(ii) Decoherence in biology.
Now, we go back to our main point – that decoherence itself will not suffice to destroy all quantum
effects (and thus make a classical description sufficient for all practical purposes). We focus on a
crucial aspect of decoherence, which should be quite clear from the previous description, – it is a
basis-dependent notion. That is to say, if we take a reduced density operator , which was diagonal
because it was represented in the basis of preferred states, and now choose to write it in a different
basis, some off-diagonal terms will reappear13. In this alternative basis, interference between the
elements of the new basis states will be present – and the notion of superposition will still apply.
the effects of decoherence on density matrix should not be confused with diagonalization procedure (see Figure 1)
the bra-ket notation was introduced by Dirac (Dirac, 1939); for an accessible introduction, see, e.g., (Nielsen and Chuang
consider reversing the arrow in the Figure 1A. It will convert a diagonal representation to a more general one, which has off-
diagonal terms
This basis-dependence of the decoherence process becomes a significant factor when we pass from
the domain of physics to the domain of biology. Due to the very varied and nuanced role of
environment, the very issue of „what the preferred states of a system should be‟ is far from obvious
in the latter discipline. For a biologist, there are many bases to represent the state of a cell, which
are interesting and become relevant in different experimental contexts14. Our general point is that
these 'biologically meaningful bases' do not necessarily correspond to the basis of „preferred states‟
in a given environment. Accordingly, if a preferred state of a cell (in a given environment) looks
like a superposition in some biologically meaningful basis, it will be, by definition, decoherence-
resistant.
Consider, for example, a chemical reaction describing the transition of a chiral molecule from one
enantiomer to another. Naively, the preferred basis to describe it should correspond to alternative
molecular structures (e.g., A and B – two enantiomers). This is an acceptable assumption for the
description of chemical reactions in vitro (i.e., in homogeneous cell-free solution). However, it is
not obvious that the same assumption is equally valid in vivo, when describing the whole cell with a
density matrix. In vivo, one cannot neglect the fact that enzymes convert one molecular structure to
another. When describing the state of the whole cell with density matrix , the transitions of state of
the cell between the alternative molecular structures A and B will correspond to off-diagonal terms
in . Diagonalizing , we will obtain a different set of preferred states – properly described as
superpositions of states of the cell containing these alternative molecular structures A and B.
Another reason why the notion of preferred basis is nontrivial in biology owes to the much more
varied and complex role that the environment plays in Life. This, in fact, suggests that the language
of decoherence, preferred states and superposition could help to formulate a general description of
biological adaptation at the level of individual organisms. Consider a cell in a particular
environment E . For simplicity‟s sake, we take a starving cell, which does not exchange with
environment15. Due to decoherence, the state of this cell will be described by a density matrix
 diagonal in the basis of preferred states (Figure 1B, left). Now suppose we change E to another
environment, E . Generally, this new environment will select a different set of preferred states. The
old density matrix  will not be diagonal in the basis composed of the new preferred states – i.e.,
the old preferred states will have to be represented as superpositions of the new preferred states.
This means that the description of the old state with a density matrix written in the new basis will
contain off-diagonal terms (Figure 1B, middle). Decoherence will see to it that these off-diagonal
terms vanish, thus describing a transition from one preferred basis to another one (Figure 1B, right)
and from  to  . From a biological perspective, however, we have nothing else but the process of
adaptation of the cell to the new environment. This suggests that a change of the preferred basis
could be a simple and economical way to describe biological adaptation.
To summarize our general approach to the decoherence problem, we argued here that, regardless of
i.e., the number of different ways to interrogate a given biological system far exceeds what physicists typically can do
with their experimental systems. For example, one can supply a cell of E. coli with dozens of different substrates or
subject it to various stress conditions and later test how does it affect their ability to produce a colony on a Petri plate.
this is an idealization, according to which no matter, energy or information flows between the cell and the
environment, at a sufficiently short time scale (for more details see Ogryzko, 2009a)
its size or temperature, the interaction of a system with environment is not sufficient to render its
behavior „classical‟. We conclude, therefore, that taking decoherence as a blanket argument against
nontrivial quantum effects in biology (Tegmark, 2000) is unwarranted, because the environment
that we need to consider in order to look for the preferred states of a particular biological system is
often very varied and complex. The preferred states of a molecular-biological system could,
consequently, look as „superpositions‟ in a more „naïve‟ (e.g., molecular structure) or other
„biologically meaningful‟ basis. On the other hand, an active change of environment will affect the
density operator of a system due to a difference in the sets of preferred states in different
environments. Our message is that, as far as biology is concerned, the notion of a „preferred state‟ is
key – and must be handled with great care.
Moreover, we are tempted to raise the stakes and make a suggestion that somewhat challenges the
subordination of sciences. We believe that, by allowing the environment to enter into our
description of the system under study, the decoherence approach to the problem of ‘quantum to
classical transition’ opens the door for biology to take central stage. This discipline can provide a
more appropriate experimental and conceptual framework for general exploration of this
fundamental phenomenon. The next section discusses how the multitude of roles that environment
plays in biology turn the decoherence argument on its head, allowing for the notion of quantum
superposition to retain a prominent role even for macroscopic systems. Further, we will show why
this does not contradict common sense – and moreover, how it can help us to approach some
biological problems.
3. How can a living cell be in a state of superposition? Not a Schroedinger’s cat
It is unfortunate that most debates as to whether all macroscopic systems are necessarily classical
almost invariably lead to a discussion of Schroedinger's cat. Accordingly, the use of quantum
superposition in the biological context waxes metaphorical, with no real bearing on the actual
physics of Life. It is commonly held that cells, let alone entire organisms, are hopelessly classical
objects, and thus cannot be in a state of superposition.
In this section we argue that, on the contrary, the notion of a living cell in superposition is neither
unreasonable nor paradoxical. As we suggest later, it could offer a convenient and intuitively
appealing way to describe how cells adapt and/or make decisions (e.g., to „live or die‟, to „divide or
differentiate‟, etc).
To see how our argument works, we propose to consider the notion of „formal superposition’, and
distinguish it from that of Schroedinger’s cat. The aim of this section is to clarify the meaning of
the notion of „formal superposition‟ as applied to cells. We will be walking a tightrope, by both
defending the plausibility of this notion and emphasizing its relevance. Our main point is that
quantum formalism is not an empty metaphor in this context, and that real physics (i.e., non-
classical correlations between molecular events in a cell) must be involved. We present our
arguments in several parts.
(i) The ‘bottom-up’ argument. Is any notion of ‘macroscopic superposition’ either illegal or
frivolous?
This argument takes advantage of the problem of the „quantum to classical transition‟ in the
foundations of quantum theory, alluded to in the previous section.
First we describe the problem. As previously noted, quantum theory has been established as a
strikingly accurate representation of physical reality. Yet, according to the common narrative, the
macroscopic world around us is manifestly classical. The major problem is that quantum theory
does not say where, exactly, the quantum description stops and the classical one begins. The
boundary between „classical‟ and „quantum‟ realms remains, in other words, elusive. This is
famously illustrated by the „Schroedinger‟s cat paradox‟ (Schrödinger, 1935), where the cat has to
exist in a superposition of the 'dead' and 'alive' states. The possibility of such superposition of
macroscopically distinct states follows from the property of linearity, essential to the quantum-
mechanical description – thus, superpositions should be ubiquitous and not limited to the
microworld. However, we never observe cats both dead and alive at the same time. This notion is
against common sense and has never been encountered in reality.
Hence, the fundamental problem of the 'quantum to classical transition' is the fact that quantum
mechanical formalism inevitably provides us with an extra supply of ‘macroscopic superpositions’
– formally acceptable states that ostensibly do not make any sense16. One requires an explanation of
why such constructs cannot have a referent in the real world – i.e., why macroscopic superpositions
do not exist in reality.
As discussed in the previous section, a popular way to get rid of macroscopic superpositions is to
take the environment of the system into account (so-called environmentally-induced decoherence,
EID) (Zurek, 2003; Joos et al, 2003; Schlosshauer, 2007). However, our arguments also suggest that
the notion of a macroscopic system being in a state of superposition is more subtle than what is
pictured by the Schroedinger‟s cat caricature. Most importantly, like decoherence, „superposition‟ is
also a relative (i.e., basis-dependent) notion.
Consider a macroscopic body. If a sufficiently exotic basis is chosen, even mundane classical states
can be formally represented as being in superposition. Although such representation could be
completely frivolous (i.e., have no merit), there are no reasons to eliminate such a description from
the theory. Consider, for example, a human hand, which could be either left |L or right |R. As an
'exotic basis' A, take two states |+ = (|L + |R)/2 and |- = (|L - |R)/2. Then, formally, there is
nothing wrong with representing the left hand (|L state) as a superposition of these states |L = (|+
Thus, "whether a system X is in superposition or not" is an ill-posed question, having no meaning
i.e., the propositions of their existence are grammatically correct but meaningless
in fact, linearity of QM requires that superpositions dynamically evolve to superpositions. Thus, the |L state will
have to remain a linear combination of these exotic states |+ , |- with time t: |L = (|+ + |-)/2. Since neither |L nor
|R states change with time, it is easy to accomplish, because their linear combinations will also not change with time,
and the expression will hold trivially
without the choice of a basis18. The truly relevant question is whether we have any practical need to
use a basis A that will represent our system X in superposition of the elements of this (perhaps
exotic) basis19 – or such representation will never be necessary and therefore would be frivolous. In
physics, we usually limit ourselves to one class of environments (like a thermal bath), so that the
preferred basis usually does not change. However, as already argued, biology is different. One
reason for such a practical need to arise is when the elements of this hypothetical basis A can be
distinguished in a different environment that could become relevant for the description of our
experiment. This can happen, for example, when the environment changes and the states of this new
basis A become the preferred states of our system. Our principal claim is that such seemingly exotic
bases (and associated kind of superposition) are not necessarily frivolous, because the changes of
environment that affect the distinctiveness of states are, in fact, a very common occurrence in
biology.
Accordingly, we suggest a silver lining to the problem of the „quantum to classical transition‟.
Instead of considering any notion of macroscopic superposition as being a nuisance, we should
rather put it to a constructive use. Granted, the formalism of quantum mechanics provides us with
the extra baggage of ostensibly paradoxical superposition states of macroscopic objects. However
(Figure 2), the key is to recognize the difference between (i) the illegitimate superposition states
(e.g., Schroedinger‟s cat states, which are macroscopically distinct) that we certainly have to get rid
of theoretically – and (ii) the more benign notion of a superposition state that results from the
choice of a particular (perhaps an 'exotic') basis, with the components not being distinguishable in a
given environment20. Whereas decoherence takes good care of the former kind, we propose that, as
far as the latter kind of macroscopic superposition is concerned, not all are a frivolous
representation of the state of the object. On the contrary, such seemingly exotic descriptions
(termed here 'formal superposition‟21) might become relevant when the system is put into a new
environment. Therefore, it would behoove us to give such a notion of superposition the benefit of
doubt and look for what it could correspond to in the real world.
The question remains, however, do we really need this language in biology?
(ii) The ‘top-down’ argument. ‘Systems nanobiology’.
This argument addresses the question of why the quantum mechanical language of observables and
operators will be needed in order to describe a living organism.
we can draw here an analogy with the question of “whether a physical body is moving or is at rest”. Since the times of
Galileo and Newton we have known that this question is meaningless without the choice of a reference frame. Similarly,
whether a system is in superposition or not will depend on the basis chosen for its description
The (|+, |-) basis becomes practical for a chiral molecule, where the superposition of the L and R states can exist
(ammonia molecule) or can be generated experimentally (Cina and Harris, 1995; Shao and Hanggi, 1997)
i.e., they are preferred states in a given environment
as a preferred state of a system in a particular environment E , but represented in a basis of preferred states in a new
environment E
Taking a long-term view, a looming challenge that modern biology is going to face is the
fundamental limit of knowing all relevant information about an individual biological system (Figure
3). In biology, these limitations are not sufficiently appreciated yet. This is mainly because most of
the data are still being obtained from averaging over large cell populations or over molecular
ensembles in vitro. However, two emerging trends in biology are going to challenge the
assumptions taken for granted in this still-dominant approach. The first trend is „nanobiology‟
(Figure 3, left), which aims at analysis of individual biological objects22, instead of their ensembles.
The second trend is „systems biology‟, which aims to determine all relevant properties of biological
systems in a single experimental study (e.g., with „omics‟ technologies) and then model
mathematically the dynamics of the system (Figure 3, right).
Eventually, the convergence of these two trends will beget what, for the absence of a better word,
we term „systems nanobiology‟ – an approach that explicitly aims to determine all relevant
properties of an individual organism (e.g., a cell) (Figure 3, bottom). This new discipline will bring
to the fore the validity of two major assumptions, usually taken for granted in molecular biology: (i)
Can one rely on „course graining‟ procedure in explaining the stability of intracellular dynamics?
(ii) Can all relevant properties of an individual cell be known at once?
We expect that dealing with these questions will require going back to the physics‟ „first principles‟
and taking quantum theory into account. Ogryzko addressed the coarse-graining assumption
(Ogryzko, 2008), suggesting that the understanding how intracellular dynamics can remain robust
despite the disruptive effects of stochasticity should involve non-classical correlations between
individual events at the molecular level (i.e., quantum nonlocality).
The notion of „cell in superposition‟ is immediately motivated while addressing the validity of the
second assumption. Formalism-wise, it is reasonable to expect that the proper language to account
for the limitations in the experiments at the single-cell level would be quantum theory. Without
going into details, the crucial novelty of quantum formalism is the mathematical notion of an
operator acting in the state space of the system under description. Such operators could represent
the properties of the system under study in a particular measurement setup (either involving human
observers, or else the „environment-as observer‟). The most important feature of the operator
formalism is that some operators (corresponding to different „measurement situations‟) will not
commute with each other. This non-commutativity directly implies the notion of superposition – as
a system prepared in an eigenstate of one particular operator, generally, will not be in an eigenstate
of a non-commuting operator, but could only be represented as a linear combination of such states.
Accordingly, one can see the notion of superposition naturally emerging as a general way to
formalize the limits on what can be known about the system under study, and thus acquiring
relevance after systems biology merges with nanobiology.
(iii) The demand meets the supply.
We summarize as follows.
On the one hand, our „top-down‟ argument indicates that the emerging discipline of „systems
nanobiology‟ will require a formalism that would capture the „non-commuting‟ properties of an
cells, (macro)molecules or individual (macro)molecules inside living cells
individual biological object (e.g., a single cell), rooted in the fundamental limitations of what can be
observed in experiments with individual cells. This formalism will naturally require the notion of
superposition. A priori, however, it is not clear if this notion is merely a mathematical trick, or
whether it truly corresponds to real physics with testable predictions.
On the other hand, our take on the fundamental physical problem of the „quantum to classical
transition‟ (bottom-up) leaves us with an extra supply of legitimate physical superpositions of
macroscopic systems (viz., „formal superpositions‟) that do not contradict observations (i.e., they
are no „Schroedinger‟s cats‟) and are in a need of interpretation.
Matching up these two lines of arguments, it is natural to expect that the extra baggage of „formal
superpositions‟ of macroscopic systems, provided by the problem of the „quantum to classical
transition‟, will correspond to the „top-down‟ superpositions that are required to describe the non-
commuting properties of individual biological systems, but which until now had only a
metaphorical link to quantum physics.
(iv) Interpretations. Instability and non-classical correlations.
Note the principal distinction of the notion of „formal superposition‟ from that of Schroedinger‟s cat
– after the environment changes, ‘formal superposition’ is expected to be very fleeting and rapidly
collapse. In fact, this is the main reason why it does not contradict common sense and observations.
Accordingly, one can suggest the interpretation of the notion of „formal superposition‟ in terms of
potentiality (Heisenberg, 1989). Consider a system in state P in a particular environment E For a
0.
new environment (E ) we can introduce a basis A, the elements of which represent potential
outcomes of the interaction of the system with the new environment E 23. In other words, basis A
corresponds to a spectrum of different alternative states that the system can assume in its new
environment E , but which coexist as mere potentialities24 before the environment actually changes
(i.e., from E to E ). Implicit in this notion are several ideas: (i) Only the elements of the A basis can
be stable in the new conditions (E ); (ii) The state P is stable in the old environment E before the
environment is changed, and can be represented as a superposition of these alternative elements of
the A basis; and (iii) For every new environment E ,our formalism has to have operators A acting
on the state space of the system and representing this environment, such that the outcomes of the
interaction with environment E would correspond to the eigenstates of the operator A.
At this point, one might object. It appears that we suggest rather fancy way to describe a trivial
phenomenon – a stable state of a system becomes unstable after its environment changes and has to
transit to either one of the alternative new stable states. Why one would need the language of
operators, preferred states and decoherence, when a classical description (e.g., with stochastic
equations) seems to be sufficient? Our key argument is that: (i) on the one hand, we need to
describe what happens to an unstable macroscopic system (e.g., a cell making decision to live or
undergo apoptosis, to differentiate or proliferate or mutate, etc), but (ii) on the other hand, it has to
be done in terms of molecular (i.e., microscopic) events occurring in it.
in the language of decoherence theory, the set of preferred states of the system in the environment E
in one "classical' state, for the macroscopic objects
At the microscopic level, the „cellular decision-making‟ typically involves many different events
(such as catalytic transitions, post-translational modifications, conformation changes, ligand
binding, transport etc), with delineation of causal connections between these events being a
principal task of molecular biology. QBCL presents us with an intriguing opportunity to include in
this description non-classical correlations between the molecular events inside the cell25 (Ogryzko,
1997, 2008, 2009a), where a change in the state of the cell (collapse event at the level of the whole
cell) is interpreted as the environment performing several joint measurements of different molecular
properties of the cell. The existence of these non-classical correlations is a significant departure
from the traditional molecular-biological perspective – as this discipline allows only 'classical
causality' connections between the molecular events inside the cell (via local operations and
classical communications, in terms of quantum information theory (Nielsen and Chuang, 2000)).
Note, that the task to describe an unstable macroscopic system in terms of underlying microscopic
processes is not limited to biology. However, in many problems of classical physics, the transition
from the micro- to macro-description is rather straightforward and typically involves either
averaging (i.e., coarse-graining, as in statistical mechanics) or dimensionality reduction (e.g., by
setting constraints on relationships between elements of the system, as in solid body physics).
Classical treatment of instability then suffices, as one can avoid the non-classical correlations and
related characteristic features of the fundamental quantum description. Our key point is that in
biology, the transition from the micro- to macro-description is far from trivial, due to the limited
scope of coarse-graining procedure, and to the open nature and multi-scale organization of even
simplest cells. Renormalization group, widely used in condensed matter physics (Maris and
Kadanoff, 1978), is also not applicable, because biological systems are spatially bounded and not
scale-invariant (i.e., exhibit different law at every new level of organization (Newman, 2011)). The
crux of the argument is that, since the classical approximations are inadequate, the characteristic
features of quantum „from-the-first-principles‟ description will have to remain, together with the
need to use the operator formalism. To describe what happens to an individual cell in terms of
molecular events occurring in it, it will remain necessary to take into account non-classical
correlations between these events (Ogryzko, 2008).
As stated before, we hope that the notion of „formal superposition‟, interpreted in terms of
potentiality (for the macro-level) and non-classical correlations (for the micro-level), can provide a
novel perspective for the understanding how the cellular decisions (e.g., to „live or die‟, to „divide
or differentiate‟, etc) are made. This will be the subject of the second half of this work.
(v) Clarification – we do not tackle the problem of quantum measurement.
At the end of this section, we need to sound a note of caution. In addition to the problem of
„quantum to classical transition‟, the decoherence approach is regarded as a promising step towards
solving the more difficult problem of quantum measurement. Importantly, however, decoherence
theory does not describe how one of the elements of the superposition is ultimately chosen during
e.g., entanglement; or more generally, quantum discord (Henderson and Vedral, 2001; Ollivier and Zurek, 2001).
The connection between the notions of superposition and entanglement is rather straightforward, illustrated by
expression for the entangled Bell pair (Nielsen and Chuang, 2000): (    ) , which is a
superposition of two states of the composite system
measurement26. Likewise, addressing this question is beyond the scope of this manuscript, lest we
claim to have solved one of the most elusive mysteries at the core of physics – the problem of
measurement (Wheeler and Zurek, 1983). Nonetheless, we hope that extending the domain of its
application to biology will help to further develop the formalism of quantum theory, enabling it to
better tackle the measurement problem.
4. Implications for biology. ‘Basis-Dependent Selection’.
Despite the many technical challenges in rigorous formulation of QBCL, the notion of „formal
superposition‟ already leads to intriguing and testable biological implications. Its interpretation in
terms of non-classical correlations between different parts of the system should be experimentally
testable (Ogryzko, 2009a). However, this discussion is also beyond the scope of the paper. In this
section we will focus on another consequence of this idea, which we term 'Basis-Dependent
Selection' (BDS).
As noted above, a change in the state of a system following a change in its environment naturally
corresponds to its adaptation to the new environment – a notion that is key to the thinking of
biologists. As we will see now, the operator formalism could have very intriguing implications for
the mechanisms of biological adaptation (including evolutionary one).
The classical Darwinian mechanism of evolutionary adaptation via heritable variation and selection
implies separation between two time scales. The fitness value of a given heritable variation can be
determined only at the population level and a longer time scale (since it entails competition between
individuals within a population, typically over many generations). The variations themselves are
said to occur at a much shorter time scale (defined by each individual‟s reproductive lifespan) and,
most importantly, without any regard for their utility.
Intriguingly, in quantum theory, an individual object can in some sense behave like a population of
objects (so called „quantum parallelism‟ (Nielsen and Chuang, 2000)). Accordingly, QBCL lends
itself very naturally to an alternative notion of adaptation via 'selection in the population of virtual
states' (Ogryzko, 1997, 2009a, 2009b) of an individual biological system. In this scheme, variation
and selection both take place at the level of an individual organism (e.g., cell), and thus without the
Darwinian separation between the two time scales. The key difference from Darwinism is that the
spectrum of heritable variations becomes dependent on the particular selection conditions
(Ogryzko, 1997, 2009a, 2009b), hence the term „Basis-Dependent Selection‟. Such dependence of
variation on selection can substantially change our understanding of how biological adaptation
(including evolutionary one) may occur.
To explain these implications of QBCL, we first note that the operator formalism can be interpreted
in terms of selection. Indeed, out of all possible states, the eigenstates of an operator are, by
definition, those that do not change upon the action of the operator27. Our key suggestion is to
i.e., the problem of collapse of wave function – how the choice of a particular measurement outcome takes place – is
not completely addressed
since an eigenstate can be multiplied by a coefficient, it is better to say that it changes only in quantity, but not in
quality upon the action of the operator
interpret the property of „not changing‟ as survival of these states in the new environment – i.e., in
the situation of measurement represented by the operator. In language familiar to every biologist,
the generation of the spectrum of new states, 'adapted to the new environment', works via a
selection process28.
What is less obvious, however, is that the action of an operator involves two steps of selection. In
addition to generating the spectrum of different alternatives (i.e., elements of the new basis A),
which are allowed in the new environment (i.e., in a particular experimental setup), selection also
results in choosing certain „best fit‟ elements out of this population of states.
We will consider two physical examples of adaptation to illustrate the two levels of selection. The
first example is the quantum-mechanical description of a particle with spin 1⁄2. When put in a
magnetic field, it undergoes an energy split. The two allowed energy eigenstates correspond to the
spin aligned either parallel or antiparallel to the magnetic field (Figure 4A, left). This is the first
level where the action of operator involves selection (i.e., the energy eigenstates could be
interpreted as the states of spin 'adapted to the direction of the magnetic field'). Importantly, we can
also consider an additional selection step, occurring on the longer time scale. Namely, when the
system reaches an equilibrium with the environment, the lower energy eigenstate will typically have
a higher probability of being observed – hence, out of the two allowed states, this particular
eigenstate can be considered as the most 'adapted' to its particular 'environment' (Figure 4A, right).
The second example is provided by a quantum particle in a potential well. This system can have
several acceptable energy states (which, for the lower energies, form a discrete spectrum). If we
consider the short time scale, they are all relatively stable (i.e., they are all survivors, Figure 4B,
left). Among these states, there is a lowest energy state (the so-called ground state). When putting
our system in a vacuum, only this state will eventually survive after a sufficiently long time (Figure
4B, right). Thus, again, on the longer time scale, the ground state could be considered the most
adapted.
In fact, everything described so far appears to agree with the canonical Darwinian scheme of
adaptation. Indeed, even in Darwinism, the first step of the adaptation process (i.e., the generation
of a population of variations) involves selection. Every different element within the population, in
order to „qualify‟ for the competition, has to be a functioning entity able to survive on the shorter
time scale. However, the key principle of Darwinism is that the properties that determine the
survival at the first selection step29 can be dissociated from the properties determining the survival
at the second selection step. As expressed above, in Darwinism, the heritable changes take place on
the shorter time scale without any consideration for their utility, i.e., regardless of what will happen
on the longer time scale.
On the contrary, in the case of the operator formalism, the dissociation between the two selection
steps is arguably artificial. In the above examples (Figure 4A, B), both selection steps are described
by the same operator. Moreover, to say that the energy eigenstates are the only allowed states of the
The Bohr-Sommerfeld quantization from the old quantum theory, which amounted to finding allowed states of the
atom, can be considered as an application of selection principle in modern physics
the “qualification round”, using sports terminology
system is a convenient oversimplification. In fact, the superpositions of the energy eigenstates are
also allowed30.
Most strikingly, in many other situations described by quantum formalism, the two levels of
selection cannot even be assigned to two different time scales, as we attempted above. For example,
these two steps cannot be separated in the simplest kind of quantum measurement, described by
projection operators. As is illustrated by the example of a polarized photon (Figure 4C, top)
(Ogryzko, 1997), a projection measurement can be interpreted as a system passing through a
particular „filter‟, which selects only certain component of a superposition. An important property
of projective measurements, however, is that the very expansion of the state of the system in a
particular basis (the spectrum of variants to choose from) is determined by the measurement setup
itself. If the same object is measured in a different basis, the same state has to be decomposed
according to the new basis, i.e., into a different combination of basis states (Figure 4C, bottom).
We can summarize the essential difference from the canonical Darwinian adaptation scheme as
follows. In the Darwinian case, the heritable variations preexist in the population prior to (and
independent of) selection. This is not the case for Basis-Dependent Selection. Instead: i) we have a
spectrum of 'virtual variations' of an individual quantum object, and ii) this spectrum depends on the
selection setup. The very notion of „variation‟ has no meaning without the choice of how variations
will be selected.
Accordingly, our view on quantum biology (QBCL) points to more interesting and subtle
connections between the biological system (organism, cell) and its environment than is usually
granted by the Darwinian perspective. In the latter case, the spectrum of variations is generated
without any consideration for their adaptive value (i.e., what will happen to a given variation on a
longer time scale). On the contrary, in the „Basis-Dependent Selection‟ scenario, the spectrum of
variations is itself affected by the environment in an adaptive way, because it is determined by the
action of the same operator.
We note that, despite our focus on evolutionary adaptation in this section, the BDS perspective has
a general character and could bring fresh insights into many fields of biology where the Darwinian-
like mechanism has been implicated (it is not simply limited to evolution). Table 1 contains a
tentative list of such biological problems: (i) cancer (i.e., appearance of mutations responsible for
malignancy, angiogenesis and other aspects of tumor progression), (ii) immunology (i.e., somatic
tuning of specific antibody), (iii) neurological memory (i.e., Neural Darwinism), and (iv) molecular
recognition and folding (usually explained by molecules randomly exploring their respective
configuration spaces and being trapped in energetically favorable states).
5. Methodological considerations.
To summarize, one class of prediction made by QBCL relates to the fundamentally new perspective
that quantum theory brings to our understanding of „chance‟. One can say that the notion of
‘chance’ in quantum theory inherently carries an adaptive aspect – while „chance‟ refers to a
random choice, the alternatives (i.e., basis) are determined by the conditions of measurement (or
30 why then can we use the notion of eigenstates? They are convenient to describe the interaction of the system with the
environment, in terms of transitions between these states
environment, which is interchangeable in this context) (Ogryzko, 1997, 2009). Accordingly, in
many cases of stochasticity at the cellular or molecular level, quantum theory is expected to bias
„chance‟ events towards more optimal (literally, „preferred‟) outcomes, which can in many cases be
interpreted in terms of adaptation. This section offers two methodological considerations for testing
these manifestations of BDS.
(i) Progressive and regressive research programs. First, we should clarify what we mean by testing
BDS. The reader is forewarned that no „killer‟ experiment is proposed to unambiguously prove
BDS, in the sense that no classical explanation could account for a particular prediction. Our notion
of testing is more nuanced. It relates to the relative imprecision of biology, compared to physics and
chemistry, where the variability and sheer complexity of living systems finds no analog.
Accordingly, for any unexpected observation, it is easier to introduce an ad hoc hypothesis – to save
the incumbent theory and make it compatible with the new results31. In biology, the Popperian
criterion of falsification (Popper, 1934) does not appear to work as well as it does in more precise
disciplines.
To say that, in biology, theories are far more difficult to refute experimentally is not a call to
postmodern cynicism. The more constructive view is that different criteria should be used in
biology when comparing alternative theories. Imre Lacatos proposed a distinction between
progressive and regressive research programs (Lacatos, 1978), relevant in this respect. Research
program A is progressive if it makes predictions that are subsequently confirmed. Importantly, an
alternative research program B does not have to be refuted by the new predictions. However, if the
new data appear as an anomaly for this program, and require some „violence‟ to accommodate it –
by postulating an ad hoc hypothesis, for example – then research program B is deemed regressive
and will eventually lose its appeal.
Thus, for Lacatos, the main criteria of choice between research programs are the proactive versus
reactive ways of dealing with new results, and resorting to ad hoc hypotheses by the latter
(regressive one) to survive the onslaught of new data. We adopt this perspective when proposing the
experiments to verify BDS. We accept that our predictions could still be consistent with the
classical view of cells. However, (i) they do not follow from the „classical paradigm‟ naturally and
will require additional ad hoc assumptions to be accounted for; (ii) equally importantly, when a
specific „classical‟ mechanism is proposed to explain a particular prediction, the experimental
system can be refined in order to close the „classical loophole‟, and the new results will still support
BDS.
We draw here an analogy with the history of testing Bell‟s inequalities (Bell, 1966). After their
formulation in 1964, the experiments began in 1972, with the results of Aspect‟s group (Aspect et
al., 1981, 1982a, 1982b) convincing many physicists that so-called „local realism‟ was untenable.
Not everyone in the community was convinced, however, and further research – refining the
experimental system and closing newly proposed loopholes – continues to this day. Whereas „local
realism‟ has not been falsified in the strict Popperian sense, this research program can be considered
regressive.
contrast it with the hydrogen atom problem, where one could unambiguously see that no classical model could be
We clarify that in some cases of evolutionary adaptation the classical explanation might be
sufficient (e.g., when one can neglect the subtle dependence of the spectrum of heritable variations
from selection). Similarly, quantum statistics does not necessarily disqualify classical statistical
mechanics, which remains an adequate first approximation for many problems. Thus, strictly
speaking, the two programs to be compared are: (i) the incumbent Darwinian scheme (Natural
selection „NS‟ only, where the spectrum of heritable variations does not depend on the selection
conditions), versus (ii) „NS + BDS‟ – „natural selection + basis-dependent selection‟. However, for
convenience sake, we will keep referring to the program we propose to test as BDS.
(ii) DNA sequencing. The second point is of a more practical kind. That a seemingly random event
could be biased towards a more adaptive outcome could manifest itself on many levels of cellular
organization. In principle, any of these manifestations of BDS are testable. We expect, however,
that for two main reasons, the study of the cellular processes that leave a record in DNA sequence
will be the most productive:
(a) First, the development of next generation sequencing technology makes the analysis of genomes
at nucleotide resolution increasingly affordable. When the cost to sequence a human genome
reaches $1,000, the cost for a bacterial genome (of the 5 Mb size) will approach $1.00. On the other
hand, no other observable property is as robust and carries as much relevant information about the
state of an individual cell (10,000 bit of information in the E. coli genome).
(b) Second, it is considerably easier to distinguish two kinds of experimental noise: (i) noise that
one intends to study (e.g., a stochastic event and its potential bias towards a more adaptive
outcome) and (ii) the noise due to instrument errors. In the case of observable properties other than
DNA sequence, making this distinction is far more challenging, especially in single-cell level
studies. For example, correlations between nucleotide replacements in DNA, distanced 100 nm
from each other (300bp), can be reliably observed at the individual cell level (Parkhomchuk et al.,
2009). On the contrary, correlations between changes in two protein molecules (e.g., molecular
events catalyzed by two enzymes, or changes in their conformations, orientations, translation errors,
etc) located at a comparable 100 nm distance in an individual cell, are far more difficult to
demonstrate unambiguously, despite their critical contribution to intracellular organization. The
methodology for the very first step down this path – i.e., detection of long-range protein proximity
(Kulyyassov et al., 2011) – is only now being developed, and awaits considerable refinement for
use in single-cell studies.
In summary, we believe the general implications of BDS for biological adaptation to be relevant in
many experimental contexts and levels of cellular organization. However, experimental constraints
favor changes at the genetic level as the most promising avenue for testing BDS. The following
sections propose experiments related to adaptive mutations, the phenomenon that served as the
initial motivation for QBCL (Ogryzko, 1997).
6. Adaptive mutations. Fluctuation trapping mechanism.
Cells can copy their genetic material with exceptional accuracy (the spontaneous mutation
frequency in E. coli being as low as 4*10-10 base substitution mutations per base pair (bp) per
generation). The robust amplification of the effects of an individual molecular event resulting from
such accuracy has long set genetics apart from biochemistry as a discipline able to study individual
events (e.g., mutations) at the level of a single organism32. It makes sense that studies on bacterial
mutations were first to indicate potential problems with the „classical‟ molecular biological picture
of the cell – a picture grounded in the analysis of large cell populations and/or in the modeling
enzymatic processes in vitro using large homogenous ensembles of molecules.
The adaptive mutation phenomenon was first observed by Cairns et al. on bacteria (1988; 1991)33
and later expanded upon by others (Hall, 1992a; Rosenberg, 2001; Foster, 2007). On the face of it,
adaptive mutations defy the Darwinian time scale separation scheme. Indeed, being on the shorter
'generation-to-generation' time scale (where heritable changes are expected to occur without regard
for their utility), their course appears to be already biased towards adaptation. Figure 5 presents two
key experiments that set the stage for most of the subsequent work in this field.
A number of 'classical' hypotheses (i.e., not employing any new physics) were proposed to explain
the phenomenon of adaptive mutation. These include: replication and recombination systems
(Rosenberg, 2001); slow repair of mismatched bases, mutagenic transcription; selection of gene
amplification/duplication; and transient hypermutagenic „mutator phenotype‟, in which the
frequency of (random) mutations may increase by several orders of magnitude (Hall 1991;
Kugelberg et al., 2006; Foster 2007). Significant controversy remains regarding the mechanisms
underlying adaptive mutation, and consensus on the matter has yet to be reached (Foster, 2004a;
Foster, 2004b; Rosenberg and Hastings, 2004a; Rosenberg and Hastings, 2004b; Roth and
Andersson, 2004a; Roth and Andersson, 2004b; Roth et al., 2006; Stumpf et al., 2007; Gonzales et
al., 2008; Elez et al, 2010). This phenomenon, which is still very poorly understood, is not limited
to the lac system, and work on other genes and yeast cells (Hall, 1992b; Steele and Jinks-Robertson,
1992) strongly suggests it has a general character.
Here, we briefly describe our approach to adaptive mutation (for more details see Ogryzko, 1997,
2009). The main features of the mechanism, termed „Fluctuation Trapping‟ (FT) (Ogryzko, 1990,
1999, 2009b), will first be introduced without quantum theory: (i) In the absence of substrate (i.e., a
starving cell in environment E ), the state of the cell fluctuates reversibly between different states
( and  ), and this fluctuating state is stable. (ii) The fluctuating state of the cell is destabilized
by the application of substrate that can be utilized by cell in mutant state  , as in these conditions
(i.e., new environment E ) the  state can proliferate and generate a mutant colony, whereas the
 cannot. (iii) After change from E to E , and as time proceeds, more individual cells on the plate
get a chance to transition from the  to the  state and be trapped due to the irreversible
amplification. This leads to the continuous accumulation of mutant colonies on the plate. Note that
this is exactly what was observed in the experiments with delayed application of selective medium
(Figure 5): (a) no mutants accumulate in the absence of substrate, and (b) they start appearing only
after the cells are provided a substrate the mutants can utilize.
Notably, the FT mechanism is similar to the Darwinian blind search (the „trapping‟ step being a
selection event), but with the added twist of reversible fluctuation (between  and  ). It is the
reversibility of this fluctuation that allows for the search to occur at the level of an individual cell
(versus the population level).
i.e., in terms introduced earlier, genetics has been nano-biology all along
in fact, the deviations from fluctuation test for lacZ system have been already reported in (Ryan, 1955)
The key question of FT mechanism concerns the nature of the  state. Quantum theory comes into
play at this stage, as the description of the reversible fluctuation involves a non-classical
correlation between two molecular events in the starving cell (for more details, see Ogryzko, 2009).
Briefly, we propose that: (i) a process of reversible DNA and RNA synthesis takes place in a
starving cell; (ii) that this synthesis can be accompanied by errors (e.g., adenine inserted into DNA
or RNA instead of guanine), called D-error and R-error, for DNA synthesis and RNA synthesis,
respectively; (iii) most significant is that these D- and R-errors are correlated. Namely, after the
change in the environment, the D-errors will be biased towards those genomic variations that were
tested via the R-errors to have a beneficial effect in the new environment.
This R-D-error correlation is the main non-trivial assumption of the FT model, as it cannot be
provided by any classical mechanisms known to molecular biology. Ogryzko argued that it is
required for the stability of intracellular dynamics in a starving cell (Ogryzko, 2009). Briefly
(transitioning to the language of quantum physics), stability is ensured by the existence of two types
of “off-diagonal” terms in the density matrix describing the starving cell in the Molecular
Configuration basis (Figure 6, right): the WM off-diagonals represent the interference between the
wild and mutant type states (such as r r* , r d* , r d* , d d* , ...), whereas the RD off-diagonals
m w m w w m w m
correspond to the interference between the basis states containing mRNA and DNA copies of the
same (wild or mutant) forms of DNA (r d* , r d* ). After the environment changes and the wild
type can be distinguished from the mutant, the WM off-diagonals disappear due to decoherence,
whereas the RD off-diagonals are not affected (Figure 6, bottom right). The remaining interference
between the basis states containing mutant mRNA and DNA copies of cellular DNA serves as a
justification for the R-D-error correlation (Ogryzko, 2009).
The FT model conforms to the tenets of BDS in the following ways: (i) In the language of quantum
theory, the reversible fluctuation (i.e., correlated R-D error) corresponds to a component of
superposition state ( +  ), which is a preferred state of the cell in the environment E 34 (Figure
7, left) – implying that the  and  states are indistinguishable in the environment E . (ii) The
change of environment from E to E induces these components of the superposition to decohere –
i.e., the two states  and  can be distinguished in the new conditions E (Figure 7, middle). (iii)
Equally important, the wild type and all other mutant variants that cannot grow on the given
substrate (E ) will not be amplified and thus will remain undistinguishable from one another.
Insofar as actual DNA sequence is uncertain, the wild type, together with all mutant variants unable
to amplify in E , will constitute one element (i.e.,  ) of the basis of the preferred states in these
environmental conditions (Figure 7, middle top). (iv) Finally, if a different substrate was used (i.e.,
change the environment from E to E ), the same state of starving cell would have to be expanded in
a different basis, i.e., as a superposition of states, say,  and  (Figure 7, middle bottom). Thus,
the basis required to describe the future of the starving cell (the components that can or cannot
grow, respectively) depends on the particular environment. In other words, the spectrum of
variations cannot be separated from selection in this adaptation scheme35 – the distinguishing
feature of BDS.
here, we are already representing the state of the cell in the basis convenient for the description of what will happen
after we change environment from E to E . The  state corresponds to the mutant that can grow in conditions E ,
whereas the  state corresponds to the wild type plus all mutant states that are not able to proliferate in environment E
borrowing terminology from probability theory, the sampling space is determined by the conditions of observation
One last comment is on the term „population of virtual states‟, alluded to in the section 4. This term
is another way to express the notion of a cell being in a superposition of wild type and mutant
states. However, we need the following clarification of what is meant by „mutant state‟. As seen
above, the FT model implies that by sequencing an individual cell‟s DNA and RNA36 one will have
a small, but finite, probability to detect a mutant form of both its DNA and RNA components, in
addition to the predominant wild type form. So long as we implicate a correlation between two
distinct molecular events mediated by the rest of the cell (i.e., correlated R-D error), it is more
accurate to treat mutation as a change in the state of the whole cell, as opposed to a change in the
state of its genome alone. Note however, that QBCL offers a „correspondence principle‟ between
this refined understanding of mutation and its classical counterpart. There are two cases when it is
acceptable to consider the notion of mutation as simply referring to the state of DNA only: (i) when
one works with an isolated DNA instead of the whole cell, or (ii) when one works with a large cell
population and studies its bulk properties – as fluctuations at the level of individual cells (i.e.,
reversible and correlated R- and D-errors) are averaged out in the limit of large cell numbers.
7. ‘Evolvability mechanism’ loophole and synthetic biology.
According to the Fluctuation Trapping mechanism, the facility for adaptively-biased heritable
changes follows from the very physics behind biological organization and self-reproduction. This is
an appealing feature of FT, as it makes the adaptive mutation phenomenon a natural attribute of
living cells. Accordingly, we expect it to manifest itself not only in bacterial cells, where it was
originally observed, but in other living cells – whether prokaryotic or eukaryotic, and whether freely
living or part of a multicellular organism.
This is one general class of predictions made by BDS. In terms of the distinction between
progressive and regressive research programs (Section 5), the observation of an adaptive-mutation-
like (AML) phenomenon in a new experimental system would support BDS37. To the contrary, such
an observation would be a challenge for the prevailing Darwinian scheme (NS) – i.e., an anomaly
that requires a novel, if not ground-breaking, molecular mechanism to satisfactorily explain it.
At this point, however, we anticipate a general strategy to defend the incumbent paradigm. We term
it ‘evolvability mechanism’ loophole.
(i) One can first note that the ability to directly alter a genome in an adaptive manner helps cells to
evolve more quickly and/or efficiently. In a rapidly changing environment, such a feature may be
quite advantageous. (ii) One could then argue that natural selection might favor mechanisms that
increase evolvability, even if the resulting mechanisms deviate from the purely Darwinian
evolutionary scheme (Earl and Deem, 2004; Koonin and Wolf, 2009). (iii) One could then conclude
that, regardless of the exact mechanism and the details of its emergence, so long as it facilitates
adaptation and, ultimately, survivability, any such feature would still be „business as usual‟, i.e.,
consistent with the notion of life remaining Darwinian at its core – merely with some non-
Darwinian „evolvability enhancing bells and whistles‟ added later in evolution. This general
(which is a bona fide measurement procedure)
it has, indeed, been observed in yeast, for example (Hall, 1992b; Steele and Jinks-Robertson, 1992)
argument blunts the force of AML-based proposal to test BDS, rendering any observation of a
seemingly non-Darwinian phenomenon less threatening from the canonical Darwinian perspective.
One can point to genetic recombination, a process that speeds up the search for a better combination
of alleles via gene reshuffling, as a well-known example of an evolvability-increasing mechanism
(Muller, 1932; Maynard Smith, 1968).38 More to the point, at least in the case of a single cellular
organism, recombination (associated with sporulation) is a frequent response to stressful conditions,
i.e., it is „switched on‟ when an adaptive challenge is most pressing. Similar logic can then be
applied to the phenomenon of adaptive mutations. This serves to justify its recent rebranding as a
„stress-induced mutagenesis‟ – implying that specialized mechanisms in response to starvation
(considered as a particular kind of stress) are involved (Galhardo et al., 2007).
To be fair, some molecular mechanisms of stress-induced mutagenesis are supported by
experimental evidence (Rosenberg, 2001; Kugelberg et al., 2006; Foster, 2007). We can defend the
BDS-testing proposal (Section 5) by pointing to its second part: „when a specific „classical‟
mechanism is proposed to explain a particular prediction, the experimental system can be refined in
order to close the „classical loophole‟, with the new results still supporting BDS‟. The „refinement‟
here would correspond to the inactivation of the specific mechanism (e.g., by deletion of respective
genes) and still observing the adaptive mutation-like behavior. Indeed, a heated controversy
continues as to whether every instance of adaptively-biased heritable change could be accounted for
by the proposed molecular mechanisms found to date (Foster, 2004a; Foster, 2004b; Rosenberg and
Hastings, 2004a; Rosenberg and Hastings, 2004b; Roth and Andersson, 2004a; Roth and
Andersson, 2004b; Roth et al., 2006; Stumpf et al., 2007; Gonzales et al., 2008; Elez et al, 2010).
Moreover, the lac system, used in most studies, might not faithfully manifest the full range of
adaptive mutagenesis, due to the episomal location of the lac gene. Bearing with this, saturating
transposon insertion screen could not reveal specific genes responsible for adaptive mutation
phenomenon in the case of ebgR system (Dr. B. Hall, personal communication; Hall, 1998).
This defense notwithstanding, the „evolvability mechanism‟ loophole is somewhat resistant to the
refinement argument. One can appeal to the well-known tendency of biological evolution to create
redundancy, e.g., back-up mechanisms, and argue that no matter how many dedicated mechanisms
for AML one might discover and subsequently remove, additional (if latent) evolvability-enhancing
attributes could always account for any residual remnants of the AML phenomenon.
Next, we propose how this strategy to protect the incumbent paradigm (by blurring the distinction
between „BDS‟ and „NS‟ in terms of progressive versus regressive research programs) can be dealt
with in the framework of the emerging discipline of synthetic biology (Voigt, 2011; Purnick and
Weiss, 2009).
Indeed, one has to admit that, as long as we deal with a natural living system, which has been
shaped by billions of years of biological evolution, the „evolvability mechanism‟ loophole still
holds. Despite our best knowledge of how the system works, we did not „control its design‟ and
we do not claim recombination to be a deviation from Darwinism – we use it only as an example of a well documented
molecular mechanism that facilitates adaptive evolution
thus can never fully rule out the presence of a cryptic (yet to be discovered) mechanism39 that may
have been selected to enhance its evolvability.
Enter synthetic biology. The ultimate ambition of this discipline is to replace the evolution of
biological systems by its rational design and de novo construction – under the complete control of
the experimenter, in the spirit of physicist Richard Feynman‟s motto “if I can't build it, I don't
understand it”. By construction of a minimal living cell from scratch, this approach will help to
formally rule out the existence of the elusive „evolvability-enhancing‟ features of cellular design,
which could have emerged beyond our control, during the preceding evolution.
Note, that essentially the same strategy was used for a similar purpose – to rule out cryptic factors
that could account for a particular anomaly – at the time ribozymes were discovered (Kruger et al.,
1982). Because the dogma that only proteins exhibit catalytic activity was so strong at the time, and
RNA seemed such an unlikely candidate, it could not be entirely ruled out that an RNA preparation
originating from a biological source might contain protein traces – and that these traces could, in
fact, be responsible for the observed enzymatic activity. This loophole was convincingly closed
only after RNA was synthesized chemically, thereby ensuring that no biological material was
present at any step of preparation.
Similarly, our ability to close the „evolvability mechanism‟ loophole – and thus to keep sharp the
distinction between BDS and classical Darwinism (as progressive and regressive research programs,
respectively) – will be contingent upon the success of synthetic biology. If such an endeavor is
feasible, it will help to target the key implication of the loophole – that, by definition, a dedicated
mechanism for evolvability is not an essential attribute of living cells, and thus can be dispensed
with. With the engineering and construction of a minimal living cell from scratch, under complete
experimental control40, one could test whether adaptively-biased heritable changes: (i) come as a
free and natural (albeit surprising) property of a living cell, capable of self-propagation, or (ii) will
always require an additional resource (e.g., a gene) to be implemented. Our expectation – that the
dynamic modeling and rational design of a living cell requires taking quantum theory into account –
lends support to the former possibility.
8. Cell death and prophage induction.
This section describes phenomena that are typically not interpreted in terms of adaptation, but are
amenable to experiments that formally conform to the „fluctuation trapping‟ scheme. Accordingly,
they can also serve to test BDS. These experimental systems concern cell death and related
phenomena.
(i) Cell death
We return back to the scheme of FT, where the trapping step was implemented by the act of
proliferation of a mutant state. Now consider that, in conditions E , a fluctuation in the state of cell
or, if not a full-blown mechanism, at least a specific feature of cell design
which will require not only (i) synthesis of DNA, but also (ii) synthesis of all its other (macro)molecular components and
(iii) their assembly
 leads to a different kind of irreversible process – cell death – whereas, in the alternative
conditions E , the cell remains alive regardless of whether it is in  or  . We will obtain a
situation that is formally similar to the original one, i.e., cell death could serve as another way to
trap an otherwise reversible fluctuation. Accordingly, the same language of operators, preferred
states and decoherence should equally apply to this experimental system. QBCL makes the non-
trivial prediction that the mutations associated with the state  will also appear „induced‟ in the
conditions (E ) that allow them to cause death and thus manifest themselves.
Note, that, generally, cell death does not have to be associated with mutations. Our focus on the
experimental systems where death is correlated with changes at the genetic level is for the practical
reasons explained above (section 5 (ii)). Admittedly, it is still technically challenging to measure the
frequencies of the mutational events associated with death, given that dead cells cannot be selected
and propagated for further analysis. To circumvent this problem, one can take advantage of the fact
that dead cells lyse and release their DNA outside, e.g., to the growth medium. Therefore, one
should be able to measure the rate of appearance of such mutations ( ) using quantitative PCR
(specific for the mutation) by analyzing DNA purified from the growth medium. In parallel, one
could also measure the presence of such mutations in the DNA of the remaining living cells. By
adding the two frequencies together, one can estimate the overall frequency of mutations in one
type of environmental conditions (those that trap mutations causing cell death, i.e., E ). The next
step will be to compare this mutation frequency with the same value obtained from the same cells,
but in environmental conditions (i.e., E ) that do not favor these mutations  to cause cell death. If
the fluctuation trapping paradigm holds in the case of cell death, one would expect the frequency of
mutation to be higher in the original set of environmental conditions, as compared with the latter
set.
As with the evolvability loophole (Section 7), one can point out that cell death could serve a useful
role in some circumstances (e.g., for the benefit of a group, or in embryogenesis etc). Indeed, the
phenomenon of programmed cell death – e.g., apoptosis, autophagy, etc – is very well known
(Green, 2011). Accordingly, one can mount an argument for the evolution of a specialized classical
mechanism that: (i) favored mutations causing cell death, and (ii) has eluded discovery until now.
Again, we believe that such a loophole can be closed with the synthetic biology approach.
(ii) Prophage induction
Related to the preceding proposal is an experimental model based on prophage induction. Here, we
will explain the main idea using the example of the bacteriophage lambda (Hershey, 1971). The
genome of this phage can exist in so-called prophage (lysogenic) form, integrated into the host
chromosome and passively propagating with every cellular division. The switch from the lysogenic
form to the so-called lytic pathway (prophage induction) typically happens in stress conditions,
resulting in death of the host cell and the production of a large number of phage particles ready to
infect new cells.
We propose an experimental system focusing on mutations that render the prophage unable to
switch to the lytic pathway. Consider the following two mutations: (i) mutation #1 being a
conditional (e.g., temperature-sensitive) mutation in a regulatory gene, responsible for the switch
between the lysogenic and lytic programs (e.g., CI repressor), and (ii) mutation #2 in a gene
essential at the next stage of phage induction (e.g., antiterminator N, or a specific OR3 mutant that
inhibits prophage induction (Court et al., 2007). We point to the formal correspondence between
these two mutations and the two constraints on cell growth in the original fluctuation trapping
scheme (see Figure 8). The first condition (E) corresponded to the state of the environment that
constrained the cell growth regardless of whether the second constraint () was lifted or not. The
second constraint () was associated with the state of the gene we planned to follow. Thus only one
combination of states  and E (namely,  + E ) would lead to cell proliferation. Similarly, in the
prophage system, both genes must assume a certain state so that an irreversible event (phage
induction followed by cell lysis) would occur. As in the general FT scheme, the first constraint (E,
e.g., the conditional mutant CI) is under the strict control of the experimenter; whereas the second
constraint (mutation 2) changes spontaneously beyond our control. QBCL predicts that in
conditions E (inactive CI), one will observe a higher frequency of reversion to  .
The prophage experimental system can be employed in two ways, similar to the two key
experiments with adaptive mutations (Figure 5):
1. Luria-Delbruck format – individual cells of lysogenic bacteria with double mutant prophage are
inoculated into separate culture tubes and allowed to proliferate in the conditions when CI is
active. Each culture is plated onto agar, and CI is inactivated by the experimenter. The numbers
of cells that undergo cell lysis (i.e., where the gene  reverts to the wild type  ) are compared
between individual cultures. The count of these events can be facilitated by adding non-immune
cells to the plate, such that each lyzed cell produces a visible lysis plaque at the Petri plate. If
the mutant distribution were to show a deviation from the Luria-Delbruck distribution, it would
suggest that not all reversions  appeared during the culture growth before the CI constraint
was lifted, but rather that some were „induced‟ by the inactivating of CI repressor.
2. „Delayed application of selective medium‟ format – to avoid the need for numerous independent
cultures and to rule out any potential effects of cell division, non-replicating cells (lysogenic
bacteria with double mutant prophage) are kept alive in CI active state. The CI repressor is
turned off at specific times after the non-replicating stage has begun. The number of lytic events
is then measured, e.g., by the addition of non-immune cells and plating the mixture.
We must note that the realization of the general idea, and specific details of the experimental system
(including the genes used, and the ways to control their functional state), could vary significantly.
For example, instead of a temperature sensitive mutation, CI activity can be controlled by
transcriptional induction (or in some other way to make the switch more physiological). With the
development of high-throughput technology, these experiments can be performed at a true single-
cell (as opposed to population) level – e.g., using multiple well format with single cells distributed
in individual wells, or else by video-microscopy of individual cells. One might also find a different
phage species to be a more convenient model. As before, synthetic biology can help to rule out
„classical‟ evolutionary explanations for why the ability to mutate in the predicted manner would
benefit a bacteriophage.
The mutations leading to cell death or bacteriophage induction represent a new class of predictions
made by QBCL, separate and distinct from the adaptive mutation phenomenon. These phenomena
are not suggested by the established paradigm and can be tested experimentally, as briefly sketched
above. If confirmed, they would provide independent line of support for BDS, in terms of the
distinction between progressive and regressive research programs (Section 5).
9. Implications for cancer biology.
Both authors of this manuscript are career cancer researchers. Therefore, it is natural for us to
consider the implications of QBCL for the medicine and medical research.
In the foregoing, we considered the mutation linked to phage induction from a „cell-centric‟
perspective, i.e., as an event causing the demise of the host cell. Seen instead from the lower-level
„phage-centric‟ perspective, the same mutational event helps a rogue component of the cell to break
loose and evolve for its own selfish purposes.
This hierarchical view of evolution and adaptation bears directly on the subject of cancerogenesis.
Not unlike prophage mutation, and despite being injurious to the host organism, tumor progression
– considered from cell-centric perspective – easily lends itself to the adaptive evolutionary
perspective. Indeed, the Darwinian model of favorable variations subject to amplification through
natural selection is believed to play major role in carcinogenesis (Nowell, 1976; Fearon and
Vogelstein, 1990; Nowak, 2002; Gatenby and Vincent, 2003; Merlo et al., 2006; Vineis and
Berwick, 2006; Goymer, 2008; Kimmel, 2010). Accordingly, one would expect the application of
quantum biology to eventually impact cancerology in a significant – and perhaps even game-
changing – way.
We have long known that multiple mutations contribute to the development of cancer. The notion of
multi-step carcinogenesis first appeared in Knudson‟s „two hit hypothesis‟ (Knudson, 1971), and it
was later argued that the typical cancer contains at least four (Loeb, 1991) or five (Stein, 1991)
mutations contributing to tumor growth (so-called driver mutations). Moreover, a significant
portion of human cancers likely contains more than nine relevant mutations (Hollstein et al., 1991).
The question remains as to how, in a limited period of time, a tumor cell can accumulate all the
genetic and/or epigenetic changes that increase its 'fitness value'. The Darwinian scheme of
multistep carcinogenesis might place too many constraints on the possible mutation rates, selection
pressures and cell generation numbers required to explain the development and subsequent
progression of a tumor. The problem is further exacerbated by the absence of genetic recombination
in cancerogenesis, which otherwise helps to accelerate adaptive evolution in the case of population
genetics. Without recombination, all driver mutations must occur in a sequential manner. However,
it has to be yet experimentally confirmed that two pertinent values: i) the degree of increased
'fitness', directly attributed to a driver mutation (or an epigenetic change), and ii) the costs of
selection, required for the „adaptive‟ changes to be fixed in the heterogeneous population of cancer
cells, match the reality met in the confines of a host organism (Gatenby, 2006).
Thus, a potential problem with multistep carcinogenesis is that the odds are small that multiple
driver mutations and their selection will all occur in the same lineage, so in theory, tumors should
rarely, if ever, be detected (Loeb, 1991; Stein, 1991; Hall, 1995). And yet, regrettably, cancers do
occur. To make things worse, they often show a stubborn efficiency in developing therapeutic
resistance. An additional factor that could be at work is enhanced mutation rates41, i.e., that early
we use the term „mutation‟ in its broadest meaning, encompassing point mutations, transpositions, chromosome
rearrangements etc
mutations occurring in human cancers result in a mutator phenotype (Loeb, 1991; Jackson and Loeb,
1998). There are, nevertheless, examples of human cancers that do not exhibit an increased mutation
rate (reviewed in Hall, 1995; see more recent discussion in Shibata and Lieber, 2010 and Fox et al.,
2010).
As we have argued, QBCL proposes more subtle links between cell variability and selection
conditions. Accordingly, it overcomes the otherwise strict constraints on the values of the above
parameters to explain tumor progression and development of therapeutic resistance. It remains to be
seen how much of an impact this new perspective could have for cancer research, prevention and
management.
10. Conclusion.
Most biologists consider the counter-intuitive implications of quantum theory irrelevant for their
studies. Yet, we insist that the classical notions held up for so long in this field because molecular
biology has never, in fact, investigated the object that it purported to study – an individual living cell.
Only at the current stage of technological development we start to approach the goal of studying all
relevant variables at the single cell level. Accordingly, we need to recognize the need for QBCL and
to appreciate the dramatic implications that it can bring to the many fields of biology.
Moreover, the program we propose is not only about biology. Given the multi-scale organization of
living systems and the unprecedented complexity of their relationship to the environment, we believe
that study of life can provide a more appropriate experimental and conceptual framework for the
general exploration of the phenomenon of decoherence and the fundamental problem of ‘quantum to
classical transition’. Thus, one can reasonably expect the advances in QBCL to have repercussions in
fundamental physics as well.
Acknowledgements
The authors thank Dr. Linda L. Pritchard for critical reading of the manuscript, Lloyd Merriam and
Semeon Ogryzko for discussion and many suggestions how to improve the manuscript, Drs. Sisir
Roy, Bruno Sanguinetti, Bernard d’Espagnat and H. Dieter Zeh for discussion and comments. VO
thanks Dr. Marc Lipinski for his support and encouragement.
List of abbreviations
QBMBL – Quantum Biology at the Molecular-Biology Level
QBCL – Quantum Biology at the Cellular Level
EID – Environmentally Induced Decoherence
BDS – Basis-Dependent Selection
NS – Natural Selection
FT – Fluctuation Trapping
AML – adaptive-mutation-like