1v0102040/hp-tnauq:viXra
Quantum computing and information extraction for a dynamical quantum system
Giuliano Benenti∗
Center for Nonlinear and Complex Systems, Universita` degli Studi dell’Insubria, Via Valleggio 11, 22100 Como, Italy and
Istituto Nazionale per la Fisica della Materia, Unit`a di Como, Via Valleggio 11, 22100 Como, Italy
Giulio Casati†
Center for Nonlinear and Complex Systems, Universita` degli Studi dell’Insubria, Via Valleggio 11, 22100 Como, Italy
Istituto Nazionale per la Fisica della Materia, Unit`a di Como, Via Valleggio 11, 22100 Como, Italy and
Istituto Nazionale di Fisica Nucleare, Sezione di Milano, Via Celoria 16, 20133 Milano, Italy
Simone Montangero‡
NEST-INFM & Scuola Normale Superiore, Piazza dei Cavalieri 7, 56126 Pisa, Italy
(Dated: January 30, 2004)
We discuss the simulation of a complex dynamical system, the so-called quantum sawtooth map
model,onaquantumcomputer. Weshowthataquantumcomputercanbeusedtoefficientlyextract
relevant physical information for this model. It is possible to simulate the dynamical localization
of classical chaos and extract the localization length of the system with quadratic speed up with
respect to any known classical computation. We can also compute with algebraic speed up the
diffusion coefficient and the diffusion exponent both in the regimes of Brownian and anomalous
diffusion. Finally, we show that it is possible to extract the fidelity of the quantum motion, which
measures the stability of thesystem underperturbations, with exponential speed up.
PACSnumbers: 03.67.Lx,05.45.Mt
I. INTRODUCTION
Oneofthemainapplicationsofcomputersisthesimulationofdynamicalmodelsdescribingtheevolutionofcomplex
systems. From the viewpoint of quantum computation, quantum mechanical systems play a special role. Indeed, the
simulationof quantum many-body problems ona classicalcomputer is a difficult task as the size ofthe Hilbert space
growsexponentiallywiththenumberofparticles. Forinstance,ifwewishtosimulateachainofnspin-1 particles,the
size of the Hilbert space is 2n. Namely, the state of this system is determined by 2n complex numbers. As observed
by Feynman in the 1980’s [1], the growth in memory requirement is only linear on a quantum computer, which is
itself a many-body quantum system. For example, to simulate n spin-1 particles we only need n qubits. Therefore,
a quantum computer operating with only a few tens of qubits could outperform a classical computer. More recently,
a few quantumefficient algorithmshavebeen developedfor variousquantum systems,rangingfromsome many-body
problems [2, 3] to single-particle models of quantum chaos [4, 5, 6].
Any quantum algorithm has to address the problem of efficiently extracting useful information from the quantum
computer wave function. The result of the simulation of a quantum system is the wave function of this system,
encodedinthenqubitsofthequantumcomputer. Theproblemisthat,inordertomeasureallN =2n wavefunction
coefficientsbymeansofstandardpolarizationmeasurementsofthenqubits,onehastorepeatthequantumsimulation
a number of times exponential in the number of qubits. This procedure would spoil any quantum algorithm, even
in the case in which such algorithm could compute the wave function with an exponential gain with respect to any
classicalcomputation. Nevertheless,there aresome importantphysicalquestions thatcanbe answeredin anefficient
way, and we will discuss a few examples in this paper.
We will discuss a quantum algorithm which efficiently simulates the quantum sawtooth map, a physical model
with rich and complex dynamics [6]. This system is characterized by very different dynamical regimes, ranging
from integrability to chaos, and from normal to anomalous diffusion; it also exhibits the phenomenon of dynamical
localization of classical chaotic diffusion. We will show that some important physical quantities can be extracted
efficiently by means of a quantum computer:
†Electronicaddress: giulio.casati@uninsubria.it
(i) the localization length of the system, which can be extracted with a quadratic speed up with respect to any
known classical computation [7];
(ii) the diffusion coefficient and the diffusion exponent, both in the regimes of normal (Brownian) and anomalous
diffusion; in this case we obtain an algebraic speed up;
(iii) the fidelity of quantum motion, which characterizes the stability of the system under perturbations; for this
quantity we achieve an exponential speed up.
The paper is organizedas follows: the properties of the sawtoothmap model are discussed in Sec. II; our quantum
algorithmsimulatingthequantumdynamicsofthismodelinSec.III;thequantumcomputationofthelocalizedregime
and the extraction of the localization length in Sec. IV; the quantum simulation of the phenomena of normal and
anomalous diffusion and the computation of the diffusion coefficient and diffusion exponent in Sec. V; the quantum
computation of the fidelity of quantum motion in Sec. VI; our conclusions are summarized in Sec. VII.
II. THE SAWTOOTH MAP
The sawtooth map is a prototype model in the studies of classical and quantum-dynamical systems and exhibits a
richvariety of interesting physicalphenomena, fromcomplete chaos to complete integrability,normaland anomalous
diffusion,dynamicallocalization,andcantorilocalization. Furthermore,thesawtoothmapgivesagoodapproximation
to the motion of a particle bouncing inside a stadium billiard (which is a well-knownmodel of classicaland quantum
chaos).
The sawtooth map belongs to the class of periodically driven dynamical systems, governed by the Hamiltonian
where(I,θ)areconjugateaction-anglevariables(0 θ <2π). ThisHamiltonianisthesumoftwoterms,H(θ,I;τ)=
H (I) + U(θ;t), where H (I) = I2/2 is just the ≤ kinetic energy of a free rotator (a particle moving on a circle
parametrized by the coordinate θ), while
representsaforceactingonthe particlethatisswitchedonandoffinstantaneouslyattimeintervalsT. Therefore,we
say that the dynamics described by Hamiltonian (1) is kicked. The corresponding Hamiltonian equations of motion
 j=−∞ (3)
=I.
These equations can be easily integra
ted and one finds that the evolution from time lT− (prior to the l-th kick) to
time (l+1)T− (prior to the (l+1)-th kick) is described by the map
where F(θ)= dV(θ)/dθ is the force acting on the particle.
Inthe following,we willconsiderthe specialcaseV(θ)= k(θ π)2/2. This mapis calledthe sawtooth map, since
theforceF(θ)= dV(θ)/dθ =k(θ π)hasasawtoothshape,withadiscontinuityatθ =0. ByrescalingI J =TI,
the classical dynamics is seen to depend only on the parameter K =kT. Indeed, in terms of the variables (J,θ) map
(4) becomes
( θ¯=θ+J¯.
Thesawtoothmapexhibitssensitivedependenceoninitialconditions,whichisthedistinctivefeatureofclassicalchaos:
any small error is amplified exponentially in time. In other words, two nearby trajectories separate exponentially,
with a rate given by the maximum Lyapunov exponent λ, defined as
λ= lim ln , (6)
(cid:18) (cid:19)
where the discrete time t=τ/T measures the number of mapiterations and δ(t)= [δJ(t)]2+[δθ(t)]2. To compute
δJ(t) and δθ(t), we differentiate map (5), obtaining
=M = . (7)
(cid:20) (cid:21) (cid:20) (cid:21) (cid:20) (cid:21)(cid:20) (cid:21)
The iteration of map (7) gives δJ(t) and δθ(t) as a function of δJ(0) and δθ(0) [δJ(0) and δθ(0) represent a change
of the initial conditions]. The stability matrix M has eigenvalues µ = 1(2+K √K2+4K), which do not depend
on the coordinates J and θ and are complex conjugate for 4 K 0 and real for K < 4 and K > 0. Thus, the
classical motion is stable for 4 K 0 and completely chaotic for K < 4 and K > 0. For K > 0, δ(t) (µ )t
asymptotycally in t, and therefore the maximum Lyapunov exponent is λ = lnµ . Similarly, we obtain λ = ln µ
for K < 4. In the stable region 4 K 0, λ=0.
The sawtooth map can be studied on the cylinder [J ( ,+ )], or on a torus of sinite size ( πL J < πL,
∈ −∞ ∞ − ≤
where L is an integer, to assure that no discontinuities are introduced in the second equation of (5) when J is taken
modulus 2πL). Although the sawtooth map is a deterministic system, for K > 0 and K < 4 the motion of a
trajectory along the momentum direction is in practice indistinguishable from a random walk. Thus, one has normal
diffusion in the action (momentum) variable and the evolution of the distribution function f(J,t) is governed by a
Fokker–Planckequation:
∂t ∂J 2 ∂J
(cid:18) (cid:19)
The diffusion coefficient D is defined by
D = lim h i, (9)
where ∆J J J , and ... denotes the averageover anensemble of trajectories. If at time t=0 we take a phase
≡ −h i h i
space distribution with initial momentum J and random phases 0 θ <2π, then the solution of the Fokker–Planck
equation (8) is given by
f(J,t)= exp − . (10)
√2πDt − 2Dt
(cid:20) (cid:21)
The width (∆J(t))2 of this Gaussian distribution grows in time, according to
For K > 1, the diffusion coefficient is well approximated by the random phase approximation, in which we assume
that there are no correlations between the angles (phases) θ at different times. Hence, we have
1 2π 1 2π π2
≈h i 2π 2π − 3
where ∆J = J¯ J is the change in action after a single map step. For 0 < K < 1 diffusion is slowed, due to the
stickingoftrajec − toriesclosetobrokentori(knownascantori),andwehaveD(K) 3.3K5/2 (this regimeisdiscussed
in [8]). For 4 < K < 0 the motion is stable, the phase space has a complex structure of elliptic islands down to
smaller and s − maller scales, and one can observe anomalous diffusion, that is, (∆J)2 tα, with α=1 (for instance,
α=0.57 when K = 0.1, see Fig. 4 below). The cases K = 1, 2, 3are integrable.
The quantum version of the sawtooth map is obtained by means of the usual quantization rules, θ θˆ and
I Iˆ= i∂/∂θ (we set ~ =1). The quantum evolution in one map iteration is described by a unitary op → erator Uˆ,
called the Floquet operator, acting on the wave function ψ:
where H is Hamiltonian (1). Since the potential V(θ) is switched on only at discrete times lT, it is straightforward
where 1ˆ1 denotes the identity operator. It is important to emphasize that, while the classical sawtooth map depends
only on the rescaled parameter K = kT, the corresponding quantum evolution (14) depends on k and T separately.
The effective Planck constant is given by ~ =T. Indeed, if we consider the operator Jˆ=TIˆ(Jˆis the quantization
of the classical rescaled action J), we have
The classical limit ~ 0 is obtained by taking k and T 0, while keeping K =kT constant.
III. QUANTUM COMPUTING OF THE QUANTUM SAWTOOTH MAP
In the following, we describe an exponentially efficient quantum algorithm for simulation of the map (14) [6]. It is
based on the forward/backwardquantum Fourier transform between momentum and angle bases. Such an approach
is convenient since the operator Uˆ, introduced in Eq. (13), is the product of two operators, Uˆ = eik(θˆ−π1ˆ1)2/2 and
Uˆ = e−iTIˆ2/2, diagonal in the θ and I representations, respectively. This quantum algorithm requires the following
steps for one map iteration:
1. We apply Uˆ to the wave function ψ(θ). In order to decompose the operator Uˆ into one- and two-qubit gates,
we first of all write θ in binary notation:
with α 0,1 . Here n is the number of qubits, so that the total number of levels in the quantum sawtooth
map is N =2n. From this expansion, we obtain
− 2j1 − 2n 2j2 − 2n
j1X ,j2=1(cid:18) (cid:19)(cid:18) (cid:19)
is the identity operator for the qubit j and the one-qubit operators Oˆ
act on qubits j
j , respectively. We have
where (σˆ ) denotes the Pauli operator σˆ for the qubit j. Note that the operator Oˆ is diagonal in the
computational basis 0 , 1 . We can insert (18) into the unitary operator Uˆ , obtaining the decomposition
j1Y ,j2=1 h (cid:16) (cid:17)i
which is the product of n2 two-qubit gates (controlled phase-shift gates), each acting non-trivially only on the
qubitsj andj . Inthecomputationalbasis α α = 00 , 01 , 10 , 11 eachtwo-qubitgatecanbewritten
as exp(i2π2kD ), where D is a diagonal matrix:
j1,j2 j1,j2
0 1 1 1 0 0
D j1,j2 = 0 −2n 2j 0 2 − 2n 1 1 1 0 . (21)
(cid:0) (cid:1) −2n 2j1 − 2n
 0 0 0 1 1 1 1 
 (cid:0) (cid:1) 2j1 − 2n 2j2 − 2n 
Note that decomposition (20) of Uˆ is specific to the sawtooth map.(cid:0) (cid:1)(cid:0) (cid:1)
2. The change from the θ to the I representation is obtained by means of the quantum Fourier transform, which
requires n Hadamard gates and 1n(n 1) controlled phase-shift gates (see, e.g., [9]).
3. IntheI representation,theoperatorUˆ hasessentiallythesameformastheoperatorUˆ intheθrepresentation,
and therefore it can be decomposed into n2 controlled phase-shift gates, similarly to Eq. (20).
4. We return to the initial θ representation by application of the inverse quantum Fourier transform.
Thus, overall, this quantum algorithm requires 3n2+n gates per map iteration (3n2 n controlled phase-shifts and
2n Hadamard gates). This number is to be compared with the O(n2n) operations re − quired by a classical computer
to simulate one map iteration by means of a fast Fourier transform. Thus, the quantum simulation of the quantum
sawtoothmap dynamics is exponentially faster than any knownclassicalalgorithm. Note that the resourcesrequired
to the quantum computer to simulate the evolution of the sawtooth map are only logarithmic in the system size N.
Of course, there remains the problem of extracting useful information from the quantum-computer wave function.
This will be discussed in the subsequent sections.
IV. QUANTUM COMPUTING OF DYNAMICAL LOCALIZATION
Dynamical localization is one of the most interesting phenomena that characterize the quantum behavior of classi-
cally chaotic systems: quantum interference effects suppress chaotic diffusion in momentum, leading to exponentially
localizedwavefunctions. This phenomenonwasfirstfoundandstudiedinthequantumkicked-rotatormodel[10]and
has profound analogies with Anderson localization of electronic transport in disordered materials [11]. Dynamical
localization has been observed experimentally in the microwaveionization of Rydberg atoms [12] and in experiments
with cold atoms [13].
Dynamicallocalizationcanbestudiedinthesawtoothmapmodel. Inthiscase,map(14)isstudiedonthe cylinder
[I ( ,+ )], which is cut-off at a finite number N of levels due to the finite quantum (or classical) computer
memory. Similarlytoothermodelsofquantumchaos,quantuminterferenceinthesawtoothmapleadstosuppression
of classical chaotic diffusion after a break time t⋆. For t > t⋆, while the classical distribution goes on diffusing, the
quantum distribution reaches a steady state which decays exponentially over the momentum eigenbasis:
2 1 2m m 0
W mψ exp | − | , (22)
(cid:20) (cid:21)
(cid:12) (cid:12)
with m the initial value of the momentum (t (cid:12) he ind (cid:12) ex m singles out the eigenstates of Iˆ, that is, Iˆm =mm ) [15].
Therefore, for t>t⋆ only (∆m)2 ℓ levels are populated.
An estimate of t⋆ and ℓ can be obtained by means of the following argument [16]. The localized wave packet has
significantprojectionoverabout ℓ basisstates, bothin the basisof the momentum eigenstatesand inthe basis ofthe
eigenstates of the Floquet operator Uˆ defined by Eq. (13). This operator is unitary and therefore its eigenvalues can
be written as exp(iλ ), and the so-called quasienenergies λ are in the interval [0,2π[. Thus, the mean level spacing
between “significant” quasienergy eigenstates is ∆E 2π/ℓ. The Heisenberg principle tells us that the minimum
time required to the dynamics to resolve this energy spacing is given by
This is the break time after which the quantum feature of the dynamics reveals. Diffusion up to time t⋆ involves a
number of levels given by
where D = D/T2 is the classical diffusionpcoefficient, mepasured in number of levels. The relations (23) and (24)
Therefore, the quantum localization length ℓ for the average probability distribution is approximately equal to the
classical diffusion coefficient. For the sawtooth map,
Note that the quantum localization can take place on a finite system only if ℓ is smaller than the system size N.
−30 −20 −10 0 10 20 30
FIG. 1: The probability distribution over the momentum basis for the sawtooth map with n = 6 qubits, k = √3, K = √2,
and initial momentum m0 =0; the time average is taken in the intervals 10 t 20 (full curve) and 290 t 300 (dashed
curve). The straight line fit,Wm exp( 2m/ℓ), gives a localization length ℓ 12. Note that the logarithm is base ten.
InFig.1(takenfrom[7]), weshowthatexponentiallocalizationcanalreadybe clearlyseenwithn=6qubits. Itis
importanttostressthatinaquantumcomputerthememorycapabilitiesgrowexponentiallywiththenumberofqubits
(the number of levels N is equal to 2n). Therefore, already with less than 40 qubits, one could make simulations
inaccessible to today’s supercomputers. Fig. 1 shows that the exponentially localized distribution, appearing at
t t⋆, is frozen in time, apart from quantum fluctuations, which we partially smooth out by averaging over a few
map steps. The freezing of the localized distribution can be seen from comparison of the probability distributions
taken immediately after t⋆ (the full curve in Fig. 1) and at a much larger time t = 300 25t⋆ (the dashed curve
in the same figure). Here the localization length is ℓ 12, and classical diffusion is suppressed after a break time
t⋆ ℓ D , in agreement with estimates (25)–(26) [the classical diffusion coefficient is D (π2/3)k2 9.9]. This
qua ≈ ntu ≈ mcomputationupto times ofthe orderofℓ requiresanumber N 3n2ℓ 103 ofone ≈ -ortwo-qub ≈ itquantum
gates.
InFig.2,weshowaquantumcomputationthatmightbeperformedalreadywithathree-qubitquantumprocessor.
It is possible to comparetwo verydifferent regimes,namely the localizedandthe ergodic regime,by varying only the
valueofthequantumparameterk,whilekeepingthe classicalparameterK constant. Inbothcasesthewavefunction
is stationary(apartfromquantumfluctuations), ascanbe seenfromthe comparisonofthe wavefunction patternsat
different times. The difference between the two cases is striking. Notice that, in this example, the localizationlength
ℓ<1 andone canexplainthe resultsofthis simulationusing perturbationtheory. Indeed, wehavek 0.35<1,and
therefore we can treat the kick Uˆ as a perturbation of the free-evolution operatore Uˆ . The case sh ∼ own in Fig. 2 is
interestingsinceitinvolvesonlyn=3qubits andafew tens onquantumgates. Thereforethis quantumcomputation
seemstobeaccessibleorclosetothepresentcapabilitiesofNMR-based[17,18]andion-trap[19]quantumprocessors.
We now discuss how to extract the relevant information (the value of the localization length) from a quantum
computersimulatingthe sawtooth-mapdynamics. The localizationlengthcanbe measuredbyrunningthe algorithm
repeatedly up to time t > t⋆. Each run is followed by a standard projective measurement on the computational
(momentum) basis. Since the wave function at time t can be written as
with m momentum eigenstates, such a measurement gives outcome m¯ with probability
A first series of measurements would allow us to (cid:12) (cid:12)give a ro (cid:12) (cid:12)ugh (cid:12) (cid:12)estimate (cid:12) (cid:12)of the variance (∆m)2 of the distribution
W . In turn, (∆m)2 gives a first estimate of the localization length ℓ. After this, we can store the results of the
-3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4
FIG.2: Theprobabilitydistributionoverthemomentumbasisforthesawtooth mapwithn=3qubits,k=K/T =KN/2πL,
andinitial momentumm0=0: ergodic regimeat L=1(fullsymbols) andlocalized regime atL=5(emptysymbols). Circles
(squares) represent the wave function after t = 3 (t = 50) time steps. The dashed line represents an equally weighted wave
function. To smooth theresults, weaverage overten(onehundred)differentvaluesof K [1.4,1.5] for thelocalized (ergodic)
case.
measurementsinhistogrambinsofwidthδm ℓ (∆m)2 . Finally,the localizationlengthisextractedfromafit
of the exponential decay of this coarse-graineddistribution over the momentum basis. Elementary statistical theory
tells us that, in this way, the localization length can p be obtained with accuracy ν after the order of 1/ν2 computer
runs. It is interesting to note that it is sufficient to perform a coarse-grained measurement to generate a coarse-
grained distribution. This means that it will be sufficient to measure the most significant qubits, and ignore those
that wouldgive a measurementaccuracybelow the coarsegrainingδm. Thus, the number of runs andmeasurements
is independent of ℓ.
In Fig. 3, we report a simulation of the measurement process. In the left figure we compare the exact probabilities
givenby the wave function with the result of a complete measurementof all qubits and the result of a coarse-grained
measurement. The histograms are built from the same number of computational runs, each followed by a projective
measurement. The coarse-grained measurement does not resolve the thinnest structures of the exact wave function.
However, it is still possible to extract a good estimate of the localization length ℓ from a fit of the exponential
decay of the probability distribution W . In the right figure we compare the localizationlengths, extracted from the
complete and the coarse-grained measurements, as a function of the number N of projective measurements. Two
distinctbehaviorsareclearlydistinguishable: the localizationlengthcomputedfromthe completemeasurementofall
qubits convergesslowlyto the exactvalue for the localizationlength, since alargenumber ofprojectivemeasurement
is required in order to resolve the exponentially decaying tails. On the contrary, the coarse-grained measurements
approachesthe exactvalue after a much smallernumber of measurements,eventhough the fluctuations as a function
of the number of measurements are quite large.
It is possible to give a better estimate of the localization length by computing the inverse participation ratio
ξ = . (29)
The inverse participation ratio determines the numberPof basis states significantly populated by the wave function
and gives an estimate of the localization length of the system. We have 1 ξ N, with the limiting cases ξ = 1
and ξ = N corresponding to a wave function delta-peaked (W = δ ) or uniformly spread (W = 1/N). In
the localized regime, ξ ℓ/2. We stress that the inverse participation ratio is almost insensitive to the behavior
of exponentially small tails of the wave function. Thus, the estimate ℓ 2ξ is quite accurate already with a small
number of coarse-grainedmesurement (see Fig. 3).
We now come to the crucial point, of estimating the gain of quantum computation of the localization length with
respectto classicalcomputation. Firstof all, we recallthat it is necessaryto make about t⋆ =O(ℓ) map iterationsto
obtain the localized distribution, see Eq. (25). This is true, both for the present quantum algorithmand for classical
0 5 10 15 20 25 30
FIG.3: Left: Simulationofameasurementexperimentforthequantumsawtoothmapatn=6,K =√2,T =2πL/N,L=10,
t = 50. The thick line is the exact wave function, the thin dashed (thick full) histogram represents the result of NM runs,
each followed by a projective measurement of all (all except two) qubits. In both cases NM =5 103. Right: The estimated
localization length ℓ as a function of the number NM of projective measurements. We estimate ℓ by fitting the probability
decay for the complete (circles) and coarse-grained (squares) measurements. Triangles give 2ξ, with the inverse partecipation
ratio computed from the coarse-grained probability distribution. The straight line is the theoretical result ℓ 6.8, obtained
from Eq. (26).
computation. It is reasonable to use a basis size N = O(ℓ) to detect localization (say, N equal to a few times the
localizationlength). Insuchasituation,aclassicalcomputerrequiresO(ℓ2logℓ)operationstoextractthelocalization
length, while a quantum computer would require O(ℓ(logℓ)2) elementary gates. Indeed, both classical and quantum
computers need to perform t t⋆ = O(ℓ) = O(N) map iterations. Therefore, the quantum computer provides a
quadratic speed up in computing the localization length, As we shall see in Sec. VI, the quantum computation can
provideanexponentialgain (withrespecttoanyknownclassicalcomputation)inproblemsthatrequirethesimulation
of dynamics up to a time t which is independent of the number of qubits. In this case, provided that we can extract
the relevant information in a number of measurements polynomial in the number of qubits, one should compare
O(t(logN)2) elementary gates (quantum computation) with O(tNlogN) elementary gates (classical computation).
V. QUANTUM COMPUTING OF BROWNIAN AND ANOMALOUS DIFFUSION
As we have discussed in Sec. II, the classical sawtooth map is characterized by different diffusive behaviors in the
chaoticandsemi-integrableregimes. Quantumcomputerscouldhelpustostudythesedifferentregimesbysimulating
the map in the deep semiclassical region ~ 0. Let us first show that a quantum computer would be useful
in computing the Brownian diffusion coefficient D . For this purpose, we can repeat several times the quantum
simulation of the sawtooth map up to a given time t, ending each run with a standard projective measurement
in the momentum basis. This allows us to compute, up to statistical errors, (∆m)2 . The diffusion coefficient is
then obtained from Eq. (24) as D (∆m)2 /t. Therefore a computation o h f the di i ffusion coefficient up to time
t significantly involves the order of √D t momentum eigenstates (other levels are only weakly populated for times
smaller than t and can be neglected). Thus, a basis of dimension N = O(t1/2) is sufficient for this computation. To
estimatethe speedupofquantumcomputation,oneshouldcompareO(t(logN)2)=O(N2(logN)2)elementarygates
(quantumcomputation)withwithO(tNlogN)=O(N3log(N))elementarygates(classicalcomputation). Thisgives
an algebraic speed up.
We note that similar computations could be done in the regime of anomalous diffusion, in which (∆J)2 =
T2 (∆m)2 tα, to evaluate the exponent α, a quantity of great physical interest. Such a regime is qui h te comp i lex
in the sawtooth map: Fig. 4 shows, for the classical map, the dependence of the exponent α as a function of K. As
can be seen from this figure, the map explores subdiffusive (α<1) and superdiffusive (α>1) regions,up to ballistic
diffusion (α = 2). As required by the principle of quantum to classical correspondence, the quantum sawtooth map
follows this behavior in the deep semiclassical regime ~ 1, up to some time scale which diverges when ~ 0.
It is important to point out that ~ drops to zero expon ≪ entially with the number of qubits (~ 1/N = 1/ → 2n),
and therefore the deep semiclassical region can be reached with a small number of qubits. For la ∝ rge ~ , one can
also study how diffusion is modified by important quantum phenomena, like quantum tunneling, localization, and
FIG. 4: Left: Exponent α of the anomalous diffusion ( (∆J)2 tα) as a function of K for the classical sawtooth map in the
semi-integrable regime.
quantum resonances.
A quantum computer could help us in obtaining the exponent α of the anomalous diffusion. In this case,
since (∆m)2 tα, a rough estimate of the size of the basis required for the computation up to time t is
N = O(tα/2). Hence, we must compare O(t(logN)2) = O(N2/α(logN)2) elementary gates (quantum computation)
with O(tNlogN)=O(N(α+2)/αlog(N)) elementary gates (classical computation). The speed up is again algebraic.
VI. QUANTUM COMPUTING OF THE FIDELITY OF QUANTUM MOTION
The simulation of quantum dynamics up to a time t which is independent of the number of qubits is useful, for
instance, to measure dynamical correlation functions of the form
whereUˆ isthetime-evolutionoperator(13)forthesawtoothmap. Similarly, wecanefficientlycomputethefidelityof
quantum motion, which is a quantity of central interest in the study of the stability of a system under perturbations
(see, e.g., [20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27] and references therein). The fidelity f(t) (also called the Loschmidt echo),
measures the accuracy with which a quantum state can be recovered by inverting, at time t, the dynamics with a
perturbed Hamiltonian. It is defined as
Here the wave vector ψ evolves forward in time with the Hamiltonian H of Eq. (13) up to time t, and then evolves
backward in time with a perturbed Hamiltonian H (Uˆ is the corresponding time-evolution operator). For instance,
we can perturb the parameter k in the sawtooth map as follows: k k′ = k +ǫ, with ǫ k. If the evolution
operators Uˆ and Uˆ can be simulated efficiently on a quantum compute → r, as is the case in most ≪ physically interesting
situations, then the fidelity of quantum motion can be evaluated with exponential speed up with respect to known
classical computations. The same conclusion is valid for the correlation functions (30).
Thefidelitycanbeefficientlyevaluatedonaquantumcomputer,withtheonlyrequirementofanancillaqubit,using
the scattering circuit drawninFig.5[28,29]. Thiscircuithasvariousimportantapplicationsinquantumcomputing,
including quantum state tomography and quantum spectroscopy [29]. The circuit ends up with the measurement of
the ancilla qubit, and we have
where σ and σ are the expectation values of the Pauli spin operators σˆ and σˆ for the ancilla qubit, and Wˆ is
a unitary operator. These two expectation values can be obtained (up to statistical errors) if one runs several times
|0 0| H H Measurement
FIG. 5: Scattering circuit. The top line denotes the ancilla qubit, the bottom line a set of n qubits, H the Hadamard gate,
and W a unitary transformation.
the scatteringcircuit. If we setρ= ψ ψ andWˆ =(Uˆ†)tUˆt, it is easy to see thatf(t)= Tr(Wˆρ)2 = σ 2+ σ 2.
| ih | ǫ | | h z i h y i
For this reason, provided the quantum algorithm which implements Uˆ is efficient, as it is the case for the quantum
sawtooth map, the fidelity can be efficiently computed by means of the circuit described in Fig. 5. We note that
another possible way to efficiently measure the fidelity has been proposed in [26].
VII. CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we have discussed relevant physical examples of efficient information extraction in the quantum
computation of a dynamical system. We have shown that a quantum computer with a small number of qubits can
efficiently simulate the quantum localization effects, simulate both the Brownian and anomalous diffusion in the
deep semiclassical regime, and compute the fidelity of quantum motion. We would like to stress that the simulation
of complex dynamical systems is accessible to the first generation of quantum computers with less than 10 qubits.
Therefore,webelievethatquantumalgorithmsfordynamicalsystemsdeservefurtherstudies,sincethey aretheideal
software for the first quantum processors. Furthermore, we emphasize that the quantum computation of quantities
like dynamical localization or fidelity is a demanding testing ground for quantum computers. In the first case, we
want to simulate dynamical localization, a purely quantum phenomena which is quite fragile in the presence of noise
[30, 31]; in the latter case, fidelity is computed as a result of a sophisticated many-qubit Ramsey-type interference
experiment. Therefore the computation of these quantities appears to be a relevant test for quantum processors
operating in the presence of decoherence and imperfection effects.
Acknowledgments
This workwassupportedin partby the EC contractsIST-FET EDIQIPandRTN QTRANS, the NSA andARDA
under ARO contractNo. DAAD19-02-1-0086,and the PRIN 2002 “Fault tolerance,controland stability in quantum
information processing”.
[1] R.P.Feynman,Int.J. Theor. Phys. 21, 467 (1982).
[2] S.Lloyd, Science 273, 1073 (1996).
[3] G. Ortiz, J.E. Gubernatis, E. Knill, and R. Laflamme, Phys. Rev.A 64, 022319 (2001).
[4] R.Schack,Phys. Rev.A 57, 1634 (1998).
[5] B. Georgeot and D.L.Shepelyansky,Phys.Rev.Lett. 86, 2890 (2001).
[6] G. Benenti, G. Casati, S.Montangero, D.L.Shepelyansky,Phys.Rev.Lett. 87 227901 (2001).
[7] G. Benenti, G. Casati, S.Montangero, D.L.Shepelyansky,Phys.Rev.A 67, 052312 (2003).
[8] I.Dana, N.W. Murray, and I.C. Percival, Phys. Rev.Lett. 62, 233 (1989).
[9] M.A.NielsenandI.L.Chuang,QuantumComputationandQuantumInformation(CambridgeUniversityPress,Cambridge,
2000).
[10] G.Casati, B.V. Chirikov, J. Ford, and F.M. Izrailev, Lecture Notes Phys. 93, 334 (1979); for a review see. e.g., F.M.
Izrailev, Phys. Rep.196, 299 (1990).
[11] S.Fishman, D.R.Grempel, and R.E. Prange, Phys. Rev.Lett.49, 509 (1982).
[12] P.M. Koch and K.A.H.van Leeuwen, Phys. Rep.255, 289 (1995), and references therein.
[13] F.L.Moore,J.C.Robinson,C.F.Barucha,B.Sundaram,andM.G.Raizen,Phys.Rev.Lett.75,4598(1995);H.Ammann,
R. Gray, I. Shvarchuck, and N. Christensen, ibid. 80, 4111 (1998); D.A. Steck, W.H. Oskay, and M.G. Raizen, ibid. 88,
120406 (2002).
[14] A.D.Mirlin, Y.V. Fyodorov,F.-M. Dittes, J. Quezada, and T.H. Seligman, Phys.Rev. E54, 3221 (1996).
[15] Strictlyspeaking,theasymptotictailsofthelocalized wavefunctionsdecay,forthesawtoothmapmodel,asapowerlaw:
Thishappensduetothediscontinuityin thekickingforceF(θ)=k(θ π),whentheanglevariableθ=0.Forthisreason
thematrix elements of the evolution operator Uˆ [defined by Eq. (13)] decay as a power law in the momentum eigenbasis:
Umm′ = mUˆ m′ 1/m m′α , with α=2. This case was investigated for random matrices, where it was shown that
eigenfunctionsarealso algebraically localized withthesame exponentα[14].However,thelocalization pictureisnotvery
sensitivetothebehaviorofthetailsofthewavefunction.Indeed,aroughestimateofthecrossoverbetweentheexponential
decay (22) and the power law decay (33) is given bytheir crossing point,
Thisimpliesthatbyincreasingℓtheexponentiallocalization ispushedtolargermomentumwindowsanddowntosmaller
probabilities.
[16] B.V. Chirikov, F.M. Izrailev, and D.L.Shepelyansky,Sov.Sci. Rev.C 2, 209 (1981).
[17] Y.S.Weinstein, S. Lloyd,J. Emerson, and D.G. Cory Phys. Rev.Lett. 89, 157902 (2002).
[18] L.M.K. Vandersypen,M. Steffen,G. Breyta, C.S. Yannoni, M.H. Sherwood and I.L. Chuang, Nature 414, 883 (2001).
[19] S. Gulde, M. Riebe, G.P.T. Lancaster, C. Becher, J. Eschner, H. H¨affner, F. Schmidt-Kaler, I.L. Chuang, and R. Blatt,
Nature421, 48 (2003).
[20] A.Peres, Phys.Rev. A 30, 1610 (1984).
[21] R.A.Jalabert and H.M. Pastawski, Phys. Rev.Lett, 86, 2490 (2001).
[22] Ph. Jacquod, P.G. Silvestrov, and C.W.J. Beenakker, Phys.Rev.E 64, 055203(R) (2001),
[23] N.R.Cerruti and S.Tomsovic, Phys. Rev.Lett. 88, 054103 (2002).
[24] G. Benenti and G. Casati, Phys.Rev.E 65, 066205 (2002).
[25] T. Prosen and M. Zˇnidariˇc, J. Phys.A 35, 1455 (2002).
[26] J. Emerson, Y.S.Weinstein, S. Lloyd and D.Cory, Phys. Rev.Lett. 89, 284102 (2002).
[27] F.M. Cucchietti, D.A.R.Dalvit, J.P. Paz, and W.H.Zurek, Phys.Rev.Lett. 91, 210403 (2003).
[28] S.A.Gardiner, J.I. Cirac, and P. Zoller, Phys.Rev.Lett. 79, 4790 (1997).
[29] C. Miquel, J.P. Paz, M. Saraceno, E. Knill, R. Laflamme and C. Negrevergne, Nature418 59 (2002).
[30] E. Ott,T.M. Antonsen,Jr., and J.D. Hanson, Phys.Rev. Lett.53, 2187 (1984).
[31] P.H.Song and D.L. Shepelyansky,Phys. Rev.Lett. 86, 2162 (2001).