]hp-tnauq[
1v51520.3051:viXra
Quantum Information Biology: from
information interpretation of quantum
mechanics to applications in molecular biology
and cognitive psychology
Masanari Asano
Liberal Arts Division, Tokuyama College of Technology, Japan
Irina Basieva, Andrei Khrennikov
International Center for Mathematical Modeling
in Physics and Cognitive Science
Linnaeus University, V¨axjo¨, Sweden
Masanori Ohya and Yoshiharu Tanaka
Department of Information Sciences
Tokyo University of Science, Japan
Ichiro Yamato
Department of Biological Science and Technology
Tokyo University of Science, Japan
March 10, 2015
We discuss foundational issues of quantum information biology
(QIB) – one of the most successful applications of the quantum for-
malism outside of physics. QIB provides a multi-scale model of in-
formation processing in bio-systems: from proteins and cells to cogni-
tive and social systems. This theory has to be sharply distinguished
from “traditional quantum biophysics”. The latter is about quan-
tum bio-physical processes, e.g., in cells or brains. QIB models the
dynamics of information states of bio-systems. It is based on the
quantum-like paradigm: complex bio-systems process information in
accordance with the laws of quantum information and probability.
This paradigm is supported by plenty of statistical bio-data collected
at all scales, from molecular biology and genetics/epigenetics to cog-
nitive psychology and behavioral economics. We argue that the infor-
mation interpretation of quantum mechanics (its various forms were
elaborated by Zeilinger and Brukner, Fuchs and Mermin, and D’ Ari-
ano) is the most natural interpretation of QIB. We also point out that
QBIsm (Quantum Bayesianism) can serve to find a proper interpre-
tation of bio-quantum probabilities. Biologically QIB is based on two
principles: a) adaptivity; b) openness (bio-systems are fundamentally
open). These principles are mathematically represented in the frame-
work of a novel formalism – quantum adaptive dynamics which, in
particular, contains the standard theory of open quantum systems as
a special case of adaptivity (to environment).
keywords: quantum biological information, quantum adaptive dynamics,
open quantum systems, information interpretation, QBism, molecular biol-
ogy, genetics, cognition
1 Introduction
Inthispaperwediscuss anovel fieldofresearch, quantum information biology
(QIB). It is based on application of a novel quantum information formalism
[1]–[10], quantum adaptive dynamics, outside of physics. 1 Quantum adaptive
dynamics describes in the most general setting mutual adaptivity of informa-
tion states of systems of any origin (physical, biological, social, political) as
well as mutual adaptivity their co-observations, including self-observations
(such as performed by the brain).
Nowadaysquantum information theoryiswidelyappliedtoquantumcom-
puters, simulators, cryptography, and teleportation. Quantum information
theory is fundamentally based on quantum probability (QP).
We noticed that biological phenomena often violate the basic laws of
classical probability (CP) [12]–[31]; in particular, the law of total probabil-
ity (LTP). Therefore in biology (treated widely as covering cognition and
its derivatives: psychology and decision making, sociology and behavioral
economics and finances) it is natural to explore one of the most advanced
and well known nonclassical probability theories, namely, QP. This leads to
1QIB is not about quantum physics of bio-systems (see [11] for extended review), in
particular, not about quantum physical modeling of cognition, see section 2 for details.
Another terminological possibility would be “quantum bio-information”. However, the
latter term, bio-information,has been reservedfor a specialpartof biologicalinformation
theorystudyingcomputermodelingofsequencingofDNA.Wedonotwanttobeassociated
with this activity having totally different aims and mathematical tools.
thequantuminformationrepresentationofbiologicalinformationflowswhich
differs crucially from the classical information representation.
Since any bio-system S is fundamentally open (from a cell to a brain or
a social system), i.e., it cannot survive without contacts with environment
(physical, biological, social), it is natural to apply the powerful and well
developed apparatus of theory of open quantum systems[32] to the descrip-
tion of biological information flows. Adaptivity of the information state of S
to an environment is a special form of bio-adaptivity: mutual adaptivity of
information states of any pair of bio-systems S1 and S2. Since quantum infor-
mation theory provides a very general description of information processing,
it is natural to apply it to model adaptive dynamics. This led us to quantum
adaptive dynamics. Surprisingly we found that such an operational quantum
formalism can be applied to any biological scale by representing statistical
experimental data by means of quantum probability and information. Dur-
ing the last years a general model representing all basic information flows
in biology (from molecular biology to cognitive science and psychology and
to evolution) on the basis of quantum information/adaptive dynamics was
elaborated. In a series of our works [1]–[10] the general scheme of embedding
of biological information processing into the quantum information formalism
was presented and the foundational issues related to usage of quantum repre-
sentation for macroscopic bio-systems, such as genome, protein,..., brain,...,
bio-population were discussed in details and clarified.
Our theory can be considered as the informational basis of decision mak-
ing. Each bio-system (from a cell to a brain and to a social or ecological
system) is permanently in process of decision making. Each decision making
can be treated as a self-measurement or more generally as an adaptive reply
to signals from external and internal environments.
On this basis, we believe that QIB is the most predictive tool know our
future state on earth. We expect that this quantum-like operator formalism
is a kind of brave trial to unify our social and natural sciences.
2 Interrelation of quantum bio-physics and
information biology
This section is devoted to comparison of quantum bio-physics with QIB.
Those who have been satisfied with a brief explanation given in footnote 1
can jump over this section.
First of all, we emphasize that our applications of the methods of QM
to modeling of information flows in bio-systems have no direct relation to
physical quantum processes in them, cf. [11]. For example, by considering
quantum information processing by a cell or by a protein molecule [1]–[10]
we do not treat them as quantum physical systems. In fact, already a single
cell or even a protein molecular are too big to be treated in the conventional
QM-framework which was elaborated for microscopic systems. (N. Bohr
emphasized the role of the fundamental quantum of action - the Planck
constant h.) Of course, in the quantum foundational community so-called
macroscopic quantum phenomena have been discussed a lot. However, it
seems that magnitudes ofsome importantphysical parameters ofbio-systems
do not match with scales of macro-quantum phenomena (e.g., Tegmark’s [33]
critique of “quantum mind”, cf. with [11]). For example, bio-systems are too
hot comparing with Bose-Einstein condensate or Josephson-junction. At the
same time we can point to experiments of A. Zeilinger continued by Arndt,
see [11], on interference for macro-molecules, including viruses. They were
performed at high temperature. We can also point to recent studies claiming
the quantum physical nature of the photo-synthesis.
In any event in QIB we are not interested in all complicated problems
of macro- and, in particular, bio-quantumness. In particular, by applying
our formalism to cognition we escape involvement in hot debates about a
possibility to treat the hot and macroscopic brain as processing quantum
physical (entangled) states, since we do not couple our model to the “quan-
tum physical brain project”, e.g., theories of Penrose [34] and Hameroff [35].
For example, the complex problem whether micro-tubules in the brain are
able to preserve quantum physical entanglement (before its decoherence) for
a sufficiently long time, e.g., to perform a step of quantum computation, is
outside of our theory. QIB describes well processing of mental informational
states, independently ofwhowillberight: PenroseandHamerofforTegmark.
(It is also possible that this debate will continue forever.) The ability of a
bio-system to operate with superpositions of information states including
brain’s ability to form superpositions of mental states is the key-issue.
For a moment, there is no commonly accepted model of creation of su-
perposition of information states by a bio-system, in particular, there is no
a proper neurophysiological model of creation of mental superposition. For
the latter, we can mention a series of attempts to model states superposition
with the aid of classical oscillatory processes in the brain, as it was proposed
by J. Acacio deBarrosandP. Suppes [20], including classical electromagnetic
waves in the brain, see, e.g., for a model [36] proposed by A. Khrennikov.
In these studies mental states are associated with classical physical waves
or oscillators, the waves discretized with the aid of thresholds induce the
probabilistic interference exhibited in the form of violations of LTP.
In general we consider violations of LTP by statistical data collected in
bio-science, from molecular biology to cognitive psychology, as confirmation
of the ability of bio-system to operate with states superpositions. In an ex-
periment, in QM as well as in biology, we do not detect superposition of
“individual information states” such as superposition of two classical waves.
Informational states of bio-systems are probabilistic amplitudes. In QIB we
discuss the ability of bio-systems to represent probabilities by vector ampli-
tudes and operate with such amplitudes by using the operations which are
mathematically represented as the matrix calculus. From this operational
viewpoint an electron does not differ so much from a cell, or a brain, or a
social system.
In the series of works, see [14] for references, it was shown that, for proba-
bilisticdataofanyorigin,violationofLTPleadstorepresentationofstatesby
probabilityamplitudes(usualcomplexormoregeneral, so-calledhyperbolic)-
the constructive wave function approach. It might be that bio-systems re-
ally use this algorithm of production of amplitudes from probabilities – the
quantum-like representation algorithm. In a bio-system probability can be
treated as frequency. And frequencies can (but need not) be encoded in
oscillatory processes in bio-systems.
Finally, we speculate that the brain could, in principle, use a part of its
spatial representation “hardware” (its deformation in the process of evolu-
tion) for the vector representation of probabilities and hence, for decision
making and processing of information at the advanced level. For a moment,
this is a pure speculation.
3 From information physics to information
3.1 Operational approach
In QIB, similarly to quantum physics , we treat the quantum formalism as
an operational formalism describing (self-)measurements performed by bio-
systems.
Neither QM nor biology (in particular, cognitive science) can explain why
systems under study produce such random outputs - violating the CP-laws.
Moreover, in QM, according to the Copenhagen interpretation, it is in princi-
ple impossible to provide some “explanation” of quantum random behavior,
N. Bohr always pointed out that quantum theory describes the results of measure-
ments and emphasized the role of an observer; he stressed that the whole experimental
arrangementhastobetakenintoaccount;W.HeisenbergandW.Paulihadsimilarviews,
see A. Plotnitsky [37]–[38] for detailed analysis of their views.
e.g., by using a more detailed description with the aid of so-called hidden
variables. In spite of this explanatory gap, QM is one of the most successful
scientific theories. One may hope that a similar operational approach would
finally lead to creation of a novel and fruitful theory for bio-systems.
Weremarkthatinrecent studiesofD’Arianoetal. [39]–[42]thequantum
formalism was derived from a set of purely operational postulates reflecting
features of a very general measurement scheme. Such an approach can be
applied to QIB as a theory of (self-)measurements. However, one should
carefully check matching of D’Ariano’spostulateswithdecision making done
bybio-systems(consideredasself-measurements). Itisnaturaltoexpectthat
some of these (physically natural) postulates have to be modified and that
new postulates can be in use. This is an interesting project waiting for its
realization.
3.2 Information interpretation of quantum mechanics
Wealsoemphasize thatrecentlytheinformational interpretationofthequan-
tumstatestartedtoplayanimportantroleinQMand,especially, inquantum
information theory, see the works of A. Zeilinger and C. Brukner [43]–[47], C.
Fuchs and D. Mermin [48]–[51], and M. D’ Ariano et al [39]–[42]. By this in-
terpretationthe QMformalismisaboutthe informationprocessing related to
experiments. The wave function is not treated as a physical state of, e.g., an
individual electron. It is treated as representing information about possible
outcomes of experiments. This viewpoint matches well with Schro¨dinger’s
treatment of the wave function as a table of expectations about possible
outcomes. The adherents of the information interpretation also often refer
to the views of N. Bohr and W. Heisenberg who treated QM operationally.
However, here the situation is complicated, since, for example, Bohr’s views
on the interpretation of the wave function changed many times during his
life, see, for example, A. Plotnitsky for discussions [37]-[38].
3We remark that Schr¨odinger’s views on possible interpretations of the wave function
changed crucially a few times. At the very beginning he considered the wave function
as a new physical field. Then he pointed out that for a system of two electrons their
wave function can be represented as a physical field defined not on the physical three
dimensional space, but on the six dimensional configuration space. At that time multi-
dimensional spaces were considered as exotics, cf. with the modern situation in string
theory. Therefore he gave up with the physical interpretation of quantum states. By
discovering unusual features of entangled states he concluded that such states can only
be understood if they are treated as information states. We remark that later, in 50th,
Schr¨odinger stimulated by the success of quantum field theory tried again to come back
to the physical field interpretation of the wave function.
3.3 QBism: Quantum Bayesian interpretation of quan-
tum probability
In its extreme subjective form the information interpretation is presented
as QBism, quantum Bayesian approach – C. Fuchs and D. Mermin, see, for
example, [48]–[51]. QBists really belief that the QM-formalism is simply a
mathematical tool to assign subjective probabilities to expected outcomes of
experiments. QBism’s position is very supporting for the part of QIB related
to the project “quantum(-like) cognition”. Probabilities assigned to possible
events by decision makers are subjective. It is worse with our more general
project. Subjective probability, what would it mean for a cell? for a protein?
for a social or ecological system?
Even for quantum cognition, we cannot simply (as C. Fuchs does in QM)
assign a subjective probability to some event: “the brain produces it in some
way”. By discussing the cognitive component of decision making it would be
natural to try at least to imagine how a subjective probability is assigned to
the concrete event.
One can speculate that, in fact, the probability which appears at the con-
scious level asthefeeling of“subjective probability” isanesemble probability
at the unconscious level. Unconscious has a plenty of factors for and against
the possibility of occurrence of some event A. These factors are weighted
by unconscious, so in the mathematical terms it operates with a probability
measure corresponding to summation of weights of the factors in favor of A.
We remark that at the very beginning A. Zeilinger and C. Brukner did
not emphasize so much the subjective probability viewpoint to QP, they
stressed that QM is about information, that this is a step towards, so to
say, information physics. However, the recent talk of A. Zeilinger at the
conference “50 years of Bell theorem”, Vienna, June 2014, was very much in
the QBism spirit.
4 This unconscious-ensemble viewpoint to subjective probabilities in QM and in this
way connection “quantum-mental” as the basis of QBism was advertised by one of the
coauthors (AKH). During many years it was discussed with C. Fuchs, but his reaction
was not supporting. Moreover, another author of this paper (IB) strongly rejects the
unconscious-ensemble viewpoint on quantum probabilities which she otherwise interprets
as subjective. The reader can see how difficult is the probability interpretation problem
and that even keeping rigidly to the subjective interpretation one cannot say that the
interpretation problem was solved completely.
3.4 Difference between the information interpretations
of Zeilinger-Brukner and Fuchs-Mermin: the role
of irreducible quantum randomness
Although, as we can see from the aforementioned lecture of Zeilinger, views
of Zeilinger-Brukner and Fuchs-Mermin are sufficiently close, it is important
to point to one fundamental difference in their approaches. The interpreta-
tion of Zeilinger-Brukner is heavily based on the assumption that quantum
randomness is irreducible. This idea that quantum randomness crucially dif-
fers from classical one was present already in von Neumann’s book [52]. He
pointed out that quantum randomness is individual, e.g., even an individual
electron is intrinsically random, and classical randomness is of the ensemble
nature. Inaseriesofpapers[43]–[47]thisideologywasdevelopedinthequan-
tum informationframework andit serves as thebase of the Zeilinger-Brukner
interpretation. It seems that QBism can proceed even without referring to
the irreducible quantum randomness.
In principle, in QIB we can proceed as QBists, i.e., without looking for
biological sources of irreducible randomness. On the other hand, it is impor-
tant to pose the following stimulating question:
Is an individual bio-system intrinsically random?
3.5 Free will problem
In principle, for human beings (and applications of QIB to cognition and
decision making), one can try to couple the intrinsic quantum(-like) random-
ness with free will. In the recent debates on non/deterministic nature of
quantum processes, the role of non/existence of free was actively discussed.
At the moment two opposite positions aggressively coexist. We remark that
the rejection of free will, the position of G. ‘t Hooft [53] known as super-
determinism, opens a possibility to treat QM as a deterministic theory, e.g.
[54], [55]. (We also remark that a part of quantum foundation community
thinks that the issue of non/existence of free will is irrelevant to the problem
of quantum (in)determinism.)
Exploring the free will assumption may be helpful to motivate the pres-
ence of intrinsic mental randomness and in this way to couple QIB even
closer to Zeilinger-Brukner interpretation. However, by proceeding in this
way one has to be ready to meet a new problem of the following type:
Have a cell, DNA or protein molecular a kind of free will?
We can formulate the problem even another way around:
Is human free will simply a special exhibition of intrinsic randomness
which is present at all scales nature?
We remark that in general the problem of interrelation of classical and
quantum probabilities and randomnesses is extremely complex. In some way
it is easier for probabilities, since here we have satisfactory mathematical
models, e.g., the Kolmogorov model [56] (1933) of classical probability. How-
ever, even in the classical case a commonly acceptable notion of randomness
has not yet been elaborated, in spite tremendous efforts of the during the
last one hundred years, see [57], [58] for details.
3.6 Bohmian mechanics on information spaces and men-
tal phenomena
In fact, this position in application to mental phenomena and their unifica-
tion with natural phenomena was expressed in a series of works, see, e.g.,
[66], of one of the coauthors of this paper (A. Khrennikov), where a version
of Bohmian mechanics on information spaces was in use. We remark that
some Bohmians, e.g., D. Bohm by himself and B. Hiley, interpreted the wave
function as a field of information. But this information field was still defined
on the physical space, because, for D. Bohm (as well as his predecessor L.
De Broglie), the physical space was undiscussable reality. In works of A.
Khrennikov mental information fields were defined on “information space”
reflecting hierarchic tree-like represenattion of information by cognitive sys-
tems (mathematically such mental trees can be represented with the aid of
so called p-adic numbers [69]). However, later A. Khrennikov became less
addicted to the idea of information reality.
The main problem of the information interpretation of QM is to assign
a proper meaning to the notion of information. It is very difficult to do
– especially by denying reality; one has to define information not about
some real objectively existing stuffs, but information as it is by itself. Of
course, one can simply keeps to Zeilinger’s position (private discussions):
information is a primary notion which cannot be expressed through other
“primitive notions”. However, not everybody would be satisfied by such a
solution of this interpretational problem.
3.7 Information interpretation as a biology friendly in-
terpretation of quantum state
In any event the information interpretation matches perfectly with our aims,
although its creators may be not support the attempts to apply it outside of
physics. (We remark that the position of A. Zeilinger was quite positive .)
There is a chance that physicists using this interpretation would welcome
the born of quantum cognition and more generally QIB. There was no any
chance to find understanding of physicists keeping to the orthodox Copen-
hageninterpretation – thewave functionasthemost complete representation
of the physical state of an individual quantum system such as an electron.
4 Nonclassical probability? Yes! But, why
quantum probability?
One may say: “Yes, I understood that the operational description of infor-
mation processing in complex bio-systems can be profitable (independently
from a possibility to construct a finer, so to say hidden variables, theory).
Yes, I understand that bio-randomness is nonclassical and it is not covered
by CP and hence classical information theory cannot serve as the base for
information biology. But, why do you sell one concrete nonclassical probabil-
ity theory, namely, QP and the corresponding information theory? May be
(as Zeilinger guessed) QP and quantum information serve well for a special
class of physical systems and their application to biology may meet hidden
pitfalls?” Yes, we agree that there is a logical gap: nonclassical does not
imply quantum. Negation of CP is not QP.
Nevertheless, why exploring QP and quantum information are so attrac-
tive? First of all, because these are the most elaborated nonclassical theories.
It is attractive to use their advanced methods. Then one may expect that
some basic nonclassicalities of random responses of bio-systems can be de-
scribed by the standard quantum formalism. This strategy can be fruitful,
especially at the initial stage of development, as it was done for quantum
cognition [14], [17], [29].
Now the crucial question arises:
Can the standard quantum formalism cover completely information pro-
cessing by bio-systems?
Here “standard” refers to Schro¨dinger’s equation for the state evolu-
tion, the representation of observables by Hermitian operators and the von
Neumann-Lu¨ders projection postulate for quantum measurement.
5In a series of private discussions with A. Khrennikov he expressed satisfaction that
by exploring ideas of QM for modeling of cognition one finally breaks up the realistic
attitude dominating in cognitive science. At the same time he did not find reasons to
use precisely the quantum formalism to model cognition: novel operational formalisms
representing information processing might be more appropriate, see also section 4.
Our answer is “no”. Already in quantum information one uses the open
system dynamics and generalized observables given by positive operator val-
ued measures (POVMs). It is natural to expect that they can also arise in
bio-modeling. Another argument to departure from the standard quantum
formalism is that in the constructive wave function approach, i.e., construc-
tion of complex probability amplitudes from data of any origin violating LTP
[14], in general observables are represented not by Hermitian operators, but
by POVMs and even by generalized POVMs which do not sum up to the
unit operator [14].
A strong argument against the use of solely Hermitian observables in cog-
nitive science was presented in [59]: it seems that the Hermitian description
of the order effect for a pair of observables A,B, i.e., disagreement between
A−B and B−A probabilities, is incompatible with A−B−A respectability:
first A-measurement, then B-measurement, then again A-measurement and
the first and the last values of A should coincide with probability 1. At the
same time the standard opinion polls demonstrating the order effect have the
property of A−B−A respectability. However, it seems that this problem is
even more complicated: even the use of POVMs cannot help so much [59]. It
seems thatwehavetogoreallybeyondthequantummeasurement formalism,
beyond theory of quantum instruments. One of such novel generalizations
was proposed by the authors [5], [10] - quantum adaptive dynamics.
5 Open quantum systems, adaptive dynam-
The dynamics of an isolated quantum system is described by the Schro¨dinger
equation. In the standard quantum framework measurements are mathemat-
ically represented by orthogonal projectors (Pi) onto eigen-subspaces corre-
sponding to the observed values (ai). A quantum observable can be formally
represented as a Hermitian operator A = P
aiPi. The probability to obtain
the fixed value ai as the result of measurement is given by Born’s rule. Let
a system have the physical state given by a normalized vector ψ of complex
Hilbert space H. Then
and the post-measurement state is given by
However, the situation that an isolated quantum system propagates in
space-timeandthensuddenlymeetsameasurement deviceistooideal. Inthe
real situation a quantum system interacts with other systems, the presence of
an environment cannot be ignored. In particular, measurement devices can
also be treated as special environments. The corresponding part of quantum
theory is known as theory of open quantum systems. Here dynamics of a
state is described by quantum master equation, its Markovian approxima-
tion is known as equation Gorini-Kossakowski-Sudarshan-Lindblad (GKSL)
equation [32]. This equation has numerous applications in quantum physics,
especiallyquantumoptics. Itwasappliedtomodeldecisionmaking(ingames
of the Prisoners’ Dilemma type) in a series of papers [1]–[4], see also [30] for
applications for decision making in political science. However, the GKSL-
equation is an approximation and its derivation is based on a number of
assumptions constraining essentially the domain of its applications. One of
the main assumptions is that a environment is huge comparing with a sys-
tem under study. We cannot apply the GKSL-equation to model the state
dynamics of an electron interacting with another electron or a few electrons
considered as an environment.
In decision making typically there are two brain’s functions, as, e.g., sen-
sation and perception, which interact and produce the output of one of them,
e.g., the output-perception. In such a situation the GKSL-equation is not
applicable. In our work [5] we developed general theory of quantum adap-
tive dynamics which, in particular, contains the standard theory of open
quantum systems as describing a special sort of adaptivity, to a bath, see
[10]. In our novel formalism the state dynamics is described by more general
class of state transformations than in the standard theory. In particular, in
theory of open quantum systems all state transformations arecompletely pos-
itive maps. An adaptive dynamical map need not be completely positive nor
even simply positive. The tricky point is that in quantum physics, for a given
state, one can in principle measure any observable. It seems that in problems
of decision making this assumption can be relaxed. We consider “general-
ized states” which permit measurements of only special (state-dependent)
classes of observables; often just two observables,e.g., sensation and percep-
tion. The class of adaptive dynamical maps is essentially larger than the
6We remark that quantum master equation (as well as the Schr¨odinger equation) is a
linearfirstorder(withrespecttotime)differentialequation. Linearityisoneofthefunda-
mental features of quantum theory. It is very attractive even from the purely operational
viewpoint, since it simplifies essentially calculations. In fact, mathematically we proceed
with matrix-calculus. The question whether QM can be treated as linearization of more
complex nonlinear theory was actively discussed in quantum foundations. For a moment,
it is commonly accepted that QM is fundamentally linear, although there were presented
strongreasonsinfavorofthelinearizationhypothesis. This problemisveryimportantfor
cognition as well. Opposite to physics, even preliminary analysis of this problem has not
yet been performed.
class of (completely) positive maps. This simplify essentially modeling of
concrete phenomena, for example, recognition of ambiguous figures [9].
Quantum nonlocality in physics and biology
Nonlocal interpretation of violation of Bell’s inequality led to revolutionary
rethinking of foundations of QM. The impossibility to create theories with
local hidden variables makes quantum randomness even more mystical than
it was seen by fathers of QM, for example, by von Neumann [52]. In biology
we have not yet seen violations of Bell’s inequality in so to say nonlocal
setting. Nevertheless, it may be useful to comment possible consequences
of such possible violations. Consider, for example, quantum modeling of
cognition and the issue of mental nonlocality. The quantum-mental analogy
has to be used with some reservations. The brain is a small physical system
(comparing with distances covered bypropagatinglight). Therefore “mental-
nonlocality” (restricted to information states produced by a single brain) is
not as mystical as physical nonlocality of QM. One may expect that in future
cognition can be “explained”, e.g., in terms of “nonlocal” hidden variables.
ThispositionwaspresentedbyJ.AcaciodeBarrosin[21]anditisreasonable.
“Quantum nonlocality” is still the subject of hot debates about inter-
pretational and experimental issues. From the interpretation side, the main
counter-argumentagainstthecommonnonlocalinterpretationisthat,infact,
the main issue is not nonlocality, but contextuality of Bell’s experiments [60]:
s tatistical data collected in a few (typically four) experimental contexts Ci
are embedded in one inequality. However, from the viewpoint of CP each
context Ci has to be represented by its own probability space. It is not
surprising or mystical that such contextual data can violate the inequality
which was derived for a single probability space [57], [14]. This viewpoint is
confirmed by experiments in neutron interferometry [61] showing a violation
of Bell’s inequality for a single neutron source, but in multi-context setting.
In cognitive psychology a similar experiment, on recognition of ambiguous
figures, was performed by Conte et al. [16], see [12] for the theoretical basis
of this experiment.
The experimental situation in quantum physics is not so simple as it is
presented by the majority of writers about violations of Bell’s inequality.
There are known various loopholes in Bell’s experimental setups. A loophole
appears in the process of physical realization of the ideal theoretically de-
scribed experimental setup. One suddenly finds that what is possible to do in
reality differs essentially from the textbook description. To close each loop-
hole needs tremendous efforts and it is costly. The main problem is to close
a few (in future all possible) loopholes in one experiment. Unfortunately,
this “big problem” of combination of loophole closing is practically ignored.
The quantum physical community is factually fine with the situation that
different loopholes are closed in different types of experiments. Of course, for
any logically thinking person this situation is totally unacceptable. The two
main loopholes which disturb the project of the experimental justification of
violation of Bell’s inequality are the detection efficiency loophole also known
as fair sampling loophole and the locality loophole.
Locality loophole: It is very difficult, if possible at all, to remove safely
two massive particles (i.e., by escaping decoherence of entanglement) to a
distance which is sufficiently large to exclude exchange by signals having the
velocity of light and modifying the initially prepared correlations. Therefore
the locality loophole was closed by Weihs et al. [62] for photons, massless
particles.
Detection efficiency/fair sampling loophole: Photo-detectors (op-
posite to detectors for massive particles) have low efficiency, an essential part
of the population produced by a source of entangled photons is undetected.
Thus a kind of post-selection is in charge. In terms of probability spaces, we
can say that each pair of detectors (by cutting a part of population) produces
random output described by its own probability space. Thus we again fall
to the multi-contextual situation. Physicists tried to “solve” this problem
by proceeding under the assumption of fair sampling, i.e., that the detection
selection does not modify the statistical features of the initial population.
Recently novel photo-detectors of high efficiency (around 98%) started to
be used in Bell’s tests. In 2013 two leading experimental groups closed the
detection loophole with the aid of such detectors, in Vienna [63] (Zeilinger’s
group) and in Urbana-Champaign [64] (Kwiat’s group).
Experiments in 2013 led to increase of expectations that finally both lo-
cality and detection loopholes would be soon closed in a single experiment.
However, it seems that the appearance of super-sensitive detectors did not
solve the problem completely. Photons disappear not only in the process of
detection; they disappear in other parts of the experimental scheme: larger
distance - more photons disappear. It seems that the real experimental situ-
ation matches with the prediction of A. Khrennikov and I. Volovich that the
7As was pointed in the first paragraph of this section, contextuality is present even in
the ideal formulation, i.e., for detectors having 100% efficiency. Thus the low efficiency of
detection just makes the contextual structure of Bell’s experiment more visible.
locality and detection loopholes would be never closed in a single experiment
[65] (where by detection efficiency we understand the efficiency of the com-
plete experimental setup): an analog of Heisenberg’s uncertainty relation for
these loopholes.
Another problem of the experimental verification of violation of Bell’s in-
equality is that experiments closing one of previously known loopholes often
suffer of new loopholes which were not present in “less advanced experi-
ments”.
In general one has not to overestimate the value of Bell’s test; other test
of nonclassicality, for example, violation of LTP, may be less controversial.
Finally, we make a philosophic remark: Bell’s story questions the validity
of Popper’s principle of falsification of scientific theories. It seems that it
is impossible to falsify the CP-model of statistical physics in any concrete
experiment. It seems that one has to accept that the QP-formalism is useful
not because it was proven that the CP-formalism is inapplicable, but because
the QP-formalism is operationally successful and simple in use. (We remark
that QP is based solely on linear algebra which much easier mathematically
than the measure theory serving as the basis of CP.)
“Exotic quantum-like models: possible usefulness for
biological information theory
Quantum adaptive dynamics, although essentially deviating from the stan-
dard quantum formalism, is still based on complex Hilbert space. Coming
back to the question posed in section 4 (“why the quantum formalism?”) we
remark that, in principle, there is no reason to expect that the biological
information theory should be based on the representation of probabilities by
complex amplitudes, normalized vectors of complex Hilbert space. Therefore
one may try to explore models which are quite exotic, even comparing with
quantum adaptive dynamics.
Some of these models are exotic only from the viewpoint of using of
rather special mathematical tools; otherwise they arise very naturally from
theprobabilisticviewpoint. Forexample, wepointtoanovel model, so-called
hyperbolic quantum mechanics, which was applied to a series of problems of
cognition and decision making [14]. Here, the probability amplitudes are
valued not in the field of the complex numbers, but in the algebra of the hy-
perbolicnumbers, numbersoftheformz = x+jy,wherex,y arerealnumbers
and j is the generator of the algebra satisfying the equation j = +1. Hyper-
bolic amplitudes describe interference which is stronger than one given by
the complex amplitudes used in QM: the interference term is given by the
hyperbolic cosine, opposite to the ordinary trigonometric cosine in QM. In
[14] there can be found the classification of various types of (probabilistic)
interference exhibited in the form of violation of LTP; here the interference
term is defined as the magnitude of deviation from LTP. It was found that
the mathematical classification leads to only two basic possibilities: either
the standard trigonometric interference or the hyperbolic one. Probabilis-
tic data exhibiting the trigonometric interference can be represented in the
complex Hilbert space and the data with the hyperbolic interference in the
hyperbolic Hilbert space. The third possibility is mixture of the two types
of interference terms. This leads to representation of probabilities in a kind
of Hilbert space over hyper-complex numbers. We remind that in quantum
foundations extended studies were performed to check usefulness of various
generalizations of the complex Hilbert space formalism; for example, quater-
nionic QM or non-Archimedean QM [67]. It seems that such models were
not so much useful in physics; in any event foundational studies did not lead
to concrete experimental results. However, one might expect that such mod-
els, e.g., quanternionic QM, can find applications in quantum-like biological
information. Possible usefulness of non-Archimedean, especially p-adic QM,
will be discussed later in relation with unconventional probability models.
One of the widely known unconventional probabilistic model is based
on relaxation of the assumption that a probability measure has to value in
the segment [0,1] of the real line. So-called “negative probabilities” appear
with strange ragularity in a variety of physical problems , see, e.g., [57], for
very detailed presentation (we can mention, for examples, the contributions
of such leading physicists as P. Dirac, R. Feynman, A. Aspect). Recently
negative probabilities started to be used in cognitive psychology and decision
making [68].
Negative probabilities appears naturally in p-adic quantum models as
limits of relative frequencies with respect to p-adic topology on the set of
rational numbers (frequencies are always rational). P-adic statistical stabi-
lization characterizes a new type of randomness which is different from both
classical and quantum randomness. P-adic probabilities were used in some
biological applications [69]: cognition, population dynamics, genetics.