Rank diversity of languages: Generic behavior in computational
linguistics
Germinal Cocho1,2, Jorge Flores1, Carlos Gershenson3,2,∗, Carlos Pineda1, Sergio Sa´nchez4
1 Instituto de F´isica, Universidad Nacional Auto´noma de M´exico
2 Centro de Ciencias de la Complejidad, Universidad Nacional Auto´noma de M´exico
3 Instituto de Investigaciones en Matem´aticas Aplicadas y en Sistemas, Universidad
Nacional Auto´noma de M´exico
4 Facultad de Ciencias, Universidad Nacional Auto´noma de M´exico
E-mail: cgg@unam.mx
Statistical studies of languages have focused on the rank-frequency distribution of words. Instead, we
introduce here a measure of how word ranks change in time and call this distribution rank diversity.
We calculate this diversity for books published in six European languages since 1800, and find that it
follows a universal lognormal distribution. Based on the mean and standard deviation associated with the
lognormaldistribution, wedefinethreedifferentwordregimesoflanguages: “heads” consistofwordswhich
almost do not change their rank in time, “bodies” are words of general use, while “tails” are comprised
by context-specific words and vary their rank considerably in time. The heads and bodies reflect the
size of language cores identified by linguists for basic communication. We propose a Gaussian random
walk model which reproduces the rank variation of words in time and thus the diversity. Rank diversity
of words can be understood as the result of random variations in rank, where the size of the variation
depends on the rank itself. We find that the core size is similar for all languages studied.
Introduction
Statistical studies of languages have become popular since the work of George Zipf [1] and have been
refined with the availability of large data sets and the introduction of novel analytical models [2–7]. Zipf
found that when words of large corpora are ranked according to their frequency, there seems to be a
universaltendencyacrosstextsandlanguages. Heproposedthatrankedwordsfollowapowerlawf 1/k,
where k is the rank of the word—the higher ranks corresponding to the least frequent words—and f is
the relative frequency of each word [8,9]. This regularity of languages and other social and physical
phenomena had been noticed beforehand, at least by Jean-Baptiste Estoup [10] and Felix Auerbach [11],
but it is now known as Zipf’s law.
Zipf’slawisaroughapproximationoftheprecisestatisticsofrank-frequencydistributionsoflanguages.
As a consequence, several variations have been proposed [12–15]. We compared Zipf’s law with four other
models, all of them behaving as 1/ka for a small k, with a 1, as detailed in the SI. We found that all
models have systematic errors so it was difficult to choose one over the other.
Studies based on rank-frequency distributions of languages have proposed two word regimes [15,16]: a
“core” where the most common words occur, which behaves as 1/ka for small k, and another region for
large k, which is identified by a change of exponent a in the distribution fit. Unfortunately, the point
where exponent a changes varies widely across texts and languages, from 5000 [16] to 62,000 [15]. A recent
study[17]measuresthenumberofmostfrequentwordswhichaccountfor75%oftheGooglebookscorpus.
Differences of an order of magnitude across languages were obtained, from 2365 to 21077 words (including
inflections of the same stems). This illustrates the variability of rank-frequency distributions. The core of
human languages can be considered to be between 1500 and 3000 words (not counting different inflections
of the same stems), based on basic vocabularies for foreigners [18], creole [19], and pidgin languages [20].
For example, Voice of America’s Special English [21] and Wikipedia in Simple English use about 1500 and
1v38730.5051:viXra
2000 words, respectively (not counting inflections). The Oxford Advanced Learner’s Dictionary lists 3000
priority lexical entries [22]. This suggests that the change of exponent a or another arbitrary cutoff in
rank-frequency distributions does not reflect the size of the core of languages.
Inviewoftheseproblemswithrank-frequencydistributions,weproposeanovelmeasuretocharacterize
statistical properties of languages. We have called this measure rank diversity and it tells us how words
change their rank in time. With rank diversity, three regimes of words are identified: “heads”, “bodies”
and “tails”. This measure of rank diversity follows the same simple functional law with similar parameters
for all data analyzed. In particular, this is so for the six European languages studied here using a large
data set of more than 6.4 1011 words from Google Books [23], which contains about 4% of all books
written until 2008. It should be noted that this data set includes all different inflected forms (such as
plural, different tense/aspect forms, etc.) found in the book corpus. Data sets such as this have allowed
the study of “culturomics”: how cultural traits such as language have changed in time [24–30].
The rank diversity follows a scale-invariant behavior regarding its fluctuations, which inspires a model
basedonrandomwalks,withscale-invariantrandomsteps. Thismodelreproducesthebehaviorofdiversity
and thus captures the essence of the evolution of word rank across different languages.
Rank diversity of words
In what follows we shall consider six European languages from the Indo-European family. They are
English and German; Spanish, French and Italian; and Russian. They belong to different linguistic
branches: Germanic, Romance, and Slavic, respectively. The native speakers of these languages account
for approximately 17% of the world population.
We shall start by taking into account the 20, say, most used words in the six languages, that is, the
lowest-ranked words. Using, for the sake of uniformity, the first sense or first meaning given by Google
Translate,oncethesewordsaretranslatedintoEnglish,thecoincidencesinallsixlanguagesareremarkable
(see Table S1 in File S1). This could have been foreseen, since mostof the lowest-ranked words are articles,
prepositions or conjunctions, i.e. what is called function words. A different matter, as we shall see, would
result if we had considered only nouns, verbs, adverbs or adjectives, known as content words.
In order to quantify this fact, we present in Fig. 1 the time evolution of the overlap of the first 20
lowest-ranked words in the five languages with respect to the corresponding list of English. From the
upper part of this figure we can see that along two centuries this overlap fluctuates around 0.9, a rather
large number, except for Russian, since this language does not have articles. These data reveal that these
Indo-European languages have shared structural properties, notwithstanding that they belong to distinct
linguistic branches.
1800 1850 1900 1950 2000
Figure 1. Overlap of the 20 most frequent words (continuous lines), and of the 20 most
frequent content words (dashed lines) across languages, with respect to English, as a function of
time. When words have more than one meaning, the first sense, according to Google Translate, was used.
The color code for languages is as follows: light blue for French, green for German, yellow for Italian, dark
blue for Spanish, and dark orange for Russian. Additionally, light orange will be used for English when
required (see also Fig. 2). The same color coding for languages will be used throughout the rest of the
article.
The lowest-ranked words used to construct the upper part of Fig. 1 are essentially the same along
centuries (See Figs S3-S8 in SI). But this is not the case for content words, as can be seen in Table S2 in
File S1. First, and as also shown by the dashed curves in Fig. 1, the overlap of these words with respect to
English for the other five languages (including Russian) is of the order of 0.5. These values are much lower
than the overlap of function words. Second, the most common nouns vary considerably with time. On the
onehand, nounsliketime, man, life andtheirtranslationtotheotherlanguagesarepresentindependently
of the century. On the other hand, words like god and king have a low rank in the eighteenth century but
have a larger rank in the last century. The rank change in time of these nouns reflect cultural facts.
What is discussed in the previous paragraph is an example of what could be called rank diversity d(k).
This is, in the present study, the number of different words occurring at a specific rank k over a given
period of time ∆t. We found that the resulting rank diversity curves for the six languages studied between
1800 and 2008 are similar to each other, as shown in Figs. 2 and 6. Low ranks have a very low diversity,
as few words appear in the same ranks for the years we have studied.
English German Russian
σ=0.55 σ=0.53 σ=0.57
e=0.018 e=0.021 e=0.018
Italian French Spanish
μ=2.28 μ=2.37 μ=2.21
σ=0.56 σ=0.52 σ=0.58
e=0.013 e=0.020 e=0.017
1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3
0 1 2 3 1 2 3 1 2 3 0
Figure 2. Rank diversity. Diversity d as a function of the rank k for different languages from 1800 to
2008, where d(k) measures how many different words appear for a given rank k during the time
considered (∆t=208). For example, for English, d(1)=1/208, as the word ‘the’ appears in the first rank
for all years considered. Although we have analyzed up to k 106, rank diversity for k >104 is not
shown as d(k) 1, i.e., a different word appears in each rank every year. Data are windowed over time,
with a slot of size δlog k =0.1, for the sake of clearness. Additionally, the sigmoid defined in equation 1
is shown as a black dashed curve, with the best fit parameters, also reported in each subfigure. The mean
square error e between the data and the fit, is also given. The shaded region corresponds to the average
“body” of all languages.
As shown by the continuous lines in Fig. 2, the sigmoid curve fits very well d(k) for all languages
considered, except for low k where the statistical fluctuations are larger due to the small sample size.
The sigmoid is the cumulative of a Gaussian distribution, i.e.
(cid:90) log 10 k e−(y
and is given as a function of logk. The values of µ and σ reported in Fig. 2 were obtained adjusting
equation 1 to the rank diversity calculated for each individual language. The mean value µ identifies the
point where d(k) 0.5, while the width σ gives the scale in which d(k) gets close to its extremal values.
When logk is much larger than µ+σ, Φ (logk) gets exponentially close to one, whereas when logk is
much smaller than µ σ it gets exponentially close to zero. It is customary in statistics to define a bulk
of the Gaussian between µ 2σ, where 95% of the population lies. Along the same lines, we define three
regions, marked by
First, we find what we shall call the head of the language, distributed with ranks between 1 and k ; a
second region, identified as the body of the language, lies between k and k ; and finally the tail, beyond
k . From the values reported in Fig. 2, we see that 9<k <22, while k lies between 1832 and 3099.
As shown in Fig. 3, these regions are robust to changes in the historical period considered and to the data
set size (larger for recent years).
1850 1900 1950 2000
Figure 3. Evolution in time of the center of the sigmoid (middle panel), and the borders
of the head and body (bottom panel) and body and tail (top panel) for the different
languages along time for intervals of fifty years, i.e. ∆t=50. Head words have k k , body
words have k <k k , and tail words have k <k. See Fig. 2 for color coding.
The bodies of languages consist of words that have limited change in time. Based on the size of basic
vocabularies, it can be argued that the “core” of English is between 1500 and 3000 words, as mentioned in
the introduction, which is consistent with our results. If we agree that the rank diversity identifies the
core (head and body) of English, then it can be argued that the size of the core of the other five languages
studied is similar [31], which is also supported by the high similarity across languages in Fig 2.
The tails of languages are formed by words which vary their rank considerably in time. This implies
that they are more dependent on the text and its domain than words from the core. It can be assumed
that words belonging to the head and body of languages have a high probability of being used in any text,
while words from the tail would appear only in specific texts and domains.
Note that we obtain language cores slightly larger than those proposed by linguists. This is to be
expected, as the Google Books data set treats words forms inflected for different persons, tenses, genders,
numbers, cases, and so forth, as distinct items, while dictionaries count only stems (presented as citation
forms,i.e. thebasicformthatusersaremostlikelytolookup). Forexample,thecoreforEnglishobtained
using rank diversity consists of 2448 words, but within these there are only 1760 different stems in the
year 2008. Moreover, the studied data set contains several proper names which are not included in basic
vocabulary lists. For English, 55 out of 2448 are proper names in 2008.
The rank evolution of particular words in time, belonging to the head, body, and tail of English is
shown in Fig. 4a. This ratifies the results shown in Fig. 2, where low-ranked words exhibit little variation
in time and this variation increases with the rank. More trajectories are presented in the SI. As mentioned
above, words from the head vary little over time. However, the way in which words from the body or tail
vary their rank in time appears to be similar, although at a different scale. This similarity leads us to
propose a model of rank diversity where the amount of rank variation depends only on the rank.
1800 1850 1900 1950 2000
[a] (cid:4)crossed 6000
(cid:4)dream
(cid:4)net
(cid:4)length
(cid:4)members 800
(cid:4)seem
(cid:4)that
(cid:4)was 16
(cid:4)of 12
1800 1850 1900 1950 2000
Figure 4. Rank evolution. [a]: Evolution of the rank for several particular, but random words in
different regimes in the English language. From bottom to top we show words with initial ranks of order 1
(head), 100 (body) and 1000 (tail). [b]: Evolution of the rank for several particular, but random words in
different regimes, for our scale-free Gaussian walker, i.e. the simulated language we have generated.
A random walk model for rank diversity
We consider the relative size of frequency changes, or flights as they are sometimes called in statistical
physics, defined as (k k )/k where k is the rank at discrete time t of a given element. We present
in Fig. 5 the distribution of these frequency changes for English, our largest data set, and in Fig. 17 in
File S1 for all languages. Notice that, on average, the relative jumps seem to be largely independent of
the value of the rank. We propose, based on this fact, a simple model to understand the evolution of rank
diversity of words.
-0.3 -0.2 -0.1 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3
[k − k ]/k
Figure 5. Distribution of relative size of frequency changes [k k ]/k in the case of English
for words in the head (cid:4) (that start with rank between 1 and 10), the body (cid:4)− (rank between 200 and 210),
and the tail (cid:4) (rank between 5000 and 5010). Notice that for words in the head, the granularity of the
model (equation 3) shows up as large deviations from the Gaussian. For the body and tail, the relative
jumps are similar independently of the initial rank of the word. We also show, as a thick green curve, the
Lorentzian distribution which best fits the average of the curves for the body and tail. A Gaussian, with
zero mean and the most common standard deviation σˆ =0.0575, is also shown in red for comparison (see
text for details). The corresponding plot for other languages is shown in the supplementary information.
Weshallcallthismodelascale-invariantrandomGaussianwalk,sinceawordwithrankk ,isconverted
to rank k according to the following procedure: One defines an auxiliary variable s at time t+1 by
the relation
where G(0,σ˜) is a Gaussian random number generator of width σ˜ and mean 0. This means that the
random variable s has a width distribution proportional to k . Words with very low ranks will change
very slowly or not at all, while those with higher k have a larger rank variation in time, as reflected by
d(k). Once the values of s for all words are obtained, they are ordered according to their magnitude.
This new order gives new rankings, i.e. the k values at time t+1. There is a small correlation of the
jumps between different times in this model. This is consistent with the observed behavior of the six
languages dealt with here, as can be seen in Fig. 18 in File S1. The only parameter in the model is the
width σˆ, which is the most common standard deviation of the relative frequency changes of each data set.
A word of caution must be said. In Fig. 5, two curves are plotted. In green, a Lorentzian distribution,
and in red a Gaussian distribution, both centered at zero, and with a width obtained by best fit to the
data presented here. Although the Lorentzian fits these data somewhat better than the Gaussian, we
use the latter in our model, since the long tails of the Lorentzian would yield long flights in words (not
observed in the historical data) and a very different function d(k). One should recall that the Lorentzian
does not have a finite second moment, so this might be the reason for this distribution to be inadequate.
It is probable that a truncated Lorentzian could be a better choice, but we leave this detail open as a
possible refinement to our model.
With this model we have produced the evolution of a random simulated language; see [32] for other
approaches. Fig. 4b shows examples of rank trajectories at different scales, exhibiting similarities with
thoseofactualwordsshowninFig.4a. Moreover,ifitsdiversityd(k)iscalculatedwiththeσˆ corresponding
tothemostpopularwidthofthedistributionofrelativesizeofflightsforallwordsintheEnglishlanguage
from 1800 to 2008, the results coincide with the sigmoid obtained for all six languages analyzed, as shown
in Fig. 6.
Figure 6. Rank diversity for the simulated language. The green curve represents the diversity
corresponding to the language dynamics of a single realization of the Gaussian random walk model. We
also include data for all languages studied, but normalized so that k coincide. The ansatz for the rank
diversity is plotted as a parameter-free cumulative of a Gaussian with zero mean and unit variance as a
dashed black curve.
Discussion
Withinstatisticallinguistics, the frequency-rankdistributionsofseverallanguagesofEuropean originhave
been analyzed for many years now. However, no simple model can reproduce the detailed properties of
this distribution (see SI). In particular, there has been the proposal that there exist two different regimes
for ranks, but these regimes have not been satisfactorily validated in the empirical data. Due to these
difficulties we have been led to introduce a statistical measure, which we have called rank diversity, to
describe the statistical properties of natural languages. A simulated random language was generated
which reproduces the observed features quite well.
Our random walk model mimics the evolution of languages to produce a simulated rank diversity
which closely matches that of historical data. We consider that statistical similarities across languages and
the simplicity of the model to reproduce them sufficient evidence to claim that rank diversity of words is
universal. This does not imply that all languages have the same rank diversity curves, but that the rank
diversity distribution of all the languages studied here can be fitted properly with equation 1. Certainly,
different languages have different curves that fit them better, just as different exponents fit better a Zipf
distribution of different languages. For the languages studied, 1.6 µ 2.1 and 0.4 σ 0.6.
This universality could be used to favor nativist explanations of human language [33,34], where
language is claimed to be determined by innate constraints. However, the high-ranked diversity of
language tails could be used in favor of adaptationist explanations as well [35], as the precise rank of tail
words is highly contingent. In recent years, explanations of human language relating biological evolution
(genetically encoded innate properties) and learning (epigenetical adaptation) with culture have gained
strength [36–38]. Even so, few assumptions are necessary to explain some general aspects of the evolution
of human languages [39]. The present work shows that the evolution of word frequency can be explained
with Gaussian random walks, where the size of the change in word frequency is proportional to its rank,
i.e. frequent words change less than infrequent words. This explanation does not require innate properties,
adaptive advantages, nor culture. This does not imply that the latter are irrelevant for other aspects of
language evolution. Note that our study is carried out at a statistical level. We do not address syntactic,
semantic, and grammatical aspects of human language [40–43], which are certainly important.
Why does the rank diversity approach a lognormal distribution? Which processes and mechanisms are
required for this? There is one condition for a variable to have a lognormal distribution. This condition is
that the variable should be the result of a high number of different and independent causes which produce
positive effects composed multiplicatively. Thus, each cause has a negligible effect on the global result [44].
Our Gaussian random walk model supports this as a suitable explanation: the statistical distribution of
d is always lognormal, there is a high number of components (words), each word has a negligible effect
compared to the language properties, i.e. large changes in word frequency (ranking) do not cause large
changes in the statistical properties of each language, and the rank of each word is partially a cumulative
product of its rank in previous times, as expressed in equation 3. Languages statistically comply with
these dynamics, and that serves as an explanation for their evolution and structure.
In future work, it will be relevant to study the rank diversity of n-grams with n > 1 [45], other
linguistic corpora and phenomena with dynamic rank distributions [27,46–48] and more generally with
temporal networks [49–52]. A specific example would be the ranking of chess players, given by the World
Chess Federation (F´ed´eration Internationale des E´checs). The rank diversity in this case is provided in
figure 7, which shows that the sigmoid is appropriate also for this case.
Figure 7. Rank diversity of male chess players obtained from the trimestral FIDE rankings from
April, 2001 to May, 2012 (∆t=50), considering the first 10,000 ranks. Blue dots show rank diversity,
windowed in the red line. The black line shows the sigmoid fit with µ=1.24 and σ =0.76. The green line
shows a simulation with σˆ =0.18. Notice that there is no head as µ 2σ <0. This is to be expected, as
many players enter and leave the ranking during the years considered.