]hp-tsih.scisyhp[
3v1306.9031:viXra
Reconsidering Written Language
GOPAL SARMA
gopalsarma@outlook.com
AnumberofelitethinkersinEuropeduringthe16thand17thcen-
turiespursuedanagendawhichhistorianPaoloRossicallsthe“quest
forauniversallanguage,”aquestwhichwasdeeplyinterwovenwith
the emergenceof the scientific method. Fromamodern perspective,
one ofthemanysurprisingaspectsoftheseeffortsisthattheyrelied
on a diverse array of memorization techniques as foundational ele-
ments. In the case of Leibniz’s universal calculus, the ultimate vision
was to create a pictorial language that could be learned by anyone
in a matter of weeks and which would contain within it a symbolic
representationofalldomainsofcontemporarythought,rangingfrom
thenaturalsciences,totheology,tolaw. Inthisbriefarticle,Iexplore
whythisagendamighthavebeenappealingtothinkersofthiseraby
examining ancient and modern memory feats. As a thought experi-
ment,Isuggestthatasocietybuiltentirelyuponmemorizationmight
be less limited than we might otherwise imagine, and furthermore,
that cultural norms discouraging the use of written language might
havehadimplicationsforthedevelopmentofscientificmethodology.
Viewed in this light, the efforts of Leibniz and others seem signifi-
cantly less surprising. I close with some general observations about
cross-culturaloriginsofscientificthought.
Introduction
The growth of the scientific methodin 16th and 17th century Europetook
place amidst an unusual cultural milieu in which schools of thought on
memory and memorization were at the forefront of intellectual develop-
ments. During this time period, memory was viewed not only as a set
of practices for remembering, but also as a foundational methodology for
structuringknowledge[1–3].
Whereasinmoderntimesmemorizationisoftenthoughtofasbeingan-
titheticalto conceptualthinking, Renaissance andEnglightenmenteraEu-
ropeanculturegaverisetosignificantinnovationinthetechniquesandap-
plicationsofmemorization. BuildingonideasoriginatinginancientGreece
and Rome, European intellectuals from several centuries ago developed
highly sophisticated visualization techniques that allowed them to recall
massive amounts of information with astonishing accuracy. And in the
mindsofsomeofthegreatestscientificandphilosophicalinnovatorsofthe
time period,notably Francis Bacon, RenesDescartes, and GottfriendLeib-
niz,aswellasotherlesserknownthinkers,thesememorizationtechniques
formedthebasicsetofconceptsaroundwhichmanythoughtsaboutscien-
tificmethodologywereformed.
The core premise of this argument- that memory and memorization
played a critical role in the emergence of scientific culture- is that the de-
velopment of the scientific method was not a discrete event. Principled
reasoning and systematic investigation have always been part of human
society, but during this time period, they became distilled and adopted at
aninstitutionallevel. Howdidthistransformationtakeplaceandwhyhad
itnotbefore? Inasense,whatformsscientificreasoningconsistsofacom-
plexandrichsetofculturalnorms,butwhichatitscore,israthermundane.
Bynature,peopleprocrastinate,cutcorners,andarenotsystematicintheir
efforts. Scientificreasoningmightbedescribedasacollectionofsystematic
effortsconductedinacontextthatprioritizesanattempttouncovertheba-
sic principles governing the behavior of the natural world. How then did
theadoptionofa systematicapproach toknowledgeaccelerate duringthe
timeperiodtraditionallyassociatedwiththescientificrevolution?
In a previous article, I argued that the art of memory provided an in-
spiring vision of what could be accomplished with a systematic approach
toknowledge[3]. Whilethebasicnotionsofscientificreasoningmaynotbe
abstract,theyarenotnecessarilyeasytoputintopractice,andfurthermore,
it is not always clear what precise stepswould even constitute reasonable
nextactionsforaninstitutionattemptingtotransformitselfintoamorerig-
orous,long-termresearchestablishment. Intheabsenceofacriticalmassof
scientific accomplishments, major intellectual shifts would have also been
difficult to justify. The notion of a journal system and peer review seem
elementary to us, but these ideas are far from obvious and required real
momentumtobecomepartofthebedrockofinstitutionalpractice. Atthis
critical junctureinhumanhistory,theartofmemoryprovidedaclear,tan-
gible vision and concrete motivation for widespread adoption of a more
systematic approach to knowledge. On the relationship of Francis Bacon
and Renes Descartes’ thinking to the art of memory, for instance, Paolo
Rossiwrites:
In the works of Descartes and Bacon there is evidence of a direct
knowledge of sixteenth-century works on mnemonics. Bacon often
mentions ’collection of loci’, ’syntaxes’ and ’artificial memory’, and
makes explicit references to the ’doctrine of loci’, the ’collocation of
images’andtheLullian’typocosmia’. Descartes,whomakesfarfewer
explicitreferencesandgenerallyrefrainsfromquotation,nonetheless
mentions having read Schenkel’s Ars memorativa, and often refers
to the ars memoriae and the role played by ’sensible images’ in the
representation of intellectual concepts. He also refers to the Lullian
idea of the ’chain of the sciences’ (catena scientiarum), mentions his
particular interest in one of Lull’s anonymous followers, and asked
hisfriendIsaacBeeckmannaboutthepublicationofAgrippa’sLullist
works, and discussed with him the significance and potential of the
Lullian art. The themes of the ars memorativa and ars combinato-
ria seem to have exercised a significant influence on the thought of
BaconandtheyoungDescartes,andsomeofthesethemescanbere-
lated directly to Bacon’s conception of a ’new logic’ and Descartes’s
’newmethod’ofphilosophizing[2,p.103].
And yet, despite the intense interest of these visionary thinkers, the
most ambitious paradigms of this time period did not materialize. It is
difficult to imagine that Camillo’s memory theater-an effort to create sys-
tematized, physical figurines representing a taxonomy of all knowledge-
Bruno’scombinatorywheels,orLeibniz’universalcalculuswouldhavede-
liveredontheirpromises. Butinspiteoftheirfailures,theseeffortsshared
the common feature of representing a systematic approach to knowledge.
Theartofmemoryandeffortstodevelopauniversallanguageprovideda
vision thathelpedleading intellectuals to clarify and frame their thoughts
and tocatalyze the adoptionofscientificreasoning ona large scale. Itcre-
atedaphilosophicalcontextwhichallowedthemorestandardandwidely
discussed factors- patronage, the rise of a journal system, an explicitly ar-
ticulated notion of hypothesis-driveninvestigation, etc.- to take root at an
institutionallevel.
Memorization and Written Language
Inmoderntimes,thereisa standardrefrain about theroleofmemoryand
memorization in previous eras, namely that in the absence of convenient
methods for writing, a trained memory would have been practically sig-
nificant in ways that it is not today. But something noteworthy about the
European schools of thought on memory is that they continued to exist
several centuries after the development of the printing press. In exam-
ining the culture of this time period, it is clear that memory was viewed
in a very different light than by thinkers of our own era. Most broadly,
memory was thought of by many 16th and 17th century intellectuals as
being a foundational methodology for structuring knowledge. Further-
more, a few key individuals, notably Gottfried Leibniz, Giordano Bruno,
and Renes Descates, conceived of memory as being intimately related to
developing symbolic means for representingscientific concepts. For Leib-
niz,themnemonicmethodwasacriticalelementofhisvisiontodevelopa
universal calculus, a symbolic language to representand eliminate logical
contradictionsfromtheentiretyofhumanknowledge.
Whiletheambitionsofcreatingasymbolicrepresentationofknowledge
isunderstandablefromamodernperspective-certainly,mathematicsitself
is a symbolic language and has proven itself to be valuable in a wide va-
riety of subjects- what is perplexing about this agenda is the emphasis on
memorization. Whywasthisperspectiveparticularlyappealingtothinkers
ofthis time period, when in contemporarysociety, many practical techno-
logicaltools-fromaddressbooks,toelectroniccalendars,tosmartphones-
are specifically aimed atrelieving ourmindsfromtheburdenofmemory?
With the aim of elucidating the mindset of the time-period, I will suggest
the following counterfactual thought experiment. What would a world
look like in which efforts analogous to those of Leibniz and his contem-
poraries thoroughly penetrated all sectors of society? What would be the
consequencesfor a society that relied on memorization for both daily and
intellectualtasks,ratherthanwrittenlanguage?
Toimaginethispossibility,wecansimplyreturnbackintimetoseveral
thousandyearsagobeforewritingsystemswerewidelyadopted. Inpartic-
ular,itseemsasthough,aroundthetimewhenwrittenlanguagecameinto
usage, strong cultural norms discouraging its use might have precipitated
analogous developmentsto thosethat tookplace in 16th and 17th century
Europe. Whereasseveralmillennia had passedbetweentheearliestuseof
mnemonictechniquesinancientGreeceandtheirfloweringinRenaissance
andpost-RenaissanceEurope,asocietywhichresistedtheadoptionofwrit-
tenlanguagemighthaveseenacomparable developmentaltrajectory-out
ofnecessity-compressedintoamuchshortertimeperiod. Theresultmight
have been an intellectual explosion, a scientific revolution that is, but of a
very different kind than what ultimately came to pass in Europe several
millennialater.
Rather than being merely a counter-factual historical curiosity, there
is reason to believe that such a set of cultural norms might have actually
emerged. The critical observation is that written language- unlike its spo-
ken counterpart- was an invention, and like with all inventions, would
have been met with some amount of resistance. Some of the animosity
towardsthewrittenwordcamefromhighlyinformed,intellectual,andin-
fluential leaders,and werethis resistanceto have achieved a critical mass,
theadoptionofwrittenlanguagemighthaveslowedconsiderably. Thefol-
lowingbeautifulpassage,fromSocrates’Phaedrus,illustratesthispoint:
Iheard,then,thatatNaucratis,inEgypt,wasoneoftheancientgods
of that country, the one whose sacred bird is called the ibis, and the
nameof thegod himself wasTheuth. Heitwaswhoinventednum-
bersandarithmeticandgeometryandastronomy,alsodraughtsand
dice,and,mostimportantofall,letters. NowthekingofallEgyptat
thattimewasthegodThamus,wholivedinagreatcityoftheupper
region, which the Greekscallthe Egyptian Thebes, and theycallthe
god himself Ammon. To him came Theuth to show his inventions,
saying that they ought to be imparted to the other Egyptians. But
Thamus asked what use there was in each, and as Theuth enumer-
ated their uses, expressed praise or blame of the various arts which
itwouldtaketoolongtorepeat;butwhentheycametoletters,’This
invention, O king,’ said Theuth, ’will make the Egyptians wiser and
willimprovetheirmemories;foritisanelixirofmemoryandwisdom
thatIhavediscovered.’ButThamusreplied,’MostingeniousTheuth,
one manhastheabilitytobegetarts, buttheabilitytojudgeoftheir
usefulnessorharmfulnesstotheirusersbelongstoanother;andnow
you, who arethe fatherof letters, havebeenledbyyour affectionto
ascribe to them a power the opposite of that which they really pos-
sess. For this invention will produce forgetfulness in the minds of
those who learn to use it, because they will not practise their mem-
ory. Theirtrustinwriting,producedbyexternalcharacterswhichare
not partof themselveswill discourage the use of their own memory
within them. You have invented an elixir not of memory but of re-
minding; and you offer your pupils the appearance of wisdom, not
truewisdom,fortheywillreadmanythingswithoutinstructionand
willthereforeseemtoknowmanythings,whentheyareforthemost
partignorantandhardtogetalongwith,sincetheyarenotwise,but
onlyappearwise[4].
If skepticism of influential leaders such as King Thamus were more
widespread and if opposition to written language had reached a critical
mass, what might the resulting society have looked like? We would have
to imagine that there would be a division of labor entirely devoted to the
maintenance of different typesof knowledge. Differences in memory that
might appear to be extremely subtle to us would be brought to the fore-
front. There might be groups of people responsible for maintaining long-
termknowledge-say,relatedtoagricultureandmedicine,orliteratureeven-
and othersresponsibleforknowledgethatis overturnedmore quickly, for
example,theinventoryofvendorsinamarketplace. Furthermore,itseems
quite likely that the need to maintain all knowledge in memory would
have created a natural and organic selective pressure towards infrastruc-
tural simplicity, particularly in the construction of legal and political sys-
tems.
To further lend evidence for the plausibility of such a society, I have
listedinTable1variousmemoryfeatsthathavebeenperformedinancient
andinmoderntimes. ThegreatepicsfromGreeceandIndia,theIliadand
theMahabharata, werelargely carried downin an oraltradition and were
unlikelytohavebeenwrittendownforalongperiodaftertheywerecom-
posed. These were almost certainly memorized using the standard tech-
niquesofrepetition,althoughitisworthmentioningthatthemeterandpo-
eticstructureoftheseepicsweresignificantaidstothememoryaswell. In
ourownera,theartofmemoryhaslargelybeenconfinedtothedomainof
a rather peculiar set of “memory competitions”1 in which participants are
challengedwithabroadarray ofmemorization tasksthatseemalmostsu-
perhumantothoseunfamiliarwithmnemonictechniques. Inthecontextof
thepresentarticle, I mentionthesecompetitionsto give an example ofthe
highlydiversekindsofinformationthatpractitionershavedevelopedspe-
cialized techniques to remember. For a society built upon memorization,
techniquessuchasthesewouldhavenodoubtbeencommonplace-asthey
were during the Middle Ages, the Renaissance, and the Enlightenment-
and one might imagine that for the sake of redundancy and error correc-
1JoshuaFoer’smemoirMoonwalkingwithEinsteinisabeautifulfirstpersonaccountof
thehistory,techniques,andpersonalitiesofthe“competitivememorycircuit”[8]. Perhaps
oneoftheprimarylessonsofFoer’sbookrelevanttothisarticleisthatmostofthepartici-
pantsinthevariousinternationalmemorycompetitionsdonotclaimtohavestrongnatural
memories. Rather, theirmemorieswerehighlytrainedinthespecificcontextoftasksrel-
evant to competitive memory, for example, memorizing a long listof historical dates, or
memorizingtheorderofadeckofcards. Thisobservationlendsfurtherplausibilitytothe
ideaofanentiresocietyinwhichsuchtechniqueswerecommonplaceandinwhichwritten
languagewasdiscouraged-thesetechniqueswouldeasilyhavebeenlearnedbymany,and
neednothavebeenrestrictedtoahandfulofelites.
tion, there would have been social norms encouraging different groupsto
use different techniques to maintain a given body ofinformation. The an-
cientartofmemoryanditsrecentreincarnationintheformofthecompet-
itive memory circuit suggest that both long-term, slowly evolving knowl-
edge, as well as information that is rapidly overturned might have been
recorded, processed, re-evaluated, and disseminated without the use of
writtenlanguage.
Table1: Ancientandmodernmemoryfeats[5–8]
Task Sizeoftext/time Techniquesutilized
Iliad 15,000lines Repetition/poeticstructure
Mahabharata 200,000lines Repetition/poeticstructure
SpeechesofCicero2 Varied Mnemonicmethod/repetition
Onehourcards3 1456(28decks) Mnemonicmethod
Onehournumbers4 2660digits Mnemonicmethod
Speedcards(1deck)5 21.19seconds Mnemonicmethod
Historicdates(5min.)6 120 Mnemonicmethod
It is also worth noting that the consistent usage of mnemonic techniques
wouldhave had a measurable impact on brain function and neuraldevel-
opment as well. It has been demonstrated, for example, that in contrast
to memorization by ordinary repetition, use of the mnemonic method ac-
tivates thoseregions of thebrain otherwiseresponsiblefor spatial naviga-
tion [9]. Unsurprisingly, this is due to the fact that the mnemonic method
relies explicitly on the use of spatially located images to form memories.
Indeed, it is interesting to note that during the Enlightenment, one would
have been able to distinguish between disciples of the different schools
of thought on memory simply via an fMRI! That is, whereas the dialec-
tic method of Petrus Ramus and his followers would not have given rise
2Forhistoricalreasons,Cicero’sspeecheshavethedistinctionofhavingbeenmemorized
throughavarietyofdifferenttechniques[1–3].
3Inonehourcards,participantsmemorizetheorderofasmanydecksofcardsaspossi-
bleinonehour.
4Inonehournumbers,participantsmemorizeasmanydecimaldigitsaspossibleinone
hour.
5Inspeedcards,participantsaregivenasingleshuffleddeckofcards(whichhasbeen
duplicatedinanotherdeck)andthetaskistomemorizetheorderofall52cardsinunder5
minutes.
6Inhistoricdates,participantsaregivenalistoffictionaleventsandyearsandaskedto
recallasmanyeventsaspossibleaftera5mintrainingperiod.
to a strong response in the visual regions of the brain, we would expect
strong signals from parts of the visual cortex in those practitioners of the
mnemonic method, as well as Bruno and Leibniz’s hybrid methods. For
a society whose very operational foundation was built upon these tech-
niques, one would expect systematic deviations in cognitive organization
fromanotherwisenormalpopulation. Onewondersifthesecognitivedif-
ferencesinthecapacitytogenerateintenseimagerymighthavehadderiva-
tiveeffectsoncreativityaswell.
While I have presented the above set of circumstances as a counter-
factual historical thought experiment, it is worth considering that a sce-
nario such as this one is what Leibniz anticipated would be the societal
consequences of the universal calculus, as illustrated in the following ex-
cerpt:
My invention contains all the functions of reason: it is a judge for
controversies;aninterpreterofnotions;ascaleforweighingprobabil-
ities;acompasswhichguidesusthroughtheoceanofexperience;an
inventoryofthings;atableofthoughts;amicroscopeforscrutinizing
things close at hand; an innocent magic; a non-chimerical cabala; a
writing which everyone canread in his own language; and finally a
languagewhichcanbelearntinafewweeks,travelingswiftlyacross
theworld,carryingthetruereligionwithit,whereveritgoes[10].
Aside from the colorful description of the potential impact of this “in-
vention,”whatismoststrikingistheastonishingtimeframeonwhichLeib-
niz believed this language could be acquired. For a person to learn a for-
eign language in a few weeks would be a superhuman feat, and Leibniz
was conceiving ofa languagethat wouldbe acquired onsuch atime scale
whichcontainednotonlymeansforcommunicatingordinaryconcepts,but
theentiretyofhumanknowledge.Inotherwords,Leibnizwasimagininga
formofcommunicationthatwasfarsuperiortoordinarywrittenlanguage.
Ultimately,itwashopedthatbytakinginspirationfromthegeometricand
pictorial aspects of the Chinese alphabet and Egyptian hieroglyphics, and
fusingthemwiththememory-aidingpowerofthemnemonicmethodand
relatedmemorizationtechniques,arigorousprocessof“notationengineer-
ing” would allow for the creation of a symbolic systemthat transparently
represented the factual content as well as the logical structure of the en-
tirety of human thought. It hardly needs to be stated that this vision did
not materialize, but it is a striking and original vision and one worth con-
templating.
Discussion
If we accept the possibility of a society built upon memorization, and fur-
thermore, that such a set of cultural norms might have had consequences
for the development of scientific methodology and scientific culture, we
wouldalsohavetoaccepttheconclusionthatascientificrevolutioninsuch
circumstances would have looked very different from what took place in
Europe during the 16th and 17th centuries. For instance, while we tradi-
tionally associate the scientific method with hypothesis-driven investiga-
tion, one of the primary innovations of the 17th century, and which sub-
sequently formed the bedrock of the physical sciences, was Newton and
Leibniz’s infinitesimal calculus- on its own, a strictly mathematical theory
that is only incidentally related to experimental science and hypothesis-
driveninvestigation. Ifascientificrevolutionweretohavetakenplaceata
verydifferentplaceandtimeinhumanhistory,whatmightithaveactually
looked like? What would have been the topics that received the most at-
tentionandwhatwouldtheconsequenceshavebeen? Forcingourselvesto
reasonexplicitly aboutsuch unusualcircumstances might helptodevelop
more precise models for what we mean by scientific reasoning, and help
to disentangle larger principles from the specific set of historical circum-
stancesinwhichthoseprinciplesemerged.
Consider, for example, the recent interest in a scientific study of yoga,
Tai Chi, and the meditative practices of the Tibetan Buddhists (see for ex-
ample [11–13]). Each of theseancient traditions is of sufficient intellectual
depthtohavedrawntheattentionofmodernscientists. Andyettheseprac-
tices came about from places and during time periods where there were
no scientific journals, no means of rapid, widespread communication and
doubleblindpeerreview,andwithouttheinfrastructureofthemodernre-
search university. Clearly then, these early Indian, Chinese, and Tibetan
thinkersandexperimentersdevelopedahighlysophisticatedscientificcul-
ture in theabsence of many common features ofour own scientific world.
What would have happened if these efforts were to have been scaled up
even more dramatically centuries and millennia ago? What would have
theresultingsocietiesandintellectualculturelookedlike?
Inexaminingtheastonishingdevelopmentstakingplaceinthecontem-
poraryscientificworld(seeforexample[14,15]),theremayberealvaluein
encouragingthewritingofcounter-factualscientifichistories(oratthevery
least thinking about them), and in particular, asking the question of what
ascientific revolutionmight have lookedlike at differentplaces and times
in human history. The intuition gained from such exercises could prove
useful in developing policy recommendations for and guiding the evolu-
tionofyoungerscientificinstitutions,particularlyinthedevelopingworld,
where there is likely to be more freedomand opportunityto influence the
developmentofinstitutionalculture.
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank Doug Bemis and Aaswath Raman for insightful dis-
cussionsandcriticalreadingofthemanuscript.