]NG.oib-q[
1v2209060/oib-q:viXra
Reconsidering the significance of genomic
word frequency
Miklo´s Csu˝ro¨s∗ Laurent Noe´† Gregory Kucherov†
October 28, 2018
Determiningwhatconstitutesunusuallyfrequentandrareinagenomeisafun-
damental and ongoing issue in genomics [6]. Sequence motifs may be frequent
becausetheyappear in mobile,structuralorregulatoryelements. It has been sug-
gested that some recurrent sequence motifs indicate hitherto unknown or poorly
understood biological phenomena [17]. We propose that the distribution of DNA
words in genomic sequences can be primarily characterized by a double Pareto-
lognormal distribution, which explains lognormal and power-law features found
across all known genomes. Such a distribution may be the result of completely
random sequence evolution by duplication processes. The parametrization of ge-
nomic word frequencies allows for an assessment of significance for frequent or
rare sequencemotifs.
ThesimplesttypeofsequencemotifisaDNAwordofafixedlengthℓ, called
an ℓ-mer. The number of occurrences of a word w is denoted by N(w), and the
distributionofN(w)acrossallℓ-mersiscalledthewordfrequencydistributionor
spectrum. Thestatisticalsignificanceofaword’sunusualabundance(orrarity)is
assessed by referring to a null model of random sequences. Standard null mod-
elsincludesequencesofindependentandidenticallydistributedletters(Bernoulli
model) and low-order Markov models [16]. In such random text models, over-
and underrepresentation of short words (typically, 8 ≤ ℓ ≤ 16) are evaluated by
using Poisson or Gaussian approximations, implying a rapidly decreasing tail in
the spectrum. It is also customary to use localized random shuffling of the stud-
∗DepartmentofComputerScienceandOperationsResearch,Universite´deMontre´al,CP6128,
succ.Centre-Ville,Montre´al,Que´becH3C3J7,Canada.
†Laboratoired’InformatiqueFondamentaledeLille,Baˆt.M3,59655Villeneuved’AscqCe´dex,
France.
random duplications, m=18
0 1 10 100 1000
occurrence
Figure 1: 13-mer frequencies in repeat-masked human chromosome 5, and in
randomsequences ofsamelength.
iedgenomesequenceinordertopreservelarge-scalecompositionalheterogeneity.
Empiricalwordfrequencydistributionsinshuffledsequencesalsohavealighttail.
In reality, genomic word frequency distributionshave a prominent heavy tail,
which is not captured by random textmodels (Fig. 1). Depending on thegenome
lengthLanditsrelativesizewithrespecttothenumberofℓ-mers4ℓ,thespectrum
may show a power-law decrease on the left or right, or have a lognormal shape.
The heavy tail on the right cannot be entirely attributed to mobile elements, as it
ispresenteveninrepeat-maskedvertebrateandmanysmallergenomes(Figures2
and3). Consequently,randomtextmodelsandshufflingtendtounderestimatethe
probabilityoffrequent wordsin longsequences.
Tothisday,therehasbeennoexactcharacterizationofgenomicspectra,aside
from the observation of power-law behavior for certain word sizes [8, 9, 10] in
the right-hand tail. This note aims to point out that a parametric distribution de-
scribes word frequencies extremely well in prokaryotic and eukaryotic genome
sequences. The distributionin question is the so-called double Pareto-lognormal
(DPL) distribution [15]. It fits many real-life size distributions, including that of
wealth in society, human settlement sizes, and file sizes on the Internet. The dis-
tribution has four parameters: α > 0, β > 0, ν and τ > 0; it has a power-law
S. cerevisiae, 11-mers
A. pernix, 9-mers
N. equitans, 8-mers
B. subtilis, 8-mers
M. genitalium, 9-mers
0 1 10 100 1000 10000
occurrence
Figure 2: Spectra in smaller genomes. For each full genome (concatenated chro-
mosome sequences if necessary), the ℓ-mer frequency distribution is shown by
dots, and the fitted DPL distribution by a solid line. Notice the power law in the
lowertailoftheB. subtilisgenomespectrum.
(Pareto) tail to the left and to the right, with slopes characterized by the parame-
ters β and α, respectively; in the middle, its shape is dominated by a lognormal
distributionwithparameters ν andτ.
Figure 2 illustrates that a single DPL distribution’s four parameters can be
adjusted to describe spectra across hundreds or thousands of word frequencies
in non-vertebrate genomes. (More examples for different spectra are shown on
For very short words with respect to the genome length L (about 8 ≤ ℓ ≤
(log L) − 4), the spectrum has mainly a lognormal shape. As ℓ increases, the
mode of the lognormal component shifts downwards and the lower power-law
tail becomes more and more discernible, followed by the appearance of the up-
per power-law tail. For long words (from around ℓ > (log L) + 2), the upper
power-law tail dominates the spectrum. Given that compact genomes are mostly
composedofcodingsequences, theupperpower-lawtailisanothermanifestation
ofthepowerlawforproteindomainoccurrences [8].
In organisms with strong dinucleotide bias, such as for CpG in vertebrates or
1M 13-mers
0 1 10 100 1000
occurrence
Figure3: Spectra ofCpG-free ℓ-merson repeat-masked humanchromosome12.
for ApT in honey bee [2], the spectrum can be decomposed into multiple DPL
distributions by dinucleotide content (Figure 4). Spectra for words without CpG
dinucleotides in repeat-masked vertebrate sequences have a marked DPL shape
(Fig. 3). We illustratethe analysis of a large genomicspectrum with the example
of human chromosome12, which is typical of thehuman genomewith respect to
repeat element distribution and cytosine-guanine content [19]. Abundant repeat
elementsmaycausedeviationsfromtheDPLdistribution,whichmaybethebasis
of their identification using a DPL null model, but often they are absorbed in the
fundamentalDPLcurve(Figure5). Table1analyzesthecompositionofthespec-
trum’s tail in human chromosome 12. The contribution of non-repeat sequences
in the tail decreases when moving toward higher word frequencies, but it levels
offat about25%.
The power-law tail of gene family size distributions [8] can be explained by
birth and death processes [5, 14]. Similar arguments apply to genomic spectra.
Considertheoccurrencesofaparticularwordalongthegenomeasa“population.”
Thepopulationsizeisaffectedbymutationalevents,includingduplications,inser-
tions,deletionsand pointmutations. Thepopulationcan increase by any copying
mechanism, including segmental duplication and retrotranscription. The popula-
tion decreases if an occurrence is destroyed by some mutation. Point mutations
0 1 10 100 1000 10000
occurrence
Figure 4: 9-mer frequencies in non-repeat annotated regions of human chromo-
some 12. The spectrum can be decomposed by CpG content into a few DPL
distributions,shownby solidlines.
n 12-mers(a) sequence (b) non-repeat (c) SINE(d) LINE(e) LTR(f) other(g)
12 19.61 69.6 47.2 16.7 21.4 8.4 6.3
25 5.34 39.7 41.5 21.3 22.6 7.6 7.0
30 3.67 33.9 39.6 23.1 22.9 7.3 7.2
50 1.30 22.6 34.0 28.8 23.2 6.5 7.5
60 0.91 19.9 32.1 31.0 23.1 6.2 7.5
100 0.37 14.7 27.9 36.7 22.6 5.4 7.4
120 0.28 13.4 26.8 38.5 22.3 5.1 7.3
200 0.14 10.6 24.6 43.0 20.7 4.7 7.0
240 0.10 9.7 24.2 44.9 19.4 4.6 6.9
Table 1: Composition of the 12-mer spectrum’s tail in human chromosome 12.
Column (a) gives the fraction of words that occur at least n times; column (b)
lists the fraction of the genome sequence covered by such words. Columns (c–
g) list the fraction of those word occurrences within non-repeat regions, short
interspersedelements,longinterspersedelements,longterminalrepeats,andother
repeatelements(includingDNAtransposons,simplerepeats,low-complexityand
tandemrepeats), respectively. Fractions areexpressedas percentages.
non-repeat
0 1 10 100 1000 10000
occurrence
Figure 5: Decomposing the contribution of different repeat families in the spec-
trum of CpG-free 12-mers along human chromosome 12. Most of the deviation
from DPL in the right-hand tail is caused by Alu and L1 families and simple re-
peats.
can create new populations,but so can insertion (at the insertion boundaries) and
deletion (by bringing two halves of a word together). It is thus conceivable that
a birth and death model appropriately models the spectrum’s evolution. In order
to illustrate this point, we carried out a simulation experiment in which a DNA
sequence evolved solely by copying. We iteratively expanded an initial random
DNA sequence by selecting a contiguous piece of a fixed length m in each iter-
ation, and copying it back into the sequence at a random position. The resulting
sequenceexhibitsthesameheavytailasthereal-lifesequencesdo(Figure1). The
parametersofthefittedDPLdistributionareaffectedbythecopysizem, andfur-
ther vary with the introduction of a point mutation process. It is thus likely that
the DPL distribution of genomic spectra is yet another sign of ceaseless “tinker-
ing”[4]withinthegenome.
Heavy-tail distributions are signs of self-similarity, or long-range autocorre-
lation, which has been observed before in DNA sequences [7, 12], and studied
thoroughly in telecommunications engineering [18]. Long-range autocorrelation
at the single nucleotide level can result from so-called expansion-randomization
processes [11], which model sequence evolution by deletions, mutations and du-
plications.
The birth and death model implies that some words occur often simply by
chance,andnotbecauseoftheirfunctionality. Wordsthatareabundantatanearly
point of evolution tend to preserve their relative abundance in the course of ran-
domcopy events,inaccordance with theprincipleof“rich get richer” underlying
power-law distributions. Therefore, even the high frequency of a particular word
across many related species does not imply functionality on its own, as the word
may have been frequent by chance in a common ancestor already. Association
with genes is not necessarily a sign of functionality either, since transcribed re-
gionsthatharborafrequentwordcanhelpitspropagationthroughoutthegenome
byretrotranscription.
Our investigationsshow that the distribution of word frequencies can be well
approximated by a parametric model, the double Pareto-lognormal distribution.
Suchadistributionmayresultfromalonghistoryofevolutionarytinkering: copy-
ing,rearranging,deleting,andchangingdifferentpartsofthegenome. Theheavy
tailofwordfrequencydistributionsmeansthatfindingsoffrequentmotifsneedto
be assessed with extreme care, especially if their overrepresentation is related to
wordoccurrences inrandom texts.
Words were counted only on one strand of the DNA sequences (the ‘plus’ strand of the
sequencefile),withtheexceptionofthe16-mersinthehumangenome,wherebothstrands
werescanned. Wecounted theoccurrence ofawordw ifitappeared inagivensequence
atsome position i..i+ℓ−1, without ambiguous nucleotides. TheDPLdistribution was
fittedusingitscumulativedistribution function (cdf),whichis
lnx−ν −ατ2
for x > 0 and F(x) = 0 for x ≤ 0, where Φ(·) denotes the cdf of the standard normal
distribution. The spectrum consists of the numbers W(n) of ℓ-mers occurring exactly n
times for all n = 0,1,2,... In order to fit the distribution’s parameters, the spectrum
W(n): n = 0,1... wasconsidered asasetofbinned valuesforindependently drawn
(cid:16) (cid:17)
samplesfromacontinuous DPLdistribution: W(n)wascomparedtothepredicted value
4ℓ F(n+ 1 )−F(n− 1 ) . Weused custom-made programs tocarry out theparameter
(cid:16) 2 2 (cid:17)
fitting, using theLevenberg-Marquardt algorithm [13],anonlinear least-squares method,
forwhichthestarting parametervaluesweresetbylikelihood maximization [15].
We defined CpG content of a word w (Fig. 4) as the number of non-overlapping
CG and GC dinucleotides in w. The contribution of different annotations (Fig. 5) were
computedbymultiplyingeachW(n)valueinthespectrumbythefractionofoccurrences
within the annotated regions for words appearing n times in the entire sequence. For
the random shuffling of Fig. 1, we partitioned the sequence into contiguous segments
containing exactly 1000 non-ambiguous nucleotides. Non-ambiguous nucleotides were
garbledineachsegmentbygenerating auniform randompermutation.
Human sequences (original and repeat-masked) and repeat annotations (Figures 1,
3,4 and 5) were obtained from the UCSC genome browser [3] gateway’s FTP server
(ftp://hgdownload.cse.ucsc.edu/),forversionhg18(NCBIBuild36.1). (The
repeat annotations were generated by the programs RepeatMasker [20] and Tandem Re-
peats Finder [1].) Othersequences (Fig. 2)were downloaded from the NCBIFTPserver
(ftp://ftp.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genomes/).