Relevance As a Metric for Evaluating Machine
Learning Algorithms
Aravind Kota Gopalakrishna, Tanir Ozcelebi, Antonio Liotta, and Johan J.
1 System Architecture and Networking (SAN),
Department of Mathematics and Computer Science,
2 Electro-Optical Communications,
Department of Electrical Engineering,
Eindhoven University of Technology, The Netherlands
{a.kota.gopalakrishna,t.ozcelebi,a.liotta,j.j.lukkien}@tue.nl
Abstract. In machine learning, the choice of a learning algorithm that
issuitablefortheapplicationdomainiscritical.Theperformancemetric
used to compare different algorithms must also reflect the concerns of
users in the application domain under consideration. In this work, we
propose a novel probability-based performance metric called Relevance
Score for evaluating supervised learning algorithms. We evaluate the
proposed metric through empirical analysis on a dataset gathered from
anintelligentlightingpilotinstallation.Incomparisontothecommonly
used Classification Accuracy metric, the Relevance Score proves to be
more appropriate for a certain class of applications.
Keywords: Machine learning algorithms; performance metric; proba-
bilistic approach
1 Introduction
One of the general goals of a machine learning (ML) algorithm is to capture
complexrelationshipsandpatternswithinadatasetandtoapplysuchknowledge
onnewdatathatisbelievedtohavethesame(orasimilar)pattern.Thesuccess
criteriafortheMLalgorithmdependonmanyfactors,mostimportantly,onthe
user concerns that are specific to the application domain.
Consider a car navigation system that utilizes a specific ML algorithm to
select the best route from a source location to a destination. There are many
ways to measure the performance of this algorithm objectively. Useful metrics
can be, for instance, the actual time to reach the destination, the amount of gas
consumption and the amount of tolls paid. However, it is often the case that a
combination of these metrics cannot directly be mapped to the real satisfaction
ofthedriverfromthenavigationexperience,whereasthisiswhatmattersinthe
end. Assume that there are only two home-office routes possible and the driver
generally likes to take the first route, which is shorter, faster and safer. On the
other hand, sometimes, the driver likes to take the second route that goes along
3v3907.3031:viXra
2 A. K. Gopalakrishna et. al.
theseashore,especiallywhenitissunnyandthedriverisinthemood.TheML
algorithmcanbeexpectedtolearntopickthedesiredrouteamongthetwoonly
ifweatherisaparameterthatcanbeandismonitoredbythenavigationdevice.
Monitoring the mood of a person is very difficult nonetheless. Alternatively, the
ML algorithm will simply start looking for patterns within other data that is
available to it, e.g. the time of the day, which may or may not have any actual
impact.Inthiscase,thedesiredroutemayalsodependonthoseparameters,i.e.
features, which are relevant yet not considered by the navigation device.
It is a difficult task to identify all the features that are relevant for the ML
algorithm employed by an application. The features that are relevant for the
application define a context. Even when the context is known, it may be techni-
callyverychallengingorveryintrusivetomonitorsomefeaturesespeciallywhen
usersareinvolved,e.g.thedriver’smoodinthepreviousexample.Thesubsetof
relevant features that are monitored define an observed context. Depending on
the application under consideration and the observed context, sometimes evalu-
ating an output, i.e. a prediction made by the ML algorithm, as either right or
wrong might not be sufficient as there are gray areas in between. For example,
theintelligentenvironmentdescribedin[1]offerslightingservices(lightsettings)
depending on several contextual factors such as user identity, user activity and
time of the day. When the dataset collected from this intelligent environment
is examined, there are two important remarks to be made. The first remark is
that the desired light settings are not fixed for a given instance of observed con-
text. Since perception of lighting also depends on subjective factors that cannot
be monitored, even the same user, the same activity and the same time of the
day may result in different desired light settings. The second remark is that,
for a given observed context, there are acceptable (desired at least once) and
unacceptable light settings (never desired).
This means that the overall performance of the ML algorithm may be hin-
dered by the fact that the observed context is not entirely representative of the
actualcontextofanapplication.Whenthisisthecase,itisachallengetoevalu-
ateandcomparetheperformancesofdifferentMLalgorithmsintheapplication
domain.Intheliterature,differentevaluationmetricsassessdifferentcharacteris-
ticsofMLalgorithms[2].ClassificationproblemsinMLarebroadlycategorized
intomulti-classclassificationandmulti-labelclassificationproblems.Multi-class
classificationalgorithms[3]areforthosecategoriesofproblemswhere,foragiven
input instance, there is exactly one correct output class, which is selected out of
several classes. Examples of multi-class classification include image recognition
and diagnosis [4]. The commonly used evaluation metric for multi-class clas-
sification problems are accuracy, precision and recall. Multi-label classification
algorithms [5] address that category of problems where multiple output classes
must be selected for each input instance. Examples of multi-label classification
include text [6] and music categorization [7]. The commonly used evaluation
metrics for multi-label classification problems are hamming-loss, precision and
recall.
Relevance As a Metric for Evaluating Machine Learning Algorithms 3
Asillustratedbytheexamplesofcarnavigationandintelligentlighting,there
also exists another class of applications. In these applications, the ML predic-
tion model has to select a unique output class for a given input instance (as
in multi-class classification), and the output for a given input instance may fall
into multiple acceptable output classes (as in multi-label classification). An in-
teresting property of such an application is randomness in the output, i.e. there
is no single acceptable outcome for a given observed context but there is a sta-
tisticalregularityassociatedwithdifferentpossibleandacceptableoutcomes.In
such cases, even though the prediction models that are used to solve multi-class
classification problems suits the need, the evaluation metrics such as accuracy,
precision and recall are not suitable. For instance, the use of accuracy as a met-
ric would lead to a score of zero for a misclassified sample, which should not be
the case. The bad choice of performance metrics would produce results that are
meaningless to achieve the design goal of an application [8] [9].
Inthiswork,wedeviseanewevaluationschemetoevaluatetheperformance
ofsupervisedlearningalgorithmsforthisclassofapplicationsandproposeanew
evaluationmetriccalledRelevanceScore(RS).Weconsideranintelligentlighting
scenario to describe and formulate the problem. Relevance Score is defined as a
percentage measure of how much relevant an output or outcome is, as predicted
by the prediction model for a given observed context. The score is based on the
probabilistic distances among the different outcomes, i.e. predicted and actual
outcome. We use this metric to evaluate several rule based prediction models
and then compare it with the commonly used metric Prediction Accuracy or
Classification Accuracy (CA) tovalidatethesignificanceoftheproposedmetric.
Thepaperisorganizedasfollows.Section2discussesthedrawbacksofusing
thecommonlyusedCAmetricwithanexampleofintelligentlightingapplication
andidentifiesimprovementdirections.Section3presentstheproposedrelevance
metric.Section4providesanevaluationoftheproposedmetric.Finally,Section5
concludes the paper.
2 Problem Definition
In this section, we discuss the drawbacks of Classification Accuracy (CA) as a
metric for evaluating supervised learning algorithms, which motivates the need
for a new metric using an intelligent lighting application scenario.
Letx (cid:15)X denotetheithsampleinadataset,wherex =[x ,x ,...,x ]and
i i i1 i2 in
X representsann-dimensionalinputfeaturespacegivenbyX =X ×X ×X ×
...×X .Letusdenotetheoutputclasslabelasy wherey(cid:15)Y ={y ,y ,...,y }
and K denotes the number of possible outcomes. In the intelligent lighting ap-
plication under consideration [1], there are 8 possible presets for output lighting
conditions (K=8) in a breakout area, as shown in the three dimensional space
in Fig. 1. Each octant represents a possible light combination (e.g. static-warm-
dim).
4 A. K. Gopalakrishna et. al.
bbbrrriiiggghhhttt
dddyyynnnaaammmiiiccc
cccoooooolll wwwaaarrrmmm
ssstttaaatttiiiccc
Fig.1. Possible Output Light Combinations
A user is provided with a lighting condition based on six input features
(n=6) namely user-identity, type of activity, area of activity, number of users,
time of the day and the external light influence.
In[1],thesupervisedlearningapproachisexploredwhereaconsideredclassi-
ficationmodelistrainedonthebreakoutdatasettopredictauniquelightoutput
y (cid:15)Y ={y ,y ,...,y }foragiveninputx =[x ,x ,...,x ].Thesuccessofan
i 1 2 8 i i1 i2 i6
intelligent lighting application depends on selecting the best suitable prediction
model that selects the desired lighting condition for a given observed context.
The performance of the selected models is evaluated using CA as a metric.
Let us assume that a classification model h is trained using the breakout
dataset.Thebreakoutdatasetcontainsasamplex 10timesandtheoutputlight
condition selected by a user is light A (LA) four times, light B (LB) four times
andlightC(LC) twotimes.Thismeansthattheuserforagiveninputinstance
x has selected LA, LB and LC with probabilities 0.4, 0.4 and 0.2 respectively,
i.e. a sample x has multiple output classes. Assume that the classifier h selects
LAbasedonwhatithaslearntfromthetrainingdata,whereastheuseractually
desires LB as the lighting condition. Here the classifier h is not right with the
prediction, but not entirely wrong either. If CA is used as a metric, then the
selection made by the classifier h would be assessed as completely wrong. From
the application point-of-view the CA metric is not very representative as it is
importanttomeasurehowrelevantthelightingconditionisforagivenobserved
context,ratherthantomeasurehowaccurateitis.Itcanneverbe100%accurate
Relevance As a Metric for Evaluating Machine Learning Algorithms 5
Table 1. Sample comparison of metrics
Actual OutputPredicted Output CA Metric Alternative Metric
LA LA 100 Good match
LB LC 0 Decent match
LC LA 0 Irrelevant match
LA LB 0 Relevant match
LB LB 100 Good match
200/5 = 40% 325/5 = 65%
as the user is not consistent in choosing the desired lighting condition, based on
the observed context.
From the example above it is evident that CA is not a relevant metric for
similar applications as it fails to capture the degree of relevance when there is a
“non-ideal” prediction. Hence, it is necessary to have an evaluation mechanism
thatisabletocomputethedistancebetweenactualandpredictedoutcomewhen
they are not equal. An example of such a metric for a given classifier is shown
in Table 1.
As shown in Table 1, by virtue of the problem, CA gives a low accuracy of
40%, whereas the user is given relevant outputs 80% of the time and irrelevant
outputs only 20% of the time according to the Alternative Metric, resulting in
anaveragescoreof65%.Herethe Alternative Metric computestherelevanceof
the outcome i.e. how good is the output selection made by a prediction model
through the data statistics available from the observed environment, thereby
making it more suitable than the CA metric.
Formally, we propose an evaluation metric named as Relevance Score, which
is more suitable for the third class of applications mentioned in Section 1 than
the commonly used CA metric. In particular, we seek to find a performance
function f :(X,Y)→R100 where R100 ={RS(cid:15)R|0≤RS ≤100}.
3 Proposed Metric
In this section, we propose a new mechanism to evaluate supervised prediction
models used in the presented class of applications, e.g. in intelligent lighting.
Here, we formulate a function that quantifies the relevance of the predicted
outcome when there is a mismatch between the predicted and actual outcome.
6 A. K. Gopalakrishna et. al.
SSSpppllliiittttttiiinnnggg
DDaattaasseett
TTrraaiinniinngg PPPrrreeedddiiiccctttiiiooonnn
DDaattaasseett MMooddeell
CCoommpplleettee
DDaattaasseett
TTeesstt DDaattaasseett HHyyppootthheessiiss
CCCooommmpppuuuttteee
PPrroobbaabbiilliittiieess PPrreeddiicctt
PPrreeddiiccttiioonn
RREELLEEVVAANNCCEE
SSCCOORREE
Fig.2. Relevance Score computation procedure
ThewellknownCAmetriciscomputedasanaverageofthesumofindividual
accuracies for k test set samples as in equation 1.
1 (cid:88)
CA= Acc (1)
We inherit the same mechanism to compute the Relevance Score on a test
set for a given prediction model with a minor modification where the accuracy
Acc for a sample is replaced by Score as in equation 2.
1 (cid:88)
RS = Score (2)
We divide RS computation into two phases: 1. Probability Computation
Phase, and 2. Evaluation Phase. The entire process of computing RS is shown
in Fig. 2.
3.1 Probability Computation Phase
An ErrScore is a real number that is calculated when there is an error in pre-
diction by the prediction model. It is computed based on five parameters, the
predictedoutcome(O ),theactualoutcome(O ),theprobabilityofoccurrence
of the predicted outcome (P(O )), the probability of occurrence of the actual
Relevance As a Metric for Evaluating Machine Learning Algorithms 7
Table 2. Qualitative Relevance
CASEOUTCOME PROBABILITIES QUALITATIVE
1 O =O - Highly Relevant
2 O (cid:54)=O P(O )=P(O );P(O )>P(O )Moderately Relevant
P A H P P A
3 O (cid:54)=O P(O )>P(O )>P(O ) Relevant
4 O (cid:54)=O P(O )>P(O )>P(O ) Less Relevant
5 O (cid:54)=O P(O )=P(O );P(O )>P(O ) Irrelevant
P A H A A P
outcome (P(O )) and the probability of the most frequently selected outcome
(P(O )). These probabilities are the values that are computed from the entire
dataset.Theprobabilityvaluesarecomputedforthedifferentoutputclasslabels
(y(cid:15)Y) for every input instance (x ) in the breakout dataset. Formally, compute
P(y|x ) for i = 1,2,3,...,m where m is the number of samples in the entire
dataset. In this phase, the values of the most probable feature that is responsi-
blefortherandomnessinoutput(e.g.useridentityfeatureinintelligentlighting
application) is removed for generalization.
3.2 Evaluation Phase
Inthisphase,thepredictionsonthetestdataareevaluatedusingtheconsidered
classificationmodels.Ifddenotestheprobabilisticdistancesingeneral,thenthe
distances between the probabilities are given by,
Several cases are possible for a given input instance based on the predicted
and the actual outcomes and their computed probabilities. The cases may be
classified qualitatively in terms of relevancy of the outputs provided. The de-
creasing order of relevance we consider for different cases is summarized in Ta-
ble 2. The ordering is based on the consequence of individual cases as explained
later. Thus, ErrScore is a score that is obtained by quantifying these cases.
Case 1: O =O
In this case, for a given input instance in the test set, the predicted out-
come and the actual outcome are equal. Thus, there is no error in the predicted
outcome.
Case 2: O (cid:54)=O ;P(O )=P(O )>P(O )
Inthiscase,foragiveninputinstancethepredictedoutcomeandthehighest
probable outcome are equal but a different output (actual outcome) is selected.
8 A. K. Gopalakrishna et. al.
Sincethepredictedoutcomeisequaltothehighestprobableoutcome(d =0)
and the classification model has not been able to capture the switch in output,
the error is kept minimum and is equal to β ·d where β is a positive real
constant, whose value depends on the application.
Case 3: O (cid:54)=O ;P(O )>P(O )>P(O )
In this case, for a given input instance the predicted outcome, the actual
outcome and the highest probable outcome are not equal. Since the probability
of the predicted outcome lies in between that of the highest probable outcome
and the actual outcome, the error value is higher than the previous case, and is
equal to (α·d +β·d ) where α and β denote positive real constants.
Case 4: O (cid:54)=O ;P(O )>P(O )>P(O )
In this case, for a given input instance the predicted outcome, the actual
outcome and the highest probable outcome are not equal. Since the probability
of the predicted outcome lies farther away than that of the highest probable
outcome and the actual outcome, the error value is much higher, and equal to
(α·d +β·d ) as in Case 3.
Case 5: O (cid:54)=O ;P(O )=P(O )>P(O )
In this case, for a given input instance the actual outcome and the highest
probableoutcomeareequalbuttheclassificationmodelselectsadifferentoutput
(predicted outcome). Since the actual outcome is equal to the highest probable
outcome and the performance of the classification model was poor to select a
different output, the error rate is much higher than that of the previous cases.
The error is equal to (α+β)·d .
Combining above equations and normalizing over (α+β), we find the fol-
lowing error score function
ErrScore= HP PA . (6)
Therefore, the RS for a sample is computed as below
Score=(1−ErrScore)×100, (7)
Score=(1− HP PA )×100. (8)
4 Experimentation and Results
Inthissection,westudytheperformanceoftheproposedRS metricandcompare
it to the CA metric for different classifiers used in the breakout dataset. We
furtherinvestigatetheinfluenceofαandβparametersoftheRSmetricfunction.
The performance of RS metric is studied through various experimentations
using the Weka [10] simulator on the following rule-based prediction models:
DecisionTable[11],JRip[12],NearestNeighborwithgeneralization(NNge)[13],
PART[14],ConjunctiveRule[15]andRidor[16]onthebreakoutdataset[1].The
breakout dataset consists of 236 samples of data from different users gathered
Relevance As a Metric for Evaluating Machine Learning Algorithms 9
from the breakout area. Here 70% of the dataset is used for training and the
remaining 30% is used as test set. We consider 10 randomly shuffled training
and test sets for experimentation and then mean the results to avoid biased
results. We perform the following investigations:
1. Comparison of RS and CA Metrics
2. Significance of α and β
3. Lower and Upper Bounds of RS with changing α and β
4. Testing of RS on Random Output Data
4.1 Comparison of RS and CA Metrics
Fig. 3 shows the graph of Performance Metric vs. Prediction Model for two
different metrics: CA and RS. The RS values are computed with α = 2 and
β =1.Asdiscussedearlier,lowaccuracyvaluesareachievedwiththeCAmetric.
This means that no prediction models provide exact lighting conditions based
on the input instances in more than 50% of the test samples. However, with
RS as a metric, a maximum of 73% relevant lighting condition is achieved with
DecisionTable prediction model.
An interesting observation is that the prediction model Ridor has lower CA
than Conjunctive Rule, whereas Ridor has a better RS value than Conjunctive
Rule. This is interpreted as follows. For a portion of the data samples, the most
desired outcome (the best match) is calculated for each prediction model and
ConjunctiveRule performs better than Ridor, i.e. it has higher classification ac-
curacy. However, when it comes to the relevance of the predicted outcomes, the
Ridor is more successful than ConjunctiveRule, i.e. it predicts the most rele-
vant outcomes on average. Even though ConjunctiveRule finds the best match
slightly more often than Ridor, when it cannot find the best match, it comes
up with less relevant predictions. Therefore, Ridor is preferable for applications
where relevance of the predicted outcome is more critical than accuracy. As a
consequence,forsuchapplications,RS asaperformancemetricismorerelevant.
4.2 Significance of α and β
In this experiment, we investigate the influence of varying values of α and β on
RS.Fig.4showstheplotofRS vs.PredictionModelfordifferentvaluesofαand
β. The graph shows that the prediction model DecisionTable is more consistent
with the changing (α, β) whereas the RS values improve with α decreasing and
β increasing for other prediction models. The parameters α and β are used as
weights for probabilistic distances d and d , respectively. Thus, when α is
higher the product α·(d ) is emphasized more, i.e. the probabilistic distance
between the predicted and actual outcome is given less importance. When β is
higher, the product β·(d ) is emphasized more, i.e. the probabilistic distance
between the most probable outcome and the predicted outcome is given less
importance.
Fig.5showstheplotofRS vs.α,β fordifferentpredictionmodels.Fromthe
graph,wefindthatthepredictionsmadebyConjunctiveRulemodelarecloserto
10 A. K. Gopalakrishna et. al.
eeuullaaVV
DDeecciissiioonnTTaabbllee JJRRiipp NNNNggee PPAARRTT CCoonnjjuunnccttiivveeRRuullee RRiiddoorr
PPrreeddiiccttiioonn MMooddeell
Fig.3. Performance Metric vs. Prediction Model
ecnaveleR α=2, β=1
PPrreeddiiccttiioonn MMooddeell
Fig.4. Relevance Score vs. Prediction Model
Relevance As a Metric for Evaluating Machine Learning Algorithms 11
theactualoutcomeandhencevaryingα,β hasmoreinfluenceontheRSvalues.
The low RS values for the ConjunctiveRule are due to the fact that the model
is not good in consistently predicting relevant outcomes for the given scenarios.
4.3 Lower and Upper Bounds of RS with changing α and β
MaximumorminimumRS thatapredictionmodelcanreachisfoundbytaking
either α or β to be very large.
When α is very large compared to β, the error is computed is as follows:
ErrScore= lim HP PA = lim HP =d . (9)
When β is very large compared to α, the error is computed is as follows:
ErrScore= lim HP PA = lim PA =d . (10)
ThelowerandtheupperboundsonRSfortheconsideredpredictionmodels
are summarized in Table 3.
Table3.SummaryofmaximumandminimumRS valuesforvariouspredictionmodels
on the breakout dataset
DecisionTable 73.68 73.56
JRip 65.50 68.10
NNge 67.50 69.26
PART 65.79 70.48
ConjunctiveRule 57.13 67.28
Ridor 64.90 66.87
4.4 Testing of RS on Random Output Data
In this test, we study the RS results on the same dataset with randomly gener-
atedoutput.Oneofthemainmotivationsforthisresearchwasthefactthatthe
performance of the prediction model should not be punished for inconsistencies
in the data pattern that are caused by factors outside the observed context. For
example,apredictionmodelwhosegoalistofindthedesiredlightingconditions
for the user can be expected to perform at best as good as the user himself. If
the user is generating inconsistent data, i.e. if an observed context maps to dif-
ferent outcomes at different times, then the student (the prediction model) will
12 A. K. Gopalakrishna et. al.
DecisionTable erocS
DecisionTable
ecnaveleR NNge
ecnaveleR NNge
ConjunctiveRule
ConjunctiveRule
RRiiddoorr
Fig.5. Relevance Score vs. (α, β)
be learning from an inconsistent teacher (the user), whose reasons for changing
mind are completely hidden from the student, i.e. the reasons either don’t exist
ortheyarebeyondtheobservedcontext.Considertheextremecasewherethere
isnorelationbetweentheinputinstancesandoutputlightingconditions,i.e.the
user throws an 8-sided dice to select the desired lighting condition and the dice
is not part of the observed context. In this case, the CA metric would be equal
to 1/8 as there are 8 possible lighting conditions. We also expect to achieve a
lower RS in comparison to the scores on the dataset with real output. On the
otherhand,notethattheusermakesnodistinctionbetweenlightingconditions.
For a given observed context, even though there is exactly one desired lighting
condition, all possible lighting conditions are indeed somewhat relevant. There-
fore, we expect that the RS metric will be higher than the CA metric. Fig. 6
shows the plot of RS vs. prediction model for random output data and for the
real output data from the breakout dataset.
Intherandomoutputdataset,sinceoneoftheeightlightconditionsischosen
at random i.e. with probability 0.125, the output probability distributions are
almost uniform for the input instances. This makes it difficult for the prediction
modelstoselecttherightoutputchoice.Thusalltheconsideredpredictionmod-
els lie between the range 50 and 60%. But in case of real output dataset, there
are some relationships between the input and output causing the output proba-
bility distribution to be non-uniform. Thus the prediction model DecisionTable
performs the best with a RS of 74%.
Relevance As a Metric for Evaluating Machine Learning Algorithms 13
eeerrrooocccSSS
eeecccnnnaaavvveeellleeeRRR Random Output
ecnaveleR Random Output
Real Output
Real Output
DDeecciissiioonnTTaabbllee JJRRiipp NNNNggee PPAARRTT CCoonnjjuunnccttiivveeRRuullee RRiiddoorr
PPrreeddiiccttiioonn MMooddeell
Fig.6. Relevance Score vs. Prediction Model
From the performed studies, we find that RS is a more suitable metric than
the commonly used metrics for the mentioned class of applications. Further-
more, the RS metric provides a provision to select the prediction models that
havedifferentcharacteristicsinpredictingtheoutcomes.Thisdependsontheap-
plicationrequirement,andisdonebyvaryingparametersαandβ.Forexample,
a higher value of α is chosen as compared to β for applications where capturing
inconsistencies in the outcome for an observed context is not so critical.
5 Conclusion
The choice of a suitable performance metric is critical to select a machine learn-
ing algorithm for intelligent applications. In this direction, we presented the
drawback of the commonly used evaluation metric CA with an illustration of
intelligent lighting and similar class of applications. We further proposed a new
metric named as Relevance Score to evaluate machine learning algorithms when
thereismorethanonechoiceofoutputclasslabelssuitableforaninputinstance.
The metric is based on the probability values of the outcomes computed from
the dataset for a given observed context. We also presented a detailed analysis
on the performance and relevance of the proposed metric RS through various
experiments on the breakout dataset. From the obtained results, we conclude
that RS is a better performance metric for the class of applications where the
relevanceofpredictionsiscriticalratherthanthepredictionaccuracy.Moreover,
14 A. K. Gopalakrishna et. al.
variants of RS computation can be used by carefully selecting the parameters of
the RS computation function based on the application requirement.
Acknowledgments. We would like to acknowledge Smart Context-aware Ser-
vices (SmaCS) project for supporting this work. We would also like to thank
Serge Offermans for providing the breakout dataset.