3v00450.8051:viXra
R E -A I -
ENEWABLE NERGY WARE NTER DATACENTER
IRTUAL ACHINE
M E O N IGRATION OVER LASTIC PTICAL ETWORKS
LIANG ZHANG
NIRWAN ANSARI
TR-ANL-2015-005
AUGUST 26, 2015
ADVANCED NETWORKING LABORATORY
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND COMPUTER ENGINEERING
NEW JERSY INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY
Renewable Energy-Aware Inter-datacenter
Virtual Machine Migration over Elastic Optical
Liang Zhang, Tao Han, Member, IEEE, and Nirwan Ansari, Fellow, IEEE
Datacenters (DCs) are deployed in a large scale to support the ever increasing demand for data
processing to support various applications. The energy consumption of DCs becomes a critical issue.
Powering DCs with renewable energy can effectively reduce the brown energy consumption and thus
alleviates the energyconsumptionproblem.Owing to geographicaldeploymentsof DCs, the renewable
energy generation and the data processing demands usually vary in different DCs. Migrating virtual
machines (VMs) among DCs according to the availability of renewable energy helps match the energy
demandsand the renewable energygeneration in DCs, and thus maximizes the utilization of renewable
energy.SincemigratingVMsincursadditionaltrafficinthenetwork,theVMmigrationisconstrainedby
thenetworkcapacity.Theinter-datacenter(inter-DC)VMmigrationwithnetworkcapacityconstraintsis
anNP-hardproblem.Inthispaper,weproposetwoheuristicalgorithmsthatapproximatetheoptimalVM
migrationsolution.Throughextensivesimulations,we show thatthe proposedalgorithms,by migrating
VM among DCs, can reduce up to 31% of brown energy consumption.
Index Terms
Manycast, Cloud Computing, Elastic Optical Networks.
Liang Zhang and Nirwan Ansari are with the Advanced Networking Laboratory, Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering, New Jersey Institute of Technology, Newark, NJ, 07102, USA. (Email: {lz284, nirwan.ansari}@njit.edu).
Tao Han was with the Advanced Networking Laboratory, Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, New Jersey
Institute of Technology. He isnow with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of North Carolina
at Charlotte, Charlotte, NC, 28223, USA. (Email: than3@uncc.edu).
I. INTRODUCTION
Cloud infrastructures are widely deployed to support various emerging applications such as:
Google App Engine, Microsoft Window Live Service, IBM Blue Cloud, and Apple Mobile Me
[1]. Large-scale data centers (DCs), which are the fundamental engines for data processing, are
the essential elements in cloud computing [2], [3]. Information and Communication Technology
(ICT) is estimated to be responsible for about 14% of the worldwide energy consumption by
2020 [4]. The energy consumption of DCs accounts for nearly 25% of the total ICT energy
consumption [4]. Hence, the energy consumption of DCs becomes an imperative problem.
Renewable energy, which includes solar energy and wind power, produces 12.7% domestic
electricity of the United States in 2011 [5]. Renewable energy will be widely adopted to reduce
the brown energy consumption of ICT [6]. For example, Parasol is a solar-powered DC [7].
In Parasol, GreenSwitch, a management system, is designed to manage the work loads and the
power supplies [7]. The availability of renewable energy varies in different areas and changes
over time. The work loads of DCs also vary in different areas and at different time. As a result,
the renewable energy availability and energy demands in DCs usually mismatch with each other.
This mismatch leads to inefficient renewable energy usage in DCs. To solve this problem, it
is desirable to balance the work loads among DCs according to their green energy availability.
Although the current cloud computing solutions such as cloud bursting [8], VMware and F5 [9]
support inter-datacenter(inter-DC) virtual machine(VM) migration,it is not clear howto migrate
VM among renewable energy powered DCs to minimize their brown energy consumption.
Elastic Optical Networks (EONs), by employing orthogonal frequency division multiplexing
(OFDM) techniques, not only provide a high network capacity but also enhance the spectrum ef-
ficiency because of the low spectrum granularity [10]. The granularity in EONs can be 12.5 GHz
or even much smaller [11]. Therefore, EONs are one of the promising networking technologies
for inter-DC networks [12].
Powering DCs with renewable energy can effectively reduce the brown energy consumption,
and thus alleviate green house gas emissions. DCs are usually co-located with the renewable
energy generation facilities such as solar and wind farms [13]. Since transmitting renewable
energy via the power grid may introduce a significant power loss, it is desirable to maximize
the utilization of renewable energy in the DC rather than transmitting the energy back to the
power grid. In this paper, we investigate the renewable energy-aware inter-DC VM migration
(RE-AIM) problem that optimizes the renewable energy utilization by migrating VMs among
DCs. Fig. 1 shows the architecture of an inter-DC network. The vertices in the graph stand for
the optical switches in EONs. DCs are connected to the optical switches via IP routers 1. These
DCs are powered by hybrid energy including brown energy, solar energy, and wind energy. In
migrating VMs among DCs, the background traffic from other applications are also considered
in the network. For example, assume that DC 1 lacks renewable energy while DC 2 and DC 3
have superfluous renewable energy. Some VMs can be migrated out of DC 1 in order to save
brown energy. Because of the background traffic and the limited network resource, migrating
VMs using different paths (Path 1 or Path 2) has different impacts on the network in terms of
the probability of congesting the network. It is desirable to select a migration path with minimal
impact on the network.
Fig. 1. Inter-DC architecture.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II describes the related work. Section
1In this paper, we focus on the EONs. The design and optimization of the IP networks are beyond the scope of this paper.
III formulates the RE-AIM problem. Section IV briefly analyzes the property of the RE-AIM
problem and proposes two heuristic algorithms to solve the problem. Section V demonstrates
the viability of the proposed algorithms via extensive simulation results. Section VI concludes
the paper.
II. RELATED WORK
Owing to the energy demands of DCs, many techniques and algorithms have been proposed
to minimize the energy consumption of DCs [14].
Fang et al.[15]presented a novelpowermanagementstrategyfor theDCs, and theirtarget was
to minimize the energy consumption of switches in a DC. Cavdar and Alagoz [16] surveyed the
energy consumption of server and network devices of intra-DC networks, and showed that both
computing resources and network elements should be designed with energy proportionality. In
other words, it is better if the computing and networking devices can be designed with multiple
sleeping states. A few green metrics are also provided by this survey, such as Power Usage
Effectiveness (PUE) and Carbon Usage Effectiveness (CUE).
Deng et al. [17] presented fiveaspects of applying renewable energy in theDCs: the renewable
energy generation model, the renewable energy prediction model, the planning of green DCs
(i.e., various renewable options, avalabity of energy sources, different energy storage devices),
the intra-DC work loads scheduling, and the inter-DC load balancing. They also discussed the
research challenges of powering DCs with renewable energy. Ghamkhari and Mohsenian-Rad
[14] developed a mathematical model to capture the trade-off between the energy consumption
of a data center and its revenue of offering Internet services. They proposed an algorithm to
maximize the revenue of a DC by adapting the number of active servers according to the traffic
profile. Gattulli et al. [18] proposed algorithms to reduce CO emissions in DCs by balancing
the loads according to the renewable energy generation. These algorithms optimize renewable
energy utilization while maintaining a relatively low blocking probability.
Mandal et al. [5] studied green energy aware VM migration techniques to reduce the energy
consumption of DCs. They proposed an algorithm to enhance the green energy utilization by
migrating VMs according to the available green energy in DCs. However, they did not consider
the network constraints while migrating VMs among DCs. In the optical networks, the available
spectrum is limited. The large amount of traffic generated by the VM migration may congest
the optical networks and increase the blocking rate of the network. Therefore, it is important
to consider the network constraints in migrating VMs. In this paper, we propose algorithms to
solve the green energy aware inter-DC VM migration problem with network constraints.
III. PROBLEM FORMULATION
In this section, we present the network model, the energy model, and the formulation of the
RE-AIM problem. The key notations are summarized in Table I.
THEIMPORTANTNOTATIONS
Symbol Definiton
Thecapacityofalinke∈E intermsofspectrum
slots.
c The capacity of a spectrum slot.
c The maximum number of servers in the mth DC.
ς The maximum number of VMs can be supported
in a server.
Φ The amount of renewable energy in the mth DC.
Θ The number of VMs in the mth DC.
α Per unit energy cost for the mth DC.
ζ TherequiredbandwidthformigratingthekthVM
in the mth DC.
R The set of the migration requests.
Qr The set of VMs migrated in the rth migration.
κ The migration granularity.
wr,m Theusedspectrumslotratioofthepthpathinthe
rth migration from the mth DC.
w The maximum network congestion ratio.
p The maximum energy consumption of a server.
η The power usage efficiency.
A. Network Model
We model the inter-DC network by a graph, G(V,E,B). Here, V, E and B are the node set,
the link set and the spectrum slot set, respectively. The set of DC nodes is denoted as D. We
assume that all DCs are powered by hybrid energy. We denote D as the set of DCs that does not
have sufficient renewable energy to support their work loads and D as the set of DCs that has
surplus renewable energy. During the migration, D and D correspond to the two sets of DCs
acting as the sources and destinations, respectively. We define κ as the migration granularity,
which determines the maximum routing resource that can be used in one migration to each DC.
B. Energy Model
We assume that there are c servers in the mth DC and each server can support up to ς VMs.
The energy consumption of a server is p when it is active. A server is active as long as it hosts
at least one active VM; otherwise, the server is in the idle state. Here, we assume that an idling
server will be turned off and its energy consumption is zero. Then, ⌈Θ /ς⌉ is the number of
active servers required in the mth DC [5]. We denote η as the power usage effectiveness, which
is defined as the ratio of a DC’s total energy consumption (which includes the facility energy
consumption for cooling, lighting, etc. [19]) to that of the servers in the DC. Given η, a DC’s
total energy consumption is η ·p ·Θ /ς. We denote Υ as the brown energy consumption in
the mth DC. Then,
C. Problem Formulation
In the problem formulation, χm,k is a binary variable. χm,k = 1 indicates that the kth VM in
the mth DC is migrated using the p path with the fth spectrum slot as the starting spectrum slot.
The objectiveof the RE-AIM problem is to minimizethe total brown energy cost in all DCs with
the VM service constraints and the network resource constraints. The problem is formulated as:
s.t. :
VM service constraints :
XXXX p,f X m
χm,k ≤ c ,∀m ∈ D (4)
XXX p,f m s
m′∈D s k p f (5)
XXX p,f m d
Network resource constraints :
wr,m+ p,f ≤ w , ∀m ∈ D ,r ∈ R (6)
p,f p,f p,f
F , ∀i 6= j
F , ∀i 6= j
Here, Eqs. (3)-(5) are the VM service constraints. Eq. (3) constrains that all the VMs should be
hosted in the DCs, while Eqs. (4)-(5) constrain that the total number of VMs in a DC should
not exceed the DCs’ capacity. The network resource constraints are shown in Eqs. (6)-(10).
Eq.(6) constrains the network congestion ratio to be less than w , which is the maximum
network congestion ratio allowed for routing in the network. In Eq. (6), wr,m is the spectrum
slot ratio of the pth path in the rth migration from the mth DC, which is defined as the ratio
of the number of occupied spectrum slots in the pth path to the total number of spectrum slots
of this path. Γr,m is defined as the number of spectrum slots used in the pth path for the rth
migration from the mth DC. Eq.(7) is a link capacity constraint of the network; it constrains the
bandwidth used in migrating VMs not to exceed the capacity of the network resource. Here, b(·)
is the bandwidth requirement in terms of spectrum slots, and f(·) is the index of the starting
spectrum slot of a path. For example, f(χ m,k ) represents the starting spectrum slot index of
the path, which is used by χm,k. Eq.(8) is the spectrum non-overlapping constraint of a path
used by two different VMs in one migration. This constraint must be met for each VM in every
migration;if two VMs use the same spectrum slot in one migration, the total bandwidth allocated
to the two VMs should not exceed the capacity of a spectrum slot; otherwise, each VM must use
a unique spectrum slot. In the migration, the VMs are sorted in ascending order based on their
bandwidth requirement. We assume the VMs are migrated according to an ascending order; for
example, the (k +1)th VM is moved after the kth VM is migrated.
Eqs. (9)-(10) are the spectrum non-overlapping and the continuity constraints [20]. This
spectrum non-overlapping constraint is used for different paths. In these constraints, i and j
represent two different paths used in the migration. Here, F is the upper bound of the total
bandwidth requirement in terms of spectrum slots. δ (∀i 6= j) is a Boolean variable defined in
Eq. (11), which equals 1 if the starting spectrum slot index of the ith path is smaller than that of
the jth path; otherwise, it is 0. We define y(i,j) (∀i 6= j) as a Boolean indicator, which equals 1
if the ith path and the jth path in the migration have at least one common link; otherwise, it is 0.
We give an example to illustrate these equations. If y(i,j) = 1 and δ = 1, Eq. (9) becomes Eq.
(12), which ensures the bandwidth non-overlapping constraint. Eq. (10) is automatically satisfied
in this case.
δ =  (11)
When we provision spectrum slots for requests in the EONs, the path continuity constraint,
spectrum continuity constraint and non-overlapping constraint must be considered. For the path
continuity constraint, a lightpath must use the same subcarriers in the whole path for a request.
For the spectrum continuityconstraint, the used subcarriers must be continuousif a request needs
more than one subcarriers. For the non-overlapping constraint, two different lightpaths must be
assigned with different subcarriers if they have one or more common links. Since we use a path
based method to formulate the RE-AIM problem, the path continuity constraint of the network
is already taken into account.
Themaincontributionofthispaperisconsideringthenetworkinfluenceonthemigrationwhen
we minimize the brown energy consumption of the DCs. In other words, we want to impose a
controllable effect on the network in the migration that leads to less network congestion.
IV. PROBLEM ANALYSIS AND HEURISTIC ALGORITHMS
A. Problem Analysis
TosolvetheRE-AIM problem,boththeenergy costs inDCs and thenetwork resourcerequired
for the migration should be considered. For example, when a DC consumes brown energy, it is
desirable to migrate some VMs to other DCs. The VM migration will introduce additional traffic
to the network. To avoid congesting the network, we have to optimize the number of VMs that
will be migrated and select the routing path for the migration. Therefore, it is challenging to
solve the RE-AIM, which is proven to be NP-hard.
Lemma 1. The RE-AIM problem is NP-hard
Proof: We prove that the RE-AIM problem is NP-hard by reducing any instance of the
multi-processor scheduling problem (MPS) into the RE-AIM problem.
In the RE-AIM problem, without considering the network constraints, the optimal number of
VMs hosted in the DCs can be derived according to the availability of the renewable energy.
However, with the consideration of the network constraints and the background traffic, it is
difficult and impossible to solve the RE-AIM problem online. For the RE-AIM problem, many
VMs are migrated from a set of DCs (source DCs) to another set of DCs (destination DCs).
Therefore, we can model the VM migration problem as a manycast problem. Since the RE-AIM
problem is NP-hard, we propose heuristic algorithms to solve this problem. These algorithms
determine which VM should be migrated to which DC and select a proper routing path in the
network to avoid congesting the network. We consider two network scenarios. The first one is a
network with light traffic load. Under this network scenario, we design Manycast with Shortest
Path Routing (Manycast-SPR) algorithm for VM migrations. The second network scenario is a
network with heavy traffic load. In this case, we propose Manycast Least-Weight Path Routing
(Manycast-LPR) for migrating VMs among DCs.
B. Heuristic Algorithms For Light Work Loads
When the network load is light, there are more availablespectrumslots. It is easy to find a path
with available spectrum slots for the migration requests. Then, a lower computing complexity
algorithm is preferred. Manycast-SPR only uses the shortest path, and thus it is a very simple
algorithm. Hence, Manycast-SPR is expected to provision the inter-DC VM migration requests
in a network with light work loads.
The Manycast-SPR algorithm, as shown in Alg. 1, is to find the shortest routing path that
satisfiestheVMmigrationrequirementandthenetworkresourceconstraints.Inthebeginning,we
input G(V,E,B), Θ and Φ , and then calculate the optimal work loads distribution. Afterward,
we get D, D and D . Then, we collect the migration requests R. Here, our algorithm splits
the manycast requests into many anycast requests r ∈ R. Now, we start to find a source DC s
and a destination DC d for the request r. The migration will try to use the shortest path p from
s to d; the request r is carried out if the network congestion constraint is satisfied; otherwise,
the request is denied. Then, we update D and D for the next request. After many rounds of
migration, if D or D is empty, or Eq. (6) is not satisfied, the migration is completed.
Details of the Manycast-SPR algorithm is described in Algorithm 1. Here, p(·) is a func-
tion which targets to get the path for the migration. The complexity of Manycast-SPR is
O(|B||E|2|R||Q ||D| 2 c ς). Here, O(|D| 2 c ς) is the complexity to determine the optimal work
loads, O(|B|) is the complexity to determine f, and O(|R||Q |) is the complexity in building the
VMset forthemigration.O(|E|2) isthecomplexityofdeterminingthepath p forManycast-SPR.
C. Heuristic Algorithms For Heavy Work Loads
When the work load of the network is heavy, the number of available spectrum slots in the
network is limited. Since Manycast-SPR only uses the shortest path (one path) for routing, it is
impossible for Manycast-SPR to find an available path and spectrum slots in this scenario. Then,
Manycast-SPR may block the migration request, and leads to high brown energy consumption of
DCs. Hence, weproposeanotheralgorithmManycast-LPRto achievebetter routingperformance,
that results in low brown energy consumption. Manycast-LPR checks K-shortest paths from
the source node to the destination node, and picks up the idlest path to serve the requests.
The requests will be provisioned with a higher probability by Manycast-LPR as compared to
Manycast-SPR. In summary, Manycast-LPR is expected to provision the inter-DC VM migration
requests under a heavy work load. It targets to find a path with more available spectrum slots
at the expense of a higher complexity.
Manycast-LPR, as shown in Alg. 2, is to find the least weight routing path that satisfies the
VM migration requirement and the network resource constraints. The main difference between
Manycast-LPR and Manycast-SPR is using different ways to find a path. For Manycast-SPR,
it first determines the source node and the destination node. Manycast-LPR, however, finds the
path first, then uses the path to find the source node and the destination node. The other steps
are almost the same. Since Manycast-LPR should calculate the weights for all node pairs to find
a path, it increases the complexity.
Details of the Manycast-LPR algorithms is described in Algorithm 2. The complexity for
Manycast-LPR is O(K|B||E|2|R||Q ||D| 3 c ς). Here, p(·) is a function which targets to get the
pathforthemigration.O(|D| c ς)isthecomplexitytodeterminetheoptimalworkloads,O(|B|)
is the complexity to determine f, and O(|R||Q |) is the complexity in building the VM set for
the migration. O(K|E|2|D|) is the complexity of determining the path p for Manycast-LPR. The
most complex part is to determine the set of VMs for the migration.
V. PERFORMANCE EVALUATIONS
We evaluate the proposed algorithms for the RE-AIM problem in this section. In order to
make the RE-AIM problem simple, we assume migratory VMs can be completed in one time
slot. The NSFNET topology, shown in Fig. 2, is used for the simulation. There are 14 nodes,
and the DCs are located at D = {3,5,8,10,12} [21], [22]. The DCs are assumed to be equipped
with wind turbines and solar panels, which provide the DCs with renewable energy, as shown
in Fig 2. The constant α is randomly generated from [1.6,3.2] and represents the varying price
of the electric grid. The capacity of a spectrum slot b is set to 12.5Gps. The maximum number
of slots c is set to 300; 300 spectrum slots are available when the network is empty. Assume
ς equals to 10; 10 VMs can be run in one server. K is set to 3, i.e., the maximum number of
shortest paths that can be used in Manycast-LPR is 3. Without losing generality, the average
energy consumption of a VM is assumed to be 1 unit, implying that p equals to 10 units. The
Algorithm 1: Manycast with Shortest Path Routing
Input : G(V,E,B), Θ and Φ ;
Output: D, Q , p(Q ), f(Q ) and Γr , r ∈ R;
1 Build D, D s and D d by the the optimal work loads allocation;
Collect manycast requests R;
3 while D s and D d are not empty do
4 calculate the network congestion ratio for all p, and get w B ;
5 for all nodes s ∈ D s do
6 find s with the max migratory VMs as the source node;
7 for all nodes d ∈ D d do
8 find d with the max available renewable energy as the destination node;
9 get the shortest path p(Q r ) from s to d for the rth migration;
10 build Q r for the rth migration according to p(Q r ) and Eqs. (9)-(10);
if Eq. (6) is satisfied then
12 path p(Q r ) is used to migrate;
13 find the start spectrum slot index f(Q r ) in B ;
get the allocated bandwidth Γr ;
15 update D s and D d ;
VM bandwidth requirement ζ is randomly selected from [1,14], which is convenient for the
simulation. The migration requests are generated by the optimal work loads distribution which
is calculated based on Θ and Φ . The background traffic is randomly generated between node
pairs in the network. The background traffic load is counted as an average of λ, where λ is
an average arrival rate of the requests and 1 is the holding period of each request [21]. Here,
the background traffic arriving process is a poisson process, and the holding time is a negative
exponential distribution. Parameters which are used for the evaluation are summarized in Table
Algorithm 2: Manycast with Least-weight Path Routing
Input : G(V,E,B), Θ and Φ ;
Output: D, Q , p(Q ), f(Q ) and Γr , r ∈ R;
1 Build D, D s and D d by the the optimal work loads allocation;
Collect manycast requests R;
3 while D s and D d are not empty do
4 calculate the network congestion ratio for all p, and get w B ;
5 for all nodes s ∈ D s do
6 for all nodes d ∈ D d do
build K-shortest path set P;
8 for path p ∈ P do
9 get path p(Q r ) with the lowest congestion ratio for the rth migration;
10 build Q r for the rth migration according to p(Q r ) and Eqs. (9)-(10);
if Eq. (6) is satisfied then
12 path p(Q r ) is used to migrate;
13 find the start spectrum slot index f(Q r ) in B;
get the allocated bandwidth Γr ;
15 update D s and D d ;
II.
We run the simulation for 150 times, and exclude the scenario with empty VM requests traffic
load (D 6= ∅ & D 6= ∅). Fig. 3 shows the total cost of brown energy consumption
of the strategy without using renewable energy, Manycast-SPR (κ = 2) and Manycast-LPR
(κ = 2). Apparently, Manycast-SPR and Manycast-LPR can save brown energy substantially.
Manycast-SPR saves about 15% cost of brown energy as compared with the strategy without
migration. Manycast-LPR reduces up to 31% cost of brown energy as compared with the strategy
Fig. 2. NSFNET topology with renewable energy DCs.
without migration. Manycast-LPR has better performance because Manycast-LPR employs the
least weight path p of all node pairs for routing, while Manycast-LPR engages only the short
path p of one node pair.
In order to obtain a better analysis, the running time of Manycast-SPR (κ = 2) and Manycast-
LPR (κ = 2) are shown in Fig. 4. Manycast-SPR spends less time than Manycast-LPR, implying
that Manycast-SPR has a lower complexity and Manycast-LPR has a higher computing com-
plexity. It also illustrates that the time and the final cost value is a trade-off in the evaluation.
Manycast-LPR is more complex and hence incurs a lower brown energy cost.
The results of Manycast-SPR for various κ are described in Fig. 5. The cost of brown energy
consumption keeps increasing when the background traffic increases, because high background
traffic tends to congest the network links and leads to more migration failures. Apparently, a
SIMULATION PARAMETERS
Network topology NSFNET
D {3, 5, 8, 10, 12}
c m 1000 servers
α={α1,α2,...,α m} {2.1,2.5,1.9,2.8,2}
[1000,9000]
p s 10 units, 1 unit for 1 VM in average
c e 300 spectrum slots
κ {2,4,8,16} spectrum slots
λ {40,80,120,160,200,240,280,320}
small κ brings more benefits than a big κ in reducing the energy cost.
Fig. 6 shows the results of Manycast-LPR for various κ, almost the same results as shown in
Fig. 5, but the cost of the brown energy consumption is much less than that in Fig. 5, because
Manycast-LPR can easily find a path which has available bandwidth for migration. Obviously,
Manycast-LPR with κ = 2 achieves the best result with the lowest cost of consumed brown
energy. All these results illustrate that a small κ leads to a lower cost of the brown energy
consumption and a big κ induces a higher cost of the brown energy consumption. This is
because it is difficult to find a path with enough bandwidth for a big κ, when the network has
background traffic. A smaller κ achieves a lower energy cost at the cost of higher complexity.
Figs.7and 8showtherunningtimeofManycast-SPRand thatofManycast-LPRwithdifferent
κ, respectively. We can observe that the computing time is decreased when the traffic load
increases. For the same κ with a given background traffic load, Manycast-SPR consumes more
time than Manycast-LPR does. For either of the two algorithms under a specific background
trafficload, wecan seethattherunningtimeisnearly halvedwhenκis doubled.Hence, asmaller
κ brings a better performance but takes longer time, and a larger κ has worse performance with
a shorter running time.
50 100 150 200 250 300
Background Traffic Load (Erlangs)
Without migration
Manycast−SPR(kappa=2)
Manycast−LPR(kappa=2)
Fig. 3. Total brown energy cost comparison.
VI. CONCLUSION
Datacenters are widely deployed for the increasing demands of data processing and cloud
computing. The energy consumption of DCs will take up 25% of the total ICT energy consump-
tion by 2020. Powering DCs with renewable energy can help save brown energy. However, the
availability of renewable energy varies by locations and changes over time, and DCs’ work loads
demands also vary by locations and time, thus leading to the mismatch between the renewable
energy supplies and the work loads demands in DCs. Inter-DC VM migration brings additional
traffic to the network, and the VM mitigation is constrained by the network capacity, rendering
inter-DC VM migration a great challenge.
This paper addresses the emerging renewable energy-aware inter-DC VM migration problem.
40 80 120 160 200 240 280 320
Background Traffic Load (Erlangs)
Manycast−SPR(kappa=2)
Manycast−LPR(kappa=2)
Fig. 4. Running time comparison.
The main contribution of this paper is to reduce the network influence on the migration while
minimizing the brown energy consumption of the DCs. The RE-AIM problem is formulated and
proven to be NP-hard. Two heuristic algorithms, Manycast-SPR and Manycast-LPR, have been
proposed to solve the RE-AIM problem. Our results show that Manycast-SPR saves about 15%
cost of brown energy as compared with the strategy without migration, while Manycast-LPR
saves about 31% cost of brown energy as compared with the strategy without migration. The
computingtimeofManycast-LPRislongerthanthatofManycast-SPRbecause thecomplexityof
Manycast-LPR is higher than Manycast-SPR. In conclusion, we have demonstrated the viability
50 100 150 200 250 300
Background Traffic Load (Erlangs)
latoT Without migration
Manycast−SPR(kappa=16)
Manycast−SPR(kappa=8)
Manycast−SPR(kappa=4)
Manycast−SPR(kappa=2)
Fig. 5. Total brown energy cost of Manycast-SPR.
of the proposed algorithms in minimizing brown energy consumption in inter-DC migration
without congesting the network.