TECHNICALREPORTINUNIVERSITYOFHELSINKI,FINLAND,2014-01-01 1
Technical Report – Renewable Energy-Aware
Information-Centric Networking
Julien Mineraud, Liang Wang, Sasitharan Balasubramaniam, Senior Member, IEEE
and Jussi Kangasharju, Member, IEEE
Abstract—TheICTindustrytodayisplacedasoneofthemajorconsumersofenergy,whererecentreportshavealsoshownthatthe
industryisamajorcontributortoglobalcarbonemissions.Whilerenewableenergy-awaredatacentershavebeenproposed,these
solutionshavecertainlimitations.Theprimarylimitationisduetothedesignofdatacenterswhichfocusonlarge-sizefacilitieslocated
inselectedlocations.Thispaperaddressesthisproblem,byutilizingin-networkcachingwitheachrouterhavingstorageandbeing
powered by renewable energy sources (wind and solar). Besides placing contents closer to end users, utilizing in-network caching
couldpotentiallyincreaseprobabilityofcapturingrenewableenergyindiversegeographicallocations.Ourproposedsolutionisdual-
layered:onthefirstlayeradistributedgradient-basedroutingprotocolisusedtodiscoverthepathsalongroutersthatarepoweredby
thehighestrenewableenergy,andonthesecondlayer,acachingmechanismwillpullthecontentsfromthedatacentreandplacethem
onroutersofthepathsthatarediscoveredbyourroutingprotocol.Throughourexperimentsonatestbedutilizingrealmeteorological
data,ourproposedsolutionhasdemonstratedincreasedquantityofrenewableenergyconsumption,whilereducingtheworkloadon
thedatacenters.
IndexTerms—renewableenergy,energy-awarerouting,in-networkcaching
1 INTRODUCTION
THE current global energy depletion is a widely de- same time minimize CO
emissions. In particular, as we
bated topic, due largely to the increasing popula- witness increasing developments in renewable energy
tion which has fueled massive industrial growth in the infrastructure, ICT researchers are pursuing new solu-
last few decades. Paralleled to the pressing problem of tions where clean energy could be used as an energy
energy depletion, is the increase in CO emissions [?] source for the Internet infrastructure (e.g. designing
whichhasaffectedtheenvironmentintheformofglobal energy efficient networks). While new solutions have
warming.Theseproblemshavelargelybeenattributedto been proposed for increasing renewable energy sources
the poor planning process and short term goals that we for data centre networks, the limitation of these solu-
ashumanshavetakeninutilizingnaturalresources,over tions are the fact that the number of data centers are
the years. We are now witnessing a closer relationship only localized in small number of locations, which also
betweenICTanditsinfluenceintheenergysector[?],[?]. minimizes the probability of meeting high quantity of
Inparticular,thegrowthoftheInternetisslowlymoving renewable sources (e.g. as we know, renewable energy
up the ranks as a major source for energy consumption is highly dependent on the weather patterns as well as
(10%oftheworldglobalenergyconsumption[?]),which location). However, compressing the size of data centers
is close to other established industries (e.g. airline in- and increasing their distributed locations, will require a
dustry). The wide spread popularity of the Internet has brand new design, which will incur high infrastructure
ledtoanincreasingnumberofdeployedcommunication costs. Therefore, a more feasible and practical solution
networks (e.g. WiFi, WiMAX) providing rich services is required for distributing the source of content stor-
(e.g. Multimedia contents) to end users’ devices. These age, that is flexible, highly dynamic and reactive to the
rich services are usually represented through contents changing weather patterns.
that are placed in high powered data centers [?], which In this paper, we propose a solution that meets this
today is one of the major source of energy consumption objective, by utilizing content routers as a distributed
in the whole Internet infrastructure. source for content storage. Storing contents on the
This new landscape has shifted ICT researchers to- routers provides a number of appealing benefits. Firstly,
wards developing solutions that can improve energy storing contents within the network provides an oppor-
consumption of communication networks, and at the tunity to bring the contents closer to the clients, which
minimizes the need to re-fetch the contents from end
• J. Mineraud, L. Wang and J. Kangasharju are with the Department of data centers. Secondly, the lower costs of storage prices,
ComputerScience,UniversityofHelsinki,Finland. means that changes in the infrastructure costs would be
E-mail:firstname.lastname@cs.helsinki.fi.
minimal in order to enable content caching within the
• S.BalasubramaniamiswiththeDepartmentofElectronicandCommuni-
cationEngineering,TampereUniversityofTechnology,Tampere,Finland. network. However, the main benefit that also suits our
E-mail:sasi.bala@tut.fi proposedsolution,isthefactthatcontentscanbestored
inadistributedmannerandincreasesthedistributionof
1v2836.2141:viXra
TECHNICALREPORTINUNIVERSITYOFHELSINKI,FINLAND,2014-01-01 2
locations and access to wider renewable energy sources 2.1 GreeningtheInternet
(we assume that each router is powered by renewable
Developing ideas for a greener Internet has been inves-
energy infrastructure, which could be a combination of
tigated for a number of years [?], [?], where proposed
wind turbines and solar panels). Therefore, by pulling
solutions include new routing approaches as well as
contents out from the data centers and placing them on
considering renewable energy as a possible source of
contentrouterswhicharepoweredbyrenewableenergy,
power.
wewillhaveanopportunityofaccessinghigherquantity
ofrenewableenergytopowerthecontent,whichinturn
2.1.1 Energy-awareprotocols
can allow us to power-off certain servers in the data
Bolla et al. [?] developed a new approach for next-
centers that may utilize brown energy.
generation backbone network devices that have smart
Thenoveltyofourworkliesintheabilitytomaximize
stand-by primitives through virtualization of the phys-
the use of renewable energy to power storage points for
ical network infrastructure. Their evaluation showed
contents. Our solution is dual-layered:
the ability to manage hardware wakeup and standby
• The first layer uses a gradient-based routing algo- events transparently from the network-layer protocol.
rithm to discover paths along the routers that have
Cianfrani et al. [?] investigated a simple modification of
access to high renewable energy.
a link-state routing protocol to minimize the number of
• The second layer uses a CCN-like [?] in-network links powered-on in a topology. This led to traffic being
caching to cache the contents along the discovered
redirected to a small number of nodes, yielding reduc-
paths.
tions in energy consumption. Solutions based on energy
A thorough evaluation has been conducted using real optimizationtechniqueshavealsobeenproposed.In[?],
renewable energy data, on a real network topology. The an optimization approach was proposed to minimize
evaluationwasvalidatedusinganexperimentaltestbed. the traffic and energy consumption of the network.
Our key findings can be summarized as follows: However,theseproblemsareNP-completewhichmakes
them unrealistic solutions for large-scale network. An
• The combination of our routing and caching is very
important requirement is to have a more adaptive [?]
effective at both increasing use of renewable energy
power-awareroutingmechanismthatconstantlyfollows
as well as reducing traffic in the network (by up
thetrafficbehavior,whilereducingtheenergyconsump-
to 35%) even when the renewable infrastructure
tion without disrupting the QoS requirements of the
differ greatly (each geographical location has its
network [?].
own optimal combination of wind turbine or solar
panel infrastructure depending on availability of
sunlight and wind). 2.1.2 Renewableenergy
• Increaseduseofrenewableenergyinthenetworkis Liu et al. [?] proposed the use of renewable energy
equivalent to reduction of brown energy; our solu- for powering data-centers, including an optimal mix of
tion was able to save brown energy usage between renewablesourcesofenergy,usinga30kW windturbine
10-55%. and a 4 kW solar panel. The authors found the optimal
• We identify trade-offs between the amount of re- energyproportiontobe80%windand20%solar,which
newableenergyandcachingperformanceandshow is mainly due to the extra power than can be generated
how they interact with each other. by a 30 kW wind turbine compared to a 4 kW solar
• Content traffic to data centers can be reduced by panel.Unlike[?],wedonotfocusonasingledatacenter;
24–53% using the adequate caching strategy which instead our goal is to maximize the use of renewable
directly translates into energy savings at the data energy to power the routers within the network.
center.
The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 presents
2.2 ContentCachingStrategies
the related work. Section 3 clearly defines the objectives
Information-centric networking (ICN) [?], [?], [?], [?] has
of our solution, and this is followed by Section 4 which
emerged as a general, network-wide caching solution.
describesourproposedapproach.Section5describesthe
In ICN the contents are cached in the network (e.g., in
resultsofourexperiments.Section6summarizesthepa-
routers), where they are able to serve requests that pass
per, and finally, the appendix describes the meteorologi-
through the routers.
cal background used for our study, and the mechanisms
A number of research works have investigated and
of converting renewable energy to consumable power.
analyzed the performance of ICNs. In [?], Carofiglio et
al. provided an analytical model for data transfers in
2 RELATED WORK ICN.Muscarielloetal.[?]analyzedtheICNperformance
by taking into account different bandwidth and storage
In this section, we will present related work in green limits. The solution proposed by [?] evaluated the ICN
Internet and information-centric caching, as these are performance with realistic traffic mix, showing there
most closely related to our proposed solution. is significant difference between different traffic types
TECHNICALREPORTINUNIVERSITYOFHELSINKI,FINLAND,2014-01-01 3
An informal description of the design problem we
consider is the following:
[Given] (i) a realistic ISP network topology com-
posed of routers and bi-directional links, (ii) an in-
frastructureforrenewableenergyforeachrouter,(iii)
thepowerconsumptionofalldevicesinthenetworks
besides data centers, and finally (iv) a model for
content popularity in function of time.
[Objective] is to (i) determine the impact of inte-
grating renewable energy awareness on the network
and the data center performance, and (ii) if needed,
determine the best trade-off to maximize the reduc-
tion of brown energy for the ISP networks and the
data centers, while maintaining satisfactory content
Fig. 1. Sprintlink USA mainland network. The figure delivery performance for the end users.
shows the network links and the size of the bubbles
The energy consumption model of the ISP’s network
indicates the size of the POP. The placement of data
devices is derived from the study of Chabarek et al. [?],
centersisexplainedinSection5.
which was extended from the model proposed initially
by Gupta and Singh [?]. The model proposed by [?]
was developed by empirically monitoring the energy
(Web, file sharing, UGC, VoD, etc.). In all these solu-
consumption of chassis and line-cards in two Cisco
tions, only simple Least Recently Used (LRU) approach
routers (Cisco GSR 12008 and 7507) under various traffic
was used as a caching strategy. Age and popularity-
loads. Results from the experiments showed that the
based methods have also been investigated, where so-
chassis is the biggest consumer of energy while the line-
lutions have been developed to placing contents closer
cards consume less.
to the edge caches [?], [?]. In [?], an investigation was
In this paper, a new energy consumption model for
conducted on the allocation of cache sizes across the
routershasbeendevelopedtoincorporateuseofrenew-
ICN, where results from the analysis showed that the
able energy. [?]. The general energy model for a router’s
node’scachesizeshouldbeproportionaltoitsdegree.In
power consumption is represented as:
our previous work [?], we investigated effects of cache
admission policies and cooperative caching and found
them to be crucial towards good caching performance. (cid:88)
The variant of ICN that we consider in this paper 0 i i
is based on [?], which bears a close resemblance to i=1
CCN/NDN [?], in that any router on the path of a
where X is the vector of chassis and line-cards energy
request may answer it, if it has the content cached.
models, as well as the traffic configuration of the router.
Our work in this paper differs markedly from the
CC(X ) is the energy consumption for the chassis, N
work above. Our focus is not on optimizing caching 0
is the number of line-cards of router X, TP(X ) is the
performance, but instead we combine caching with re- i
energyconsumptionduetotrafficontheline-cardi,and
newable energy-aware routing and evaluate the com-
LCC(X ) is the line-card energy consumption.
binedsolutionintermsofitsabilitytoexploitrenewable i
Since the impact of traffic load on the routers does
energy available at different routers in the network, as
not fluctuate significantly, the TP(X ) can be omitted in
well as having a positive influence on the data centers’ i
equation 1, leading to:
energy savings.
3 PROBLEM STATEMENT (cid:88)
We now define our problem statement, and models that
we use to represent the renewable energy consumption
by the routers of the network. We consider an Internet
In our energy consumption model, we assume that a
ServiceProvider(ISP)network(suchasFig.1),inwhich
router has the ability to power-off line-cards, and the
nodes may be powered partially from renewable energy
entire router will be powered-off when all its line-cards
sources, where this source could be a combination of
areoff.Therefore,thepowerconsumptionmodelattime
wind and solar. The ISP network connects the data t can be represented as follows:
centers and the users access points, which serve as the
source and destination points for traffic in the network.
The remaining routers in the ISP network serve as PC(X,t)=x CC(X )+ x LCC(X ) (3)
0,t 0 i,t i
transport nodes that form the ISP’s mesh topology.
TECHNICALREPORTINUNIVERSITYOFHELSINKI,FINLAND,2014-01-01 4
x = i=1 i,t
1 otherwise
0 if X is powered-off at time t
1 if X is powered-on at time t
Consequently, the configuration of each x is added
tothevectorX.LetX0 bethevectorofchassisandline-
cards models, where all x =x0 =1.
LetusassumethateachrouterX wouldhaveasource Fig. 2. Illustration of proposed approach, demonstrating
of renewable energy rePC(X,t) at time t: path discovery as weather condition changes ((a) to (b)).
Once paths are discovered, contents C1 and C2 are
w s cachedonroutersalongthediscoveredpaths.
where P (X,t) and P (X,t) are respectively the power
generated from wind and solar energy at time t. More
details can be found in the appendix on the methods
used to calculate rePC(X,t) using real meteorological
data.
By subtracting rePC(X,t) from PC(x), we obtain
brPC(X,t), the brown energy consumed by router X
at time t.
brPC(X,t)=PC(X0,t)−rePC(X,t) (a)Windspeed (b)GHI
with brPC(X,t)=0, if rePC(X,t)≥PC(X0,t) (5) Fig.3. AverageannualwindspeedandGlobalHorizontal
Irradiance in USA. Brighter colors indicate higher avail-
Our aim in this paper is to analyse the impacts of ability.
favoring routers powered by renewable energy in order
to facilitate the powering-off of the unused routers that
may be powered by brown energy. Therefore, we can
to high renewable energy. Once the paths are discov-
formulate the brown energy reduction of the entire net-
ered, contents will be pulled from the data centre and
work σ at time t by calculating the total brown energy
n populated along the discovered paths. However, these
consumption of the network when unused devices are
pathswillchangeastheweatherpatternchanges,which
powered-on or off.
implicitlymovesthecontentstonewlocationsthathave
(cid:88)(cid:88) access to high renewable energy. At the same time,
certain routers that are powered by “brown” energy
σ =1− ∀X ∀t (6) maybeunused,whichcouldleadtoasituationwherewe
n (cid:88)(cid:88)
brPC(X0,t)
can power-off these routers to minimize overall brown
∀X ∀t energy. Therefore, as shown in Fig. 2, the proposed
Let α, α ∈ [0,1] be the factor that favor renewable approach is dual-layered.
energy, and where σ (α) and σ (α) are respectively the Firstly, a gradient-based routing protocol discovers
brown energy reduction utility functions of the network the path of routers powered by the highest amount of
and the data centers derived from the choice of α. In renewable energy, and secondly a CCN-like [?] caching
the subsequent sections we will show how α is used approach populates the routers of the discovered path
in our renewable energy aware gradient-based routing withcontentsbasedonacachingstrategy.Therefore,the
algorithm. While our paper does not focus on the utility approach maximizes the dynamic properties of caching,
functionofthedatacenters,wediscussthetrade-offthat where contents can be moved to different locations,
canbeobtainedbychangingαandshowthattheαvalue and in this particular case to locations that provide the
can be optimized according to seasonal changes. highest amount of green energy.
Toconclude,wewanttomaximizeσ (α)+σ (α),while Animportantfactorthataffectstheperformanceofre-
minimizing the impact on the performance for the end newable energy production is the location. For instance,
users. Fig. 3 shows the average annual wind speed and Global
Horizontal Irradiance in the USA. As shown by these
two figures, the available energy sources greatly differ
4 PROPOSED SOLUTION
depending on the locations of routers. Cities such as
Fig. 2 shows an example of our proposed approach, New York or San Jose exhibits dissimilar weather con-
where routes are discovered via routers with access ditions, including predictability in the weather patterns.
TECHNICALREPORTINUNIVERSITYOFHELSINKI,FINLAND,2014-01-01 5
Moredetailedinformationcanbefoundintheappendix Algorithm 1 Selection of next hop during discovery
which discusses the quantity of wind and solar energy Require: Destination d, incoming neighbour iN
for specific cities. While the production of renewable 1: u← current node
energyfluctuatesfordifferentlocations,thisismostideal 2: qIn← list of incoming neighbours
for our gradient-based routing protocol. The gradient- 3: qOut← list of outgoing neighbours
based routing protocol, which is highly scalable and 4: if iN is not nil then
distributed, can discover routes by adapting to these 5: qIn←qIn+iN
weather conditions in order to maximize the renewable 6: end if
energy. 7: nextHop←nil
The metric used to determine the greenest router is 8: bestG←−1
based on the highest ratio of renewable energy con- 9: for neighbor v of u do
sumed compared to total energy requirements of the 10: if v ∈/ qIn∪qOut and Gd u (v)>bestG then
router g(X,t) (this is also termed green ratio). This ratio 11: bestG←Gd u (v)
is calculated according to equation 7: 12: nextHop←v
(cid:40) 13: end if
1 if rePC(X,t)≥PC(X,t)
g(X,t)= (7) 14: end for
PC(X,t) otherwise 15: if nextHop is nil then
16: repeat
Examples of the variations of the green ratio for
17: nextHop←last(qIn)
different locations are presented in Fig. 14i-14l. Every
18: until nextHop∈/ qOut
router in the network locally broadcasts messages to
19: end if
its one-hop neighbors regarding the ratio of renewable
20: if nextHop is not nil then
energy that it has available. The greenest routers, will in
21: qOut←qOut+nextHop
turnmaximizetheproductionofpacketsprocessedwith
renewable energy (green packets). 22: end if
Thesubsequentsections,wedescribeourroutingpro- 23: return nextHop
tocol and caching strategies in more detail.
maximizingcachingperformance.Unlikethenormalized
4.1 Routing
hopcountvalueusedin[?],wheretheequationforhd(j)
Our routing protocol, called Renewable energy-aware Pa- is hd(j) = 1 − wd(j) , with Wd = max(wd(k)),∀k, the
rameterized Gradient Based Routing (rePGBR), is extended i Wd
new normalized hop count value of rePGBR provides
from our original Parameterized Gradient Based Routing
fast destination discovery in a scalable manner [?]. The
(PGBR) protocol [?]. The original PGBR is a fully dis-
modified hd(j) is represented as:
tributed bio-inspired routing protocol, that is inspired i
by the Bacterial Chemotaxis process. Through the process max(wd(k))−wd(j)
hd(j)= i i ,∀k neighbours of i
of Chemotaxis, bacteria are able to mobilize themselves i max(wd(k))−min(wd(k))
towards a destination point by sniffing a chemical gra- (9)
dient emitted from the destination node. This same where wd(k) represents the weight of node k in the
bacteriamotilityprincipleisusedfortherePGBRrouting shortest path tree for root d, the destination.
algorithm, where the routes are discovered by hopping Routingisperformedbyfirstdiscoveringthepathbe-
from node to node along the path with the highest tween a source-destination pair, by sending a discovery
gradient, until it reaches the destination. The benefit packet that migrates hop-by-hop, selecting the link with
of the rePGBR algorithm, includes (i) high scalability, thehighestgradientvalue.Algorithm1describeshowto
(ii) no requirements for pre-knowledge of the traffic choosethenexthopduringdiscovery.Unliketheoriginal
demand, and (iii) the ability to efficiently discover paths PGBRwherethepathwasstoredinthediscoverypacket,
to contents favoring the usage of renewable energy. rePGBR stores local information in routers. This local
The gradient field equation is represented as follows: information enables the discovery to avoid loops (i.e.
Gd(j)=αg(j)+(1−α)hd(j), 0≤α≤1 (8) using list of incoming and outgoing neighbours, line 10)
i i and performs back-tracking (i.e. lines 15 to 19) in a fully
where Gd(j) represents the gradient value of the link and efficient distributed manner.
i → j for a packet to destination d, g(j) (e.g. equation Furthermore, this discovery process is depicted in
7) represents the green ratio value of neighbor node j, Fig. 4a and Fig. 4b illustrates the discovery process
and hd(j) represents the normalized hop count value of dynamically changing to avoid brown hot-spot areas
neighbor node j of node i for destination d. The α, as (e.g. discovery avoids brown node 5 due to the gradient
specified in Section 3, represents the weighting param- field changes). Once the weather conditions change, a
eter between the shortest path and the greenest path to new discovery is issued. However, during the discovery
thecontentlocation,andisakeyparameterinevaluating process, the existing path remains stable until the new
the trade-off between maximizing green energy and discoveredpathisadoptedsequentiallyasthediscovery
TECHNICALREPORTINUNIVERSITYOFHELSINKI,FINLAND,2014-01-01 6
Gc 1(2)=0.4 Algorithm 2 Admission Policy in Cachedbit Strategy
Source 1 2 3 1: Input: Data chunk C i
Gc Gc 4(2)=0.65 Gc 5(3)=0.75 6 Destination 2: Output: Caching decision
Gc 4(5)=0.7
(6)=0.85 3
:
:
(a) Discovery of paths along gradient field formed by 5: if x<1/n then
routerswithhighrenewableenergy. 6: if Cache is full then
7: Evict entry based on LRU
Gc 1(2)=0.4 Gc 2(3)=0.6
Gc 3(6)=0.8
:
:
ata chunk C i
Source 1 2 3
10: Set cached bit
G 1 c (4)=
6 Destination 1
:
Gc 4(5)=0.65 13: Forward chunk to destination
(b) Gradient field modification due to changes in re-
newableenergyperformance.
Fig.4. RoutediscoveryprocessforrePGBR. Algorithm 3 Cooperation Policy in NbSC Strategy
1: Input: Data request R i
2: Output: Response decision
message backtracks to the source using the local infor- 3: if C i is cached for R i then
mation described in Algorithm 1. 4: Reply with C i
The utilization of the weighting parameter α provides 5: end if
rePGBR with robustness in supporting multiple objec- 6: if C i is not cached for R i then
tives. For instance, when α is set to a low value (e.g. 7: if Neighbor N i cached C i for R i then
0.2), the discovered path is biased towards the shortest 8: Redirect R i to N i
routes(moreweightisattributedtothehopcount)while 9: else
a larger value would tend to favor greener routes. As a 10: Forward R i to next hop
result, the gradient field equation of rePGBR is flexible 11: end if
andcanexhibitmultiplebehaviorsbyonlymanipulating 12: end if
oneparametertoprovidethedesiredgreenperformance
of the network. This paper aims to investigate the most
optimum α, that could maximize the savings of brown
energy usage of the full network, as well as having a
decides locally whether to cache the packet or not, with
positive influence on the data centers’ energy savings. a probability of 1/n where n is the length of the path
from the client to the server (or ingress router to egress
4.2 Caching router for an intermediate network). As discussed in [?],
the length of the path can be determined by observing
This section will describe the second component of our
packets that pass through a router; global knowledge
solution, which is the caching process of contents along
the paths discovered by rePGBR. We used three caching is not required. In this case, the caches use LRU as a
replacementpolicyforevictingthecontents.Algorithm2
strategies described in [?]. The work in [?] focused on
describes the admission policy for the Cachedbit strat-
evaluating these strategies purely on caching perfor-
egy.
manceacrossawiderangeofnetworks.Inthispaper,we
focus on using these caching strategies to maximize the Neighbor Search (NbSC): NbSC is otherwise simi-
use of renewable energy for specific points of storage, lar to Cachedbit, except that routers periodically send
and the suitability of these strategies in combination Bloom filters of their contents to their neighbor routers.
with the adapted rePGBR routing algorithm. Below we When a router experiences a miss, it can check if any
describe the three strategies and briefly recap the main of its neighbors has the requested packet. If there are
resultsfrom [?]. Intermsof differentinformation-centric multiple matches, the request will be redirected to a
architectures,ourcachingstrategieswouldbemostsuit- random neighbor. We also investigated a variant which
able for a CCN/NDN-like architecture [?]. redirects requests to the greenest neighbor.
ALL:ALListhesimplestcachingstrategy,whereeach
The results in [?] showed that a Cachedbit-like admis-
router tries to cache all the packets that passes through,
sion policy is needed to get good caching performance,
and uses LRU algorithm to evict packets if the cache is
but that the addition of NbSC reduces network traffic
full. There is no cooperation between the routers.
considerably.
Cachedbit:Cachedbitusesonebitinthepacketheader
to indicate whether the packet has already been cached Algorithm 3 describes the cooperation policy in the
by a router along the path. If the bit is not set, a router algorithm that implements NbSC.
TECHNICALREPORTINUNIVERSITYOFHELSINKI,FINLAND,2014-01-01 7
5 EXPERIMENTATION which will better represent a realistic scenario where
green renewable energy farms are built gradually (to
In order to validate our proposed approach, we have limitthecostofinstallation).Moredetailsonthesettings
conducted experiments on a testbed using the weather can be found in the appendix.
data described in the appendix. The network evaluated The following metrics have been used to evaluate
on our testbed is based on the Sprint router-level topol- our proposed solution for the two scenarios previously
ogy from the Rocketfuel project [?]. The Sprint network described:
consists of 278 routers geographically distributed in 27
• Hit Rate: Determines the fraction of requests that
cities in U.S. mainland (meteorological data from [?]
are served by the content routers. Since all objects
is available only for the U.S. mainland locations). For
are of the same size, the hit rate is also the byte
the experiment, the top 40 highest degree nodes are
hit rate. Hit rate shows how much external traffic is
connected to content servers, while the 80 routers with
saved by caching, thus leading to potential energy
the lowest degrees are connected to the clients. Fig. 1
savings for the data centers.
shows the resulting topology where routers located in
• FootprintReduction:Networkfootprintistheprod-
the same city are grouped (i.e. the size of the city
uct of the amount of content and the network
increaseswiththenumberofrouters).Forinstance,Ana-
distance from which the content was retrieved. It
heim, Chicago, New York and Dallas are the cities with
measures the amount of internal traffic reduction,
thehighestnumberofrouters.Thecolorofthecities,on
where a smaller footprint (larger reduction) means
the other hand, represents the number of servers (e.g.
less traffic within the network.
nodes which have the highest connectivity). A total of
• Green/brown ratio: Proportion of the packets by
10 cities have servers resulting in 10 data centers that
the router within an hour that has been processed
areinterconnectedthroughtheISPnetwork.Onceagain,
usingrenewableenergytothepacketsthathasbeen
Anaheim, Chicago and New York are the three cities
processed using fossil fuel energy.
with the highest number of servers.
• Reduction of brown packets: Reduction of brown
The remaining routers are used as intermediate nodes
packets that has been processed within an hour
for the routing algorithm. In our experimental setup,
using fossil fuel energy.
theclientswillcontinuallyrequestdatafromtheservers
• Brown energy savings: The amount of brown en-
(request rate depends on the traffic pattern). While tests
ergy that has been saved by powering-off unused
have been conducted for three different traffic patterns,
routers. In the case of a neighbouring router being
which includes (i) real trace from the TOTEM project
unused, the line-card connecting the two routers is
[?], (ii) trace from the gravity model [?], and (iii) con-
considered to be powered-off. The brown energy
stant traffic pattern, there was no significant difference
savings is calculated using equation 6.
between these traffic patterns in terms of performance.
While hit rate and the footprint reduction are mainly
Therefore, we only show the results of our experiments
caching metrics, the green/brown ratio, eduction of
based on a constant traffic pattern.
brown processed packets and the brown energy savings
The request trace for each client is generated from
are representing the performances of the solution to
a real DNS trace of a university lab. We sorted the
successfully address the energy efficiency requirements.
requested DNS names according to their popularity and
Hit rate also represents the reduction on traffic towards
removed the top 20 entries. The request pattern from
data centers and, therefore, indicates potential energy
this trace follows a Zipf distribution with parameter
savings at the data center.
0.9, which is very close to real-life distribution shown
in [?]. Our trace requests chunks of content, which are
5.1 Testbedsetup
assumed to be independent of each other. We assigned
All the experiments are performed on a cluster of 240
each router with a storage capacity of 4 gigabytes. The
Dell PowerEdge M610 nodes. Each node has 2 quad-
power requirements of every router has been set using
core CPUs, 32GB memory, and is connected to a 10-
themeasurementsofaCisco7507[?]:thebasicchassisre-
Gbit network. All the nodes run Ubuntu SMP with
quiring 210W and each line-card an additional 70W (i.e.
arouterwith4line-cardsconsumes210+4∗70=490W). 2.6.32 kernel. The experimental platform we used in the
evaluation is capable of simulating realistic routers, and
We investigated two scenarios: In scenario A, the
allocating necessary physical resources according to the
renewable energy infrastructure of the routers are set
simulated network size. In the event that the network
to supply twice the energy required by the router
(i.e. rePC(X,t) = 2PC(X0,t)) at most. Therefore, the size is larger than the actual number of nodes in the
cluster, multiple routers will be multiplexed onto one
changes of weather conditions greatly modify the green
node.
ratio g(X,t). This scenario is defined as the static capac-
ities scenario. In scenario B, the infrastructure supplies
5.2 Networkperformance
up to three times the energy required by the routers.
The different size of infrastructures implies that some As described earlier, the benefit of the rePGBR routing
routers are mostly fully brown and others mostly green, algorithm is in the ability of manipulating α to suit
TECHNICALREPORTINUNIVERSITYOFHELSINKI,FINLAND,2014-01-01 8
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
Winter -0.2
Summer -0.4
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
Winter -0.2
Summer -0.4
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
(b)Cachedbit
Fig.5. VaryingαofrePGBRroutingandevaluatingitsimpactonfootprintreductionforscenarioA.
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
Winter -0.2
Summer -0.4
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
Winter -0.2
Summer -0.4
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
(b)Cachedbit
Fig.6. VaryingαofrePGBRroutingandevaluatingitsimpactonfootprintreductionforscenarioB.
any particular objective. In our scenarios, we would 5.2.1 Footprintreduction
ideally like to select an α that provides the greenest
We previously mentioned that the footprint reduction is
routes, without compromising on the caching perfor-
arelevantmetricfortheISP,showingtheimprovements
mance. Therefore, we have conducted tests to select the
initsinternaltraffic.Fig.5showsthefootprintreduction
most appropriated α for different seasons in the year. In as a function of α for the four seasons and for each
total, we investigated 4 weeks throughout the year, and
caching strategies. For all the caching strategies, we see
the periods of these weeks are as follows (Winter: 1st that as α increases, the footprint reduction decreases.
- 7th, January; Spring: 6th - 12th, April; Summer: 11th - First the degradation is limited (when α ≤ 0.3). The
27th,July;Fall:21st-27th,October).TheweeksofSpring
reason for this positive correlation is because higher
and Fall have been selected at different times to ensure α value leads to longer paths along routers with high
that the weather patterns would not be similar. Fall is
green ratio, which further increases the footprint of
on the verge of Winter while Spring is slightly milder.
the network. The results also show NbSC is far more
superior than Cachedbit and ALL. The same behavior is
observed for scenario B and Fig. 6 confirms this.
We first evaluate the different caching strategies with
In particular, after α reaches 0.4, the footprint reduc-
respecttovaryingαvaluesforscenariosAandB.Below
tion drops significantly. When the footprint reduction
we will look more closely at performance of rePGBR in
reaches zero, this means the paths are so long that
these conditions.
caching strategies can no longer reduce intra-network
traffic.Obviously,cachingstillhappens,butthenetben-
We begin first by evaluating the different caching efit is zero. From the figure, we can see this threshold is
strategies with respect to varying α values. As previ- about0.8forNbSC(e.g.Fig.6c)andlowerfortheothers
ously mentioned, we focused on 5 metrics including (e.g. Fig. 6a and 6b). The degradation of the footprint
footprint reduction (e.g. Fig. 5 and 6), hit rate (e.g. reduction varies with the seasons but the behavior is
Fig. 11), green/brown ratio and the reduction of brown similar. Although the behaviour is similar, we can see
processed packets (e.g. Fig. 7), as well as the brown that for all caching strategies there are improvements in
energysavingsofthenetwork(e.g.Fig.8and9).Allthe footprint reduction in the warm seasons. This improve-
results are shown using 5 kW wind turbines, but with ment is visible when α is greater than 0.6 and 0.4 for
the nodes having different renewable energy architec- scenario A and B, respectively. An increase of the foot-
tures(scenariosAorB).Belowwewilllookmoreclosely print reduction happens when α = 1, due to inefficient
at the performance of the solution in these conditions. routediscoveriesthatarenotabletoupdateroutingtable
TECHNICALREPORTINUNIVERSITYOFHELSINKI,FINLAND,2014-01-01 9
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
nworb/neerG
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
(a)ALL-Green/brownratio
nworb/neerG
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
(b)Cachedbit-Green/brownratio
nworb/neerG
(c)NbSC-Green/brownratio
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
(d)ALL-Reductionofbrownpack-
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
(e)Cachedbit-Reductionofbrown
(f) NbSC - Reduction of brown
Fig. 7. Varying α of rePGBR routing and evaluating its impact on green/brown ratio and reduction of brown packets
forscenarioA.
information with the latest renewable energy values. As
aconsequence,requestsareservedusingoutdatedpaths 55
50 increasing slightly the chances of a cache hit. 45
As we mentioned before, we considered a variant of 35
NbSCwhichselectstheneighborrouterwiththehighest 25
20 greenratio,insteadofarandomneighborwhenmultiple 15
matches are found. However, we found out that this 5
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
modification has no visible effect on the performance.
This is mainly because routers are co-located at POPs
and thus share the same weather pattern among many
(but not all) neighbors.
We observe a large performance difference between
NbSC and the others even when using only the shortest
path (with α = 0; ALL and Cachedbit has a footprint
reductionof21%and25%,respectively,whileNbSChas
a footprint reduction of 32% for the static and random
scenarios). The advantage of NbSC is at least 7% higher
thanCachedbitandincreaseswithα,upto23%and18%,
respectively for scenarios A and B.
5.2.2 Improvingnetwork’sgreenness
Fig. 7 shows the ratio of green/brown packets and
the reduction of brown packets as a function of α for
scenario A. In particular, Fig. 7a - 7c show a difference
between the seasons for the green/brown ratio but very
little between the caching strategies. This is due to the
importance of rePGBR route discovery to enhance the
green processing of the packets. In addition, we can
see that the ratio is greater for the warm seasons (i.e.
Summer and Spring) than for the cold seasons. One
Spring 20 Summer 15
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
(a) No caching / ALL /
Spring Summer
Fig. 8. Varying α of rePGBR routing and evaluating its
impactonbrownenergysavingsforscenarioA.
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
Winter Spring 20
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
(a) No caching / ALL /
Winter Spring
Fig. 9. Varying α of rePGBR routing and evaluating its
impactonbrownenergysavingsforscenarioB.
can see that the performance of the warm seasons are
quite similar compared to those for the cold seasons.
TECHNICALREPORTINUNIVERSITYOFHELSINKI,FINLAND,2014-01-01 10
As explained in the appendix, the warm seasons tend In detail, Fig. 10a shows the footprint reduction of
to be more reliable (the impact of the solar energy is Cachedbit and NbSC. The results of ALL behave sim-
higher than the wind energy) and predictable (diurnal ilarly to Cachedbit’s, although yield less gains, and
phases) which leads the routing protocol to maximize as a consequence have been omitted. The results are
the discovery of highly green routes. Fig. 7a - 7c show showing the high stability of NbSC which maintains a
that the ratio of green/brown packets slowly increases high footprint reduction of 32% while Cachedbit’s per-
withα.Asshowninthefigures,thesignificantimprove- formance are highly variable throughout the days. The
ment (peak) starts at approximately 0.4 and ends at 0.9. performances of the two caching strategies are similar
Therefore,thisistherangeofαvaluesthatmaximizethe for the brown energy savings (e.g. Fig. 10b) and the
green processing of packets in the network. However, green/brown ratio (e.g. Fig. 10c) and distinctively show
the ratio of green/brown packets is insufficient without a trend that maps to the sun pattern (see appendix).
showingthereductionofbrownpacketsasafunctionof In other words, the performances of the caching strate-
α,whichareshowninFig.7d-7f.Theresultsshowthat gies drastically increase during the sunny hours. As
the number of brown packets almost linearly decreases previously mentioned, the sunny hours bring stability
asαincreases,whichcomfortsthefactthatthenetwork’s in the route discovery, thus improving the solution’s
greenness increases when 0.4 ≤ α ≤ 0.9. Finally, the performances. Lastly, Fig. 10b shows the reduction of
results also show that NbSC outperforms other caching brown packets as a function of time, where the daytime
strategies for every α. pattern is not visible, and performances of Cachebit and
Experimental results show similar trends for scenario NbSC are fluctuating respectively around 20.5% and
B, that differ only from the green/brown packet ratio 26.5%.
induced by the scenario definition. In the appendix, we
described how the capacities influence on the greenness
5.3 Impactofthesolutionondatacenters
of the routers, where certain routers are more green that
othersirrespectiveoftheweatherconditions.Thisinturn In order to improve energy savings in the data centers,
limits the variety of routes discovered by rePGBR. we assume that a non-negligible improvement could be
UsingtheabilityofrePGBRtomaximizethediscovery obtained by reducing the number of requests directly
of green routes, could leave to a number of routers left served by the servers of the data centers. Unlike the
unused. Fig. 8 and 9 shows the brown energy savings routers’ energy consumption where the workload in-
thatcouldbeachievediftheserouterswerepowered-off. duced by traffic does not modify the energy consumed,
ThebestsavingsareobtainedwhenrePGBRgoesforthe the data centers energy consumption are known to vary
shortestroutes,anddecreasesasαincreases.Theperfor- with their workloads. Our solution, combining the energy
mancesofALL,Cachedbitandnocachingaresimilarbe- savings at the ISP using greener routes and efficient
causealltheroutersdiscoveredbydecreasingαareused caching strategies, could greatly improves the workload
independently of the caching strategy. However, NbSC of the data centers by serving content cached in the
presents a significant disadvantage where the brown ISP’s routers, thus reducing their energy requirements
energy savings are reducing much faster with regards (i.e. maximizing σ d (α) defined in Section 3).
to α. For Cachedbit, the brown energy savings are quite Weseethatasαincreases,thehitratealsoincreases,as
stable until α reaches 0.4, while NbSC maintains high showninFig.11.Thereasonforthispositivecorrelation
energy savings only until 0.2. To summarize, the brown is because higher α value leads to longer paths along
energy savings of the network varies between 10% and routers with high green ratio, which further increases
55% which could lead to significant improvement of the the possibility of cache-hit along the path. The results
network’s greenness. For scenario B, the values of α alsoshowNbSCisfarmoresuperiorthantheCachedbit
that maintain high energy savings are larger than for and ALL, with a respective gains of over 15% and 20%
scenario A. For instance, Cachedbit is able to maintain improvementforscenarioB.ExperimentsforscenarioA
brownenergysavingsover50%whenαislowerorequal have shown similar gains and, thus have been omitted.
to 0.5 and NbSC to 0.3 for all seasons. As shown in Furthermore, the seasonal differences are also negligi-
Fig. 8 and 9, the impact of seasonal weather conditions ble, which shows that the effectiveness of the caching
is not significant on the brown energy savings, because strategies defined by α would deliver predictable per-
these savings are highly dependent on rePGBR route formances.
discoveries. The hourly performances of Cachedbit and NbSC to
improve hit rateare depicted in Fig. 12 fora selection of
5.2.3 Hourlyperformance α values on the two first days of Spring. The α values
Fig. 10 shows the 4 metrics described above for Cached- have been selected to show the hit rate performances
bit and NbSC as a function of time for the first 48 when (i) the greenness of the ISP network is at its peak
hours of Spring for scenario B. The α values used (where α equal to 0.3 and 0.5 for NbSC and Cachedbit,
for each caching strategy correspond to the greenest α respectively) or when (ii) the hit rate performance is at
maintainingbrownenergysavingsabove50%,whichare the maximum (with α=0.9 for both strategies). Fig. 12
respectively0.5and0.3forCachedbitandNbSC(Fig.9). shows that hit rate performances are very stable and do
TECHNICALREPORTINUNIVERSITYOFHELSINKI,FINLAND,2014-01-01 11
12pm 12am 12pm 12am 12pm
Cachedbit (α = 0.5) 70
NbSC (α = 0.3) 68
12pm 12am 12pm 12am 12pm
(a)Footprintreduction
Cachedbit (α = 0.5)
NbSC (α = 0.3) 2
12pm 12am 12pm 12am 12pm
(b)Brownenergysavings
nworb/neerG
Cachedbit (α = 0.5) 28
NbSC (α = 0.3) 27
12pm 12am 12pm 12am 12pm
(c)Green/brownratio
Cachedbit (α = 0.5)
NbSC (α = 0.3)
(d) Reduction of brown pack-
Fig.10. PerformancesofCachedbitandNbSCwithrespecttotimeduringthetwofirstdaysofSpringforscenarioB.
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
Winter 0.33
Spring 0.325
Summer 0.32 Fall 0.315
0.305 0.3 0.295
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
Winter 0.53
Spring 0.52
Summer 0.51 Fall
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
(b)Cachedbit
tiH Winter Spring
Fig.11. VaryingαofrePGBRroutingandevaluatingitsimpactonhitrateforscenarioB.
12pm 12am 12pm 12am 12pm
5.4 Discussion
Cachedbit (α = 0.9) Cachedbit (α = 0.5)
As stated in Section 3, the aim of the paper is to
NbSC (α = 0.9) NbSC (α = 0.3) demonstrate that using renewable energy awareness in
routing at the ISP’s network could reduce the energy
consumption from fossil fuels of the network and the
data centers serving user’s requests. The network op-
erator, could with the choice of a single parameter α
and a caching strategy, maximize the brown energy
savings of the network from an end-to-end perspective
(i.e. including data centers), without compromising the
performance of end user’s access to contents.
Fig. 12. Hit rate performances of Cachedbit and NbSC • User-observed content delivery performance: In
withrespecttotimeduringthetwofirstdaysofSpringfor this paper, we assume that delivery performance is
scenarioB. positivelycorrelatedwithfootprintreduction.Fig.5
and6showedthattheperformancewoulddecrease
as the renewable energy awareness increases, and
this is observable for all caching strategies. There
are even α values where the performance is worse
not vary according to the weather conditions. However, than not using any caching (i.e. footprint reduction
onecanobservethatCachedbitisconstantlyperforming below 0). For all caching strategies, the delivery
worse than NbSC with a loss of 20% on average in both performanceismaximalwhentheenergyawareness
cases (i and ii). isnil.Fortunately,theperformanceismaintainedfor
lower α values, and using NbSC further maximizes
As a result, increasing renewable energy awareness the delivery performance.
in routing enhances caching performances of the net- • Network greenness: Maximizing network’s green-
work, thus resulting on a positive impact on the data ness includes minimizing use of brown energy by
centers’workload.Thisinturncouldleadtodatacenters powering-offunusedroutersandreducingthenum-
reducing their energy consumption for unused servers ber of brown packets. Unfortunately, these perfor-
that hold contents which are already cached within the mances are not achievable using the same α values
network. andcachingstrategies.Ontheonehand,inorderto
TECHNICALREPORTINUNIVERSITYOFHELSINKI,FINLAND,2014-01-01 12
maximizethebrownenergysavingsofthenetwork,
the smallest α values and Cachedbit are preferable. 35 30
On the other hand, maximal reduction of brown 25
packets is obtained with high α values and NbSC. 20 15
Depending on the requirements of the network, 10
the operator would have to carefully choose the 5
appropriatecombinationtobestfulfillthenetwork’s
≤34 6 8 10 12 ≥14
objectives.
• Data center greenness: Improving caching perfor-
mances also improves the hit rate and thus helps
reduce the workload on data centers. Increasing α
improves the hit rate, while using NbSC always
increases the performances by an additional 20%.
Therefore, the choice of the caching strategy and α
value could produce a positive trade-off, where benefits
would be maximized.
6 CONCLUSION
The popularity of the Internet today has led to
widespread deployment of ICT infrastructures, which
is consuming considerable quantity of energy. In re-
cent years, a new research initiative towards enhancing
renewable energy aware ICT infrastructure has been
proposed. In this paper, we propose a renewable energy
aware CCN, where routers are powered directly by
wind and/or solar energy. The proposed approach is
composed of two components, which includes a novel
gradient-based routing algorithm that discovers paths
along routers powered by high renewable energy, fol-
lowed by a caching strategy that stores contents along
thesediscoveredpaths.Thisenablestheroutingprotocol
as well as caching strategy, to adapt to varying weather
patternsthatmayaffectenergythatisusedtopowerthe
routers. The results from an experimental testbed using
real meteorological data, has shown that using the com-
bined approach has resulted in increased consumption
ofrenewableenergy,whereacombinationbetweenhigh
renewableenergyconsumptionandcachingstrategycan
minimizetheneedoffossilfuelsenergiesofthenetwork
and the data centers without compromising the users’
experience.
RENEWABLE ENERGY BACKGROUND
WeusepubliclyavailabledatafromtheNationalRenew-
able Energy Laboratory [?] to estimate the availability
of wind and solar power in different parts of the U.S.
Below we describe our weather data and present the
methodology used to convert the meteorological wind
and solar data, to power.
Windenergyprofile
Fig. 3a shows a simplified version of the annual wind
speedintheU.S.Thedarkerzoneshaveanaveragewind
speedbetween4-6m/s,theaveragewindspeedforthe
0.6 30 kW 6 * 5 kW 0.5
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
Wind speed (m/s)
(a) Wind speed to power
conversion
fo noitroporP
30 kW, scenario A 30 kW, scenario B
5 kW, scenario A
5 kW, scenario B
Ratio of wind generated green energy
(b)Optimalmixdistribution
Fig. 13. Wind energy profile for different turbine types
(5 kW and 30 kW), as well as distribution of routers with
optimalratioofwindandsolarenergysources.
mediumzonesarebetween6-8m/s,andinthebrighter
zone, the average speed is greater than 8 m/s.
We consider two wind turbines produced by the
Huaying company [?]. The two models are “HY30-
AD11” which is a 30 kW wind turbine, and a smaller
model “HY5-AD5.6” which produces energy up to
5.4 kW (the larger turbine has a similar size to the
turbine investigated in [?].)
Fig. 13a presents a plot showing the relationship of
wind speed to generated power that can be achieved
by the two different turbines. As we can see, six 5 kW
windturbinesproducemorepowerthanasingle30kW
turbine at a low wind speed (e.g. at 6 m/s, the ratio is
2.9). However, the type of turbines could be decided on
the space restrictions and the cost of the infrastructure.
Solarenergyprofile
The Global Horizontal Irradiance (GHI) is used to es-
timate how much power could be generated by photo-
voltaicsolarpanels.A4kW photovoltaicsolarpanelthat
is needed to produce 4 kW of power, will require a GHI
of 1000 W/m2. As shown in Fig.3b, the GHI is usually
stronger in the south west of the U.S. For example, in
the brigther zone (very high GHI), the estimated energy
is greater than 6000 kWh, while the estimated energy is
only 3000 kWh in the zone with the lowest GHI.
Renewableenergycalculation
In this section, we describe two calculations that de-
termine the required renewable energy infrastructure to
provide adequate renewable energy (the infrastructure
refers to the number of turbines or size of photovoltaic
panels). Calculation 1 will be used when the proportion
between wind and solar power is predefined. Calcula-
tion 2 will determine the optimal proportion of wind
and solar power that maximizes the green ratio of the
router.
Calculation 1: Given a proportion β, a capacity c and
PC(X0,t) the energy required by the router X, we
intendtodeterminetherenewableenergyinfrastructure,
TECHNICALREPORTINUNIVERSITYOFHELSINKI,FINLAND,2014-01-01 13
12pm 12am 12pm 12am 12pm
Spring Summer 12
12pm 12am 12pm 12am 12pm
(a)SanJose,CA-GHI
Spring 800 Summer
12pm 12am 12pm 12am 12pm
(b) San Jose, CA - Wind
Spring Summer 12
12pm 12am 12pm 12am 12pm
(c)NYC,NY-GHI
(d)NYC,NY-Windspeed
12pm 12am 12pm 12am 12pm
noitareneg
Winter 180
Spring 160
Summer 140
12pm 12am 12pm 12am 12pm
(e) San Jose, CA - Per-
centage of power gener-
ated(with5kW turbine)
noitareneg
Summer 150
12pm 12am 12pm 12am 12pm
(f) San Jose, CA - Per-
centage of power gener-
ated(with30kW turbine)
noitareneg
12pm 12am 12pm 12am 12pm
(g)NYC,NY-Percentage
of power generated (with
5kW turbine)
noitareneg
(h)NYC,NY-Percentage
of power generated (with
30kW turbine)
12pm 12am 12pm 12am 12pm
Spring 0.8
12pm 12am 12pm 12am 12pm
(i) San Jose, CA - Green
ratio(with5kW turbine)
Spring 0.8
12pm 12am 12pm 12am 12pm
(j) San Jose, CA - Green
ratio(with30kW turbine)
12pm 12am 12pm 12am 12pm
(k)NYC,NY-Greenratio
(with5kW turbine)
(l) NYC, NY - Green ratio
(with30kW turbine)
Fig. 14. Weather profiles and power generation performance for San Jose, CA and New York City, NY (The number
ofturbineshasbeenoptimizedbycalculation2).
such that: the PDT time zone of Los Angeles, CA). We will do this
calculation for all β between 0.0 to 1.0. Therefore, the
w s optimal β will be the value with the best avg(g(X,t)).
where P w (X,t)=βrePC(X,t) (10) Fig.13bshowsthedistributionofroutersfortheSprint
networktopologyasafunctionoftheoptimalβ.Forex-
Inthiscase,P (X,t)istheenergyprovidedfromwind
ample, inFig. 13b, whenno wind energyare considered
infrastructure, while P (X,t) is the energy provided
intheratio(i.e.β =0.0),foramaximumc=2for30kW
by the solar panels. Therefore, rePC(X,t) is the total
wind turbine, we can see that only 47% of the routers
renewable energy that can be provided to router X. At
will have this configuration. Fig. 13b shows the optimal
thesametimewealsoconsidercaseswhenalargequan-
mix for both types of turbines for two different types of
tity of renewable energy is produced. In such situation,
capacities. The two different capacities, includes a fixed
the capacity c is set to satisfy max(rePC(X,t)),∀t =
cPC(X0,t). capacity c = 2 (also referred to as constant capacity for
the scenario A) and random capacity that is uniformly
Calculation 2: In order to maximize the green ratio of
the router, we decided to find the optimal β that would selected between 0 and 3 for the scenario B. As shown
maximizetheaverageg(X,t)(avg(g(X,t))),foratypical in Fig. 13b, selecting the 5 kW turbine will lead to a
year. The avg(g(X,t)) is calculated as follow: betterdistributionofrouterswithmixedsourcesofwind
and solar (where β goes up to 1.0). On the other hand,
(11) the 30 kW turbine will only lead to low ratios of wind
24∗365 energy (e.g. 0.0≤β ≤0.3).
where g(X,t) is the green ratio of router X at time t Wenowshowanexampleoftheoptimizationprocess
defined by equation 7 (time has been shifted to match for two routers, one in San Jose, CA, and the second in
TECHNICALREPORTINUNIVERSITYOFHELSINKI,FINLAND,2014-01-01 14
New York City, NY. Fig. 14a and 14c show the GHI and
wind speeds for these three locations over a period of
two days, for each season. Fig. 14e, 14f, 14g and 14h
show the power generated at these two locations for
wind energy using either 5 kW or 30 kW turbines, after
theoptimizationofratiobetweenwindandsolarenergy.
Recallthattheoptimizationisperformedoverthewhole
year by picking out the peak periods of high wind and
solar performance, and the figures presented only show
performancefortwodays.Interestingly,therouterinSan
Jose gets all of its renewables from solar and ignores
the weak wind performance, even though this means
that during night time the router must be powered with
brown energy. In contrast, the router in New York uses
only wind energy as its renewable source (although not
clearly visible in Fig. 3a, New York is in the medium
wind zone). Fig. 14g and 14h, shows that using 5 kW
wind turbines produces better energy performance than
30 kW wind turbines. As a consequence, only experi-
ments using 5 kW wind turbines have been presented
in this paper.