Gabora, L. (2013). Reply to the commentaries on “An evolutionary framework for cultural
change: Selectionism versus communal exchange”. Physics of Life Reviews, 10(2),
Reply to Commentaries on
An Evolutionary Framework for Cultural Change:
Selectionism versus Communal Exchange
Running head: Reply to Commentators: Evolutionary Framework Culture
LIANE GABORA
University of British Columbia
Pre-publication draft:
There may be minor differences between this draft and the final published version.
Address for Correspondence:
Liane Gabora
Department of Psychology, University of British Columbia
Okanagan Campus, Kelowna BC
Canada, V1V 1V7
E-mail: liane.gabora@ubc.ca
Phone: 604-822-2549 or 250-807-9849
Reply to Commentators: Evolutionary Framework Culture
The commentators have brought a wealth of new perspectives to the question of how
culture evolves. Each of their diverse disciplines—ranging from psychology to biology to
anthropology to economics to engineering—has a valuable contribution to make to our
understanding of this complex, multifaceted topic. Though the vast majority of their
comments were supportive of my approach, it is natural that a reply such as this focus on
points where my views differ from that of the commentators.
The commentaries indicate strong support for the first basic premise of the paper: that
culture does not evolve through a selectionist process. There are two unsympathetic
commentaries, one of which (Simonton’s) offered no criticism, stating simply “space does
not permit discussion here”. The rest of this commentary, which summarizes his own
theory of creativity, has little relevance to the content of the target paper.
The second unsympathetic commentary, Madsen and Lipo’s, claims that my
“primary mission is to “save culture” from being subject to natural selection”. This is not
the case; an examination of my papers on the topic over the last twenty years reveal the
long and difficult struggle I went through trying to reconcile cultural change with the
Darwinian perspective, initially believing that it was the only way to evolve.
Madsen and Lipo argue that culture evolves through a selectionist process on the
basis of the following claims:
“First, Gabora’s argument is based upon a non-standard account of selection. Few if
any geneticists or biologists would recognize genetic inheritance as powered by
“self-replicating automata” of the von Neumann type. A “gene” (an incredibly
complex concept in its own right [2]) certainly does not code both for the machinery
to interpret itself, and for the protein its sequence represents.”
I never claimed that a gene codes both for the machinery to interpret itself, and for the
protein its sequence represents. I claimed that a genome—the set of all genes within an
organism—constitutes a self-assembly code that is both interpreted during development
and copied during reproduction, and this is standard biology; no living geneticist would
argue with this.
Madsen and Lipo continue: “Second, Gabora adds unnecessary conditions to the
requirements for selection.” This is simply false, and the book by Holland that they cite at
the end of this sentence says nothing about me, nor about unnecessary conditions to the
requirements for selection. Instead of providing arguments to support their case they write:
For example, the sequestration of inherited information, as in the isolation of germ-
line cells in many animal lineages, is a derived characteristic which evolved quite late
in the history of life [9]. Natural selection proceeds handily in many taxa which do
not sequester heritable information.
Natural selection does not “proceed handily” in these taxa, but evolution does. Indeed
that is exactly my point; it is those taxa evolve through, not natural selection, but communal
exchange, and that served as the inspiration for the communal exchange theory of cultural
evolution. I never said sequestration of inherited information is a requirement for evolution,
I said it is a requirement for evolution through natural selection. This point is clearly
understood by Smith (also an anthropologist), who writes, “As Carl Woese (1928-2012)
Reply to Commentators: Evolutionary Framework Culture
pointed out, biology must abandon molecular reductionism and enter the nonlinear world
[see reference 2]. Cultural evolution models must do the same, and Gabora’s work is a
significant step in the right direction.” For decades it has been accepted that evolution
through means other than natural selection is widespread. In addition to those cited in the
target paper (such as [16, 25, 28]) thousands of other papers could be cited. As Koonin [17]
puts it in a paper titled ‘Darwinian evolution in the light of genomics’:
“Comparative genomics and systems biology offer unprecedented opportunities for
testing central tenets of evolutionary biology formulated by Darwin in the Origin of
Species in 1859 and expanded in the Modern Synthesis 100 years later. Evolutionary-
genomic studies show that natural selection is only one of the forces that shape
genome evolution and is not quantitatively dominant”
Dagan and Martin [4] suggest that as little as 1% of all species actually evolves as per
a Darwinian ‘tree of life’ model; the rest exhibit the kind of network structure that
characterizes cultural evolution as discussed in the target paper. Indeed in prokaryotes this
kind of non-Darwinian horizontal exchange is so rampant that it appears that no two genes
have the exact same evolutionary history [2, 3, 13, 18, 19, 30, 31].
Madsen and Lipo also claim, “Nor is it required that new variation be approximated
by a random process.” If the explanation provided in the target paper was not sufficiently
clear, I encourage Madsen and Lipo to consult any basic population genetic text (such as
Hartl and Clark’s [14]) to understand why natural selection entails random variation. Not
only does generation operate prior to selection, but it can change the distribution of variants
instantaneously, whereas selection requires generations to do so. The speed and
effectiveness of a generation bias renders any selection bias negligible. Generation biases
exist in the biological world (e.g., mutation biases or nonrandom mating), but to a degree
that is miniscule compared with culture, where novelty is not just “biased by” but
strategically designed to meet human needs, tastes, and preferences.
The logic of this is seen clearly when one writes computer programs to simulate
natural selection (as I once did as the teaching assistant for a population genetics class).
Natural selection operates when some traits make it harder for organisms that bear them to
survive and reproduce, so that there are fewer and fewer organisms with those traits in
subsequent generations. The greater the extent to which variants are generated non-
randomly, the greater the extent to which what you end up with over time reflects not
selection (which occurs after variants have come into existence) but the initial generation
bias. To take a cultural example, the greater the extent to which, say, a novel is generated
non-randomly, the greater the extent to which the wording and organization of novels
reflect the thought processes of their authors. Madsen and Lipo do not provide any reason
for their conviction that variation need not be random, nor do they address the arguments
on this matter in the target paper. They merely cite a paper by anthropologists [15] that
describes a model in which variation is generated through random copying error, i.e., a
paper that in no way addresses their claim that natural selection can be operative when
variation is non-random.
Madsen and Lipo continue:
“Third, Gabora criticizes the transfer of biological concepts to culture, by confusing
theoretical concepts and empirical instances. For example, she claims that
Reply to Commentators: Evolutionary Framework Culture
“generations” are not applicable to culture. In reality, organismal generations are an
empirical matter, and depend upon the details of a transmission process. For culture,
the lack of a convenient empirical package to identify generations simply points to
the need to define and model appropriate time scales for analysis.
I am all for defining and modeling appropriate time scales for analysis, but that is
irrelevant; in a realm where entities can appear to be ‘dead’ and then suddenly resume the
characteristics of life, and do so regularly, the concept of ‘generation’ does break down.
Madsen and Lipo then say: “Such a challenge is also routine in biology when germ-line
sequestration is not present or reproduction is age-structured or reproduction continuous”. I
agree; again, it was through my study of these problems in the microbial world that it
became evident that they were problematic with respect to cultural evolution.
Finally, Madsen and Lipo write:
Using a well-accepted definition of natural selection [12], it is apparent that any
population in which individuals vary in their phenotype, inherit the information
underlying that phenotype, and where the success of individuals is affected by that
heritable information, will evolve. Observed changes in the frequencies of heritable
cultural information constitute natural selection, given these conditions. [bold added]
It is ironic that they cite Lewontin here given his well-known critique of Darwinian
approaches to culture [5]. In the situation they describe, information is not acquired but
inherited, and therefore natural selection may be taking place. Nothing I have ever said
contradicts this. However, they continue:
In this light, Gabora’s EVOC model [1] displays all the hallmarks of natural
selection, demonstrating that “communal exchange” is a viable model of an
inheritance and selection process, not a replacement for selection.
EVOC models an evolutionary process, but it exhibits characteristics that disqualify it
as evolution through natural selection, such as, (1) information is acquired not inherited,
and (2) variants are generated non-randomly, as discussed above, and discussed more
extensively in the target paper. Thus it does not support the idea that communal exchange is
an “inheritance and selection process”. As Lynch [20] puts it:
It has long been known that natural selection is just one of several mechanisms of
evolutionary change, but the myth that all of evolution can be explained by adaptation
continues to be perpetuated by our continued homage to Darwin's treatise (6) in the
popular literature. For example, Dawkins' (7–9) agenda to spread the word on the
awesome power of natural selection has been quite successful, but it has come at the
expense of reference to any other mechanisms, a view that is in some ways
profoundly misleading.
I agree with Smith that culture “retains a place for selection” in the sense that
individuals select one brand of peanut butter over another. This is quite different from
selection in the sense of a selectionist algorithm, i.e., selection of certain instruction sets
that code for self-replicating structures at the expense of others. I agree with Orsucci that
Reply to Commentators: Evolutionary Framework Culture
an important related project is to study the co-evolution of cultural and genetic systems, and
many including myself have taken steps in this direction. This has always been an
important component of the communal exchange approach to cultural evolution, and
although it is not developed extensively in this paper, it is an area ripe for future work.
Establishing an adequate theoretical framework for cultural evolution will provide a natural
foundation for work in this area. If in the future cultural evolution experiences (as did
biological evolution did several billion years ago) what Vetsigian et al. [28] refer to as a
Darwinian threshold, a transition from a communal exchange to a selectionist evolutionary
process then, as Orsucci suggests, communal exchange and selectionist theories would be
complementary components of a cohesive theory of cultural evolution.
Orsucci also points out that, “A focus on artifacts and artistic expressions could lead
to difficulties related to their iconic nature, in semiotic terms, and the identification of
markers for underlying codes might be left to inferential and subjective approaches.”
Fortunately, the need for inference is decreasing as neuroscience progresses toward the
point where thoughts about artifacts and artistic expressions can be reliably connected to
underlying patterns of neural activation.
Communal Exchange Theory
The commentaries also indicate strong support for the second basic premise of the paper:
culture evolves through communal exchange amongst self-organizing, autopoietic
networks, in a manner that is algorithmically similar to metabolism-first theories of the
origin of life. Smith points out that the communal exchange approach to culture “avoids a
monolithic conception of ‘culture’ (again a common item of critique in evolutionary
approaches to culture)” and that it “places a premium on understanding the flow of cultural
information communicates well with such traditional cultural-anthropological subjects as
power relationships”. Kauffman points out that the fact that elements of culture do not
evolve as separate entities but as facets of an integrated whole (a worldview) is particularly
in evidence with respect to science, in that a scientific hypothesis builds upon (and may fall
with) other scientific hypotheses. Kauffman also notes that enabling the user of the
conceptual network program for documenting material cultural history to “introduce
context-relevant attributes and perspectives is of particular importance, and should be
highlighted,” because this shows “implicit acceptance that the phase space is not pre-state-
able”. Indeed, the conceptual network program is part of a family of approaches referred to
collectively as “human computation” systems [21] that tackle the kind of intractability
Kaufman describes by merging the inductive abilities of individuals and crowds with the
speed and accuracy of computers at algorithmically solvable tasks.
One commentator (Brown) is in agreement with my critique of Darwinian theories
of culture but unsympathetic with the view that culture evolves by some means. He claims,
“The search for the “right” evolutionary framework for cultural change is obviously
motivated by the belief that culture is something that “evolves.” … But how may
cultural change be described as adaptive? … [I]n what sense might the proliferating
use of video games or tanning salons be classified as adaptive cultural change?”
It is true that video games and tanning salons may not be adaptive for humans
evolving on a biological fitness landscape, but that is not relevant to their cultural
evolution, and indeed the two are often at odds. A cultural adaptive landscape need not be
Reply to Commentators: Evolutionary Framework Culture
defined by natural laws; all that is necessary is that there exist some criterion according to
which some outputs rate higher than others. This rating can be in terms of number of
offspring, as in biology, or it can be defined by human-made rules, preferences, or even
dollars. As Smith notes, the communal exchange approach, “highlights the importance of
individual agency in reshaping culture moment by moment”.
Brown also claims,
“An adaptive genotypic trait gives survival advantages to all members of the species
that possess it. By contrast, a successful—meaning broadly rooted—cultural
innovation (such as intellectual property rights) may advantage some individuals or
groups and disadvantage others.”
Brown is mistaken that biological and cultural evolution differ in this respect. There
are genetic traits that benefit some individuals and that are maladaptive for, detrimental to,
or even not expressed at all in, others. A classic example of this is the gene that causes
sickle-cell anaemia in homozygous individuals (those who bear two copies of the gene), but
confers resistance to malaria in heterozygous individuals (those who bear one copy of the
gene). As another example, genes that make an individual exhibit a sudden growth spurt
during adolescence are beneficial for basketball players but not for gymnasts.
Bejan suggests that development of a communal exchange framework for cultural
evolution falls under the umbrella of construal law, a program that investigates the physical
rules underlying designs, both natural and human-made. Some might fear that use of the
word “design” implies a “designer” but as I understand it, Bejan uses the term to refer to
form that emerges or evolves through low-level physical processes as well as form that
comes about through the actions of intentional agents. I am sympathetic toward attempts to
develop this kind of unified framework, and my colleagues and I have made similar efforts
[1, 9, 10, 11]. Bejan’s framework is interesting, though in my view somewhat too
simplified with respect to its characterization of living, cognitive system to capture their
essential features. For example, there is much more to being alive than “to persist in time”
(indeed a dead body continues to “persist in time”, and non-living systems often persist
substantially longer than living ones). As another example, Bejan’s explanation for how
physics can explain even the existence of the peacock’s tail invokes “mating”, which is not
the domain of physics. Nevertheless his commentary demonstrates that by viewing
biological and cultural systems through the lens of construal theory one gains a refreshingly
new and valuable perspective.
Simonton outlines a theory of creativity that ignores “the minor complications
introduced when selection is sequential rather than simultaneous”. However, selection by
definition entails that entities are simultaneously chosen amongst; selectionist processes are
subject to order effects such that if some are selected before others, they change the fitness
landscape by which the others are evaluated. Thus a selectionist model by definition cannot
describe sequential change. Moreover, sequential change is not a “minor complication”; it
necessitates a different mathematical structure (for discussion, see [6, 7, 8]). Furthermore,
sequential refinement of ideas over time is the rule, not the exception. Indeed the exception
to this rule, the only sort of creativity that a model such as Simonton’s could hope to
describe, is insight, where an idea manifests suddenly and unexpectedly. However insight
would seem to be more aptly described as reflecting a phase transition, i.e., a sudden re-
Reply to Commentators: Evolutionary Framework Culture
organization of knowledge due to self-organized criticality [6, 24], rather than an executive
level selection amongst competing alternatives.
Another problem with Simonton’s theory of creativity is that it starts from the
assumption that “the individual produces a set X containing the potential solutions x ... x ...
x , where k ≥ 1”. It is not explained how different x has to be from x to be considered a
different solution; indeed it is generally the case that different possibilities constitute a
family of interrelated solutions. Without going into the details, this interrelatedness is why
in the honing theory of creativity they are characterised as different actualizations of a core
idea, which exists, initially, in a “ground state”, or state of potentiality [6, 7, 12].
I conclude by saying that I am grateful to the commentators for their diverse
perspectives and insights, their overall support for the project, and provocative ideas for
where to go from here. Clearly there are many fascinating avenues to explore as we move
forward on our quest to understand how culture evolves.
Acknowledgements
This research was conducted with the assistance of grants from the National Science and
Engineering Research Council of Canada, and the Fund for Scientific Research of Flanders,
Belgium.