RESEARCH AND INNOVATIVE DESIGN OF A ZERO-
EMISSIONS VEHICLE BY MULTIDISCIPLINARY
STUDENT TEAMS IN MULTI-YEARS
Raymond K. Yee, Professor
Tai-Ran Hsu, Professor and Chair, ASME Fellow
Thuy T. Le, Professor
San José State University
San José, California, USA
Abstract design projects class in two academic years from 2006 to
2008.
This paper presents a unique learning and research
experience for students from mechanical and electrical There were 16 ME and 3 electrical engineering (EE)
engineering majors in a course on senior design projects students signing up in an innovative design of a 4-wheel
involving research & development, design and production electric vehicle with the size that is compatible to that of
of a proof-of-concept electric vehicle, the ZEM (Zero neighborhood electric vehicles in the marketplace, and the
EMissions) vehicle. The ZEM vehicle combined positive vehicle could be driven by a similar hybrid human pedaling
aspects and latest technologies in electric vehicle design, and electric power but with solar photovoltaic (PV) cells to
solar/electric power conversions, and ergonomic human supply additional power to charge the batteries. This
power into one affordable and environmentally sustainable vehicle is regarded as the ZEM vehicle. All authors acted as
vehicle for urban transportation. The 43 mechanical and 10 faculty supervisors of this project. In this first academic
electrical engineering majors plus 7 students from business year, the student teams accomplished the design of a proof-
participated in this multidisciplinary project spanned over of-concept prototype ZEM vehicle ready for construction. A
two academic years. The students involved in this multi- team of 7 students from the College of Business at the
year endeavor gained valuable experiences in real-world authors’ university used the ZEM project as its case study
working environment with multifunctional and multi-year project for a course on business entrepreneurship in 2007.
sub-groups. The success of this new attempt in conducting Student teams with expanded memberships of 27 ME and 7
senior design projects classes have set a model for faculty EE students enrolled in the next academic year to undertake
members in the authors’ university in conducting similar the construction of the prototype ZEM vehicle under the
courses. supervision of the second and third authors. This major task
was accomplished in December 2008 with able assistance of
technical staff of the College of Engineering in fault-proof
Keywords—electric vehicle, zero emissions, student project,
test runs during the summer of that year. The design of
solar photovoltaic, innovative design
ZEM vehicle won the First Prize in the 2007 National Idea-
to-Product Competition for Engineering Projects in
I. INTRODUCTION
Community Services and Social Entrepreneurship at
Princeton University with a cash award of $15,000.
Authors of this paper have been instructors of a senior
project course in their respective departments for many
II. THE ZEM PROJECT
years. Previous projects, like those from other engineering
schools, were focused on design projects on single-function
There have been clear messages sent to engineering
devices or systems such as robots for specific tasks, human-
educators by prominent business leaders in the country that
power vehicles for annual ASME sponsored competitions
they desire engineering graduates to be proficient in: (1)
and electric systems for certain devices. Most these design
communication, (2) team work experience, and (3)
projects lack long lasting values and impacts to the
knowledge and experience in multidiscipline. These desired
community. The authors were motivated to experiment with
skills are documented in several special reports by the
a new approach in conducting this course by challenging
National Science Foundation, American Society for
their students to be involved in projects that would have
Engineering Education and the ABET [1-4]. Engineering
potential benefits to global community in eco-environment
educators have been working relentlessly to cultivate their
and socioeconomic well being, and also acquire R&D
students’ acquiring such skills in addition to the
experience from a real-world working environment with
professional knowledge and skill in their specific disciplines
multifunctional and multi-year sub-groups. Consequently,
[5-7].
they selected a pilot project of innovative design of a hybrid
human/solar/electric-powered vehicle that would be
The ZEM vehicle, designed for 2 riders, is intended for
practical for modern urban transportation in their senior
both energy-efficient urban commuting and for light utility
services and small business deliveries. The motor of the
ZEM vehicle is driven by batteries that can be charged by quantitatively demonstrate the functionality and
household 110-VAC electric outlets, and by solar energy interaction between power produced by the solar PV
harnessed by the collection panels that are integrated into cells and the power consuming systems for the ZEM
the exterior surface of the vehicle. The vehicle can be driven vehicle.
at low speed by human pedaling in inner city streets with
congested pedestrian and vehicle traffic. The electric motor
can power the vehicle to run at a higher speed in other parts
of the city. Solar energy reduces current load from the
batteries during the operations of the vehicle and charges
the batteries when the vehicle parks in open parking lots.
The ZEM vehicle is suitable for urban commuting, errand
runners, small business deliveries and shuttle services
between designated locations.
III. DESIGN AND DEVELOPMENT PROCESS
The ZEM vehicle project intends to produce a low cost,
energy efficient vehicle that harnesses three types of energy: Fig. 1 Schematic of Battery Experiment
human pedaling, electro-chemical and photovoltaic. The
design, research & development, and production of the
Table 1 EXPERIMENTAL FINDINGS
“proof-of-concept” prototype ZEM vehicle turned out to be
Characteristic Lead Acid Silicone Source
a major challenge to the students and the supervising faculty;
Battery Stinger Clean Power
there are several original ideas and concepts involved in the
Manufacturer (SPV35, Tech. Inc.
development process. Students conducted research and (model) AGM) (12V 17Ahr)
development on several key subsystems to warrant the Electrolyte Sulfuric Acid Silicone Ref. [8]
(Environmental (Acid mist, compound
success of the project:
merit) polluting) (nonpolluting)
Theoretical 35-44 45-52 Ref. [8]
A. Conduct research on suitability of batteries for the ZEM Energy Density
vehicle. Batteries are important design parameters for (Wh/Kg)
electric vehicle design; many batteries used in electric Experimental 23.4 35.8 ZEM
Energy Density Energy
vehicles are heavy in weight and they become “dead
(Wh/Kg) Experiment
load” to the vehicle after having consumed all the
Theoretical 35 70 (unknown Respective
electric power they have stored. Two types of batteries Amp-hours (Discharging discharge Manufacturer
were considered: the lead-acid batteries and silicone (nominal) at 1.75A) rate)
Experimental 21 43.8 ZEM
batteries. The lead acid batteries are low cost but have
Effective Am- Energy
low energy density. The silicone batteries are relatively
hours (at 12A, Experiment
new on the market. They use dry silicate as electrolytes 100 to 20%
and have high power density suitable for vehicles, and SoC)
they are also environmentally friendly. However, these Charging Time 4-8 hours 2-4 hours Ref. [8]
Memory Effects @ low volt None Ref. [8]
batteries are high in cost. An extensive research study
was spent by the student team to determine which of
This experiment was carried out by a special facility
these two types of batteries would be suitable for the
on a roof-top balcony of the engineering building. It
ZEM vehicle. Figure 1 shows the schematic of their
involved the selected high-output silicone batteries for
study and their findings were presented in Table 1.
the ZEM vehicle, PV charge controller, PC & power
supply, and data acquisition system. In this experiment,
B. Research on solar-electric power conversion and
students evaluated the solar PV system performance.
transmission for ZEM vehicle. The teams of students of
Experiment was performed on an eight-hour day in
ME and EE majors soon realized that there was no
March 2008 and the data was plotted against the
precedence on the design in solar-electric energy
theoretical prediction of available solar energy at this
conversion for vehicles in open literature. Several
particular location. Table 2 shows the theoretical
experimentations were performed to evaluate the
predictions and experimental measurements. The
feasibility of this subsystem design. An energy system
experimental measured data is averaged 26% lower
experimentation was carried out. The objective was to
than the predicted value in the solar PV output power.
The main source of error was most likely from the
environment of the experimental site which was
surrounded by trees and buildings. The secondary C. Conduct research to prepare ZEM components for
source of error may have to do with the surface manufacturing/assembly, the ME student teams were
polarization effect [9] inherent in the SunPower’s high working diligently on various tasks in the mechanical
efficiency solar cells design, although only a minor aspects of the ZEM project. ZEM vehicle consists of
reduction in output power (2 to 5%) is expected in this innovative design of several major mechanical systems
application. including vehicle frame and chassis, power
transmission system, and suspension system. Figure 4
TABLE2 SOLAR PV EXPERIMENATAL FINDINGS shows the schematic of the electromechanical power
transmission system used in the ZEM vehicle. Students
developed a dual pedaling system for the ZEM vehicle
which employs one common drive axle that can accept
two separate power inputs; one from human pedaling
and the other from an electric motor. The front wheel
drive axle consists of two power transmitting sprockets
which are integrated into the differential housing of the
vehicle. One of the sprockets connects to the electrical
motor and the other sprocket connects to the pedal
Another energy experiment was conducted to input shaft for human pedaling as shown in Figure 3
simulate the full energy system. This experiment below.
provided feedback of a simulated system and data prior
to actual full energy system integration on the ZEM
vehicle. Figure 2 shows schematic of this energy
system experimental setup. The above experiments
allowed the students to not only become familiar with
solar-electric conversion system for vehicles, but also
the proper connections of various components and their
integration into the ZEM vehicle.
Fig. 2 Schematic of the Energy System Experiment
based system to collect the data, process the information,
and control the whole electrical power circuit.
The battery bank system includes eight 12V 70 Ahr
silicone batteries, as shown in Figure 4. These 8 batteries
are connected in series and parallel to provide 48 VDC
power to the motor and DC/DC conversion unit. Measured
results by the research work showed that for equivalent
manufacturing specifications, the effectiveness ratios of
silicone battery is higher than lead acid battery, but with
lower charging rate. Since high energy density and
environmental friendliness are more important to charging
rate, silicone batteries were selected for the ZEM vehicle.
Fig. 3 The Power Transmission System
The solar PV system used in the project includes 4
Friction clutches are integrated into the sprocket hubs
silicon-based PV panels. These solar panels are rated with
mounted at the pedal input shaft which allows for direct
nominal voltage of 40V and current of 5.1A, with a peak
power transmission from human pedaling at low speed
power at 205W and conversion efficiency of 16.5%. Since
of 5 to 7 mph. When the driving power of the vehicle is
the operating voltage input to the PV charger should be
switched from human pedaling power to electric motor
higher than 48V for better efficiency, the four PV panels are
power, the clutches disengage and the pedal input shaft
wired in two parallel strings of two panels in series. This
behaves like a free wheel. A hydraulic disc braking
connection provides the theoretical operating voltage of
system is implemented in the front wheels of the ZEM
80V with nominal current of about 10.2A and peak power at
vehicle.
410W. Experimental results showed that during the sunny
periods, the system can reach a maximum operating voltage
of about 56V, a maximum current of about 7A, and a peak
IV. DESIGN OF ZEM VEHICLE
power at about 350W. The solar PV power is used to charge
the battery bank by a 3-function charge controller, which is
The research on batteries and solar-electric power
rated at 45A from a 48-VDC input. This charge controller is
conversion and transmission as well as multiple power input
able to share the load with the battery bank when the vehicle
to the drive train as mentioned above led to the design of
is in use and charge the battery whenever there is no load.
complete power/drive system of the ZEM vehicle as
illustrated in Figure 4.
The motor used in the ZEM vehicle has maximum output
Solar PV Panel Solar PV Panel Solar PV Panel Solar PV Panel of 10 hp operated with 48VDC supply. The velocity of the
vehicle is controlled by a programmable solid state motor
controller. This controller is rated at 48V and 500A and is
Household 110 VAC 3-function charge controller controlled by 0-5kΩ potentiometer. The motor controller
& Blocking diode
takes a signal from the potentiometer and varies the duty
Batteries cycle of the pulse-width-modulated (PWM) voltage applied
B B B B to the armature of the motor. Varying duty cycle of the
Pedals PWM voltage effectively varies the average voltage applied
to the motor. The motor controller is programmed to operate
s Motor shaft as desires via an RS-232 serial port.
Pedal shaft C l h in a k in w F h re e e e l G re e d a u r c & er The whole vehicle electrical system is controlled by a
Electric motor
M microcontroller based system and the data acquisition unit.
clutch Transmission The microcontroller, the data acquisition circuit, the
Wh T e ir e e l & Differential chain Drive gear dashboard display system, the vehicle lighting system, and
all automatic relays and switches are all powered by 5 VDC
Front wheel axle
and 12 VDC supplied by a 450W DC/DC conversion unit.
Fig. 4 Schematic of the Power Transmission System In order to limit large current load as well as to save battery
energy, the microcontroller system only turns on the motor
when the forward speed of the vehicle exceeds 5 mph. This
Major components of the ZEM electrical system include
is not applied to vehicle reversal, and drivers are able to turn
a series motor, a motor controller unit, a silicone battery
off this option if desired.
bank and charger, a solar PV system and its charge
controller, a DC/DC conversion unit, and a microcontroller-
Fig. 7The completed ZEEM prototype
VII. POSITIVE OOUTCOMES OOF THE ZEM PROJECT
Fig.. 5 Technologies ffor ZEM Vehicle DDesign
Thhe project nott only provideed the studentts with great
Figure 5 illustrates the syynergistically iintegrated keyy learnning experiencce in R&D, deesign, and fabbrication, but
techhnologies in thhe design of thhe ZEM vehiclle. The designn also offered the sttuudents with uunique opportuunities in: (1)
of tthe proof-of-cooncept prototyype ZEM vehiccle is shown inn beingg mentored byy Silicon Vallley industry aand business
Figgure 7, with 3 solar PV panels attached to the roof of thee leadeers in developiing entrepreneeurship, (2) leaarning strong
vehhicle and anothher one on the top of the froont hood. Eightt leadeership skills, ((3) developingg effective commmunication
higgh performance silicone battteries are placed under thee and organizationaal skills, andd (4) develooping fiscal
seaats. respoonsibility with available fundds and resourcees. Based on
our eexperience, thee authors feel that the goal of the ZEM
The intimacy of mechanicall and electroniics systems forr projeect is well accoomplished.
ZEEM design reqquired close diialogue betweeen students off
theese two engineeering disciplinees. Consequently, in additionn AACKNOWLEDDGMENT
to encouraging oone-on-one disscussions amoong all studentt
teams, there weere expanded meetings schheduled twicee Authhors are gratefuul for the contiinuous encouraagements and
durring each semeester with invited technical mmanagers fromm finanncial supports bby the College of Engineerinng at San Jose
loccal solar and EEV industries,, as well as ssenior officialss Statee University.
from transportatiion departmennt of the Cityy of San Jose. REFERENNCES
Theese invited tecchnical consulttants offered vvaluable inputss
andd suggestions to all students iin the project [1] ““Shaping the Futuure-New Expectatiions for Undergraaduate Education
iin Science, Mathhematics, Engineerring, and Technoology,” National
SScience Foundatioon, NSF-96-139, 1996.
V. COMPLETION OF “PPROOF-OF-COONCEPT” [2] ““Restructuring EEngineering Educcation: A Focuss on Change,”
PROTTOTYPE NNational Science FFoundation NSF 995-65, 1995.
[3] ““Engineering Schhools and Engineeering Careers,” Ammerican Society
ffor Engineering Edducation, April 20009.
A proof-of-cconcept protootype ZEM vehicle wass
[4] ““ABET 2001-20002 Criteria for Acccrediting Engineeering Programs,”
connstructed by 277 ME and 7 EEE students andd completed inn AAccreditation Boaard for Engineeringg and Technology,, 2002.
thee 2007-2008 accademic year. They were orrganized into 66 [5] MMcDonald, D., DDevaprasad, J., Duuesing, P, Mahajann, A., Qatu, M.
funnctional sub-ggroups with approximatelyy equal sizee aand Walworth, MM., “Re-Engienerinng the Senior Dessign Experience
meemberships as shown in Figgure 6. Figuree 7 shows thee
cconference.org/fiee96/papers/398.pdff
commpleted functioonal ZEM prottotype. [6] RRamachandran, R.,, Marchese, A.J., OOrdonez, R., Sun, C, Constans, E.,
SSchmalzel, J.L. aannd Newell, H.L. “Integration of MMultidisciplinary
DDesign and Tecchnical Communnication: An Ineexorable Link,”
IInternational Journnal of Engineeringg Education, Vol. 18, No. 1, 2002,
ppp. 32-38.
[7] BBurnell, L.J., Priiest, J. W., and Durrett, J.R., “AAssessment of a
RResource Limited Process for Multidisciplinary Projeccts,” Inroads-the
SSIGCSE Bulletin, Vol. 35, No. 4, December 2003.
[8] GGuangdong Jiangmmen Yuyang Speciial Batteries Comppany. LTD.
CComparisons Betwween Lead-acid Baatteries and GUINENG (silicon
aalloy) Power Batteeries. Retrieved February 11, 2008, from
[9] RR. Swanson, M. Cuudzinovic, D. DeCCeuster, V. Desai, Jorn Jurgens, N.
KKaminar, W. Mullligan, L. Rodrigguues-Barbarosa, D. RRose, D. Smith,
AA. Terao, and K. WWilson, “The Surffaace Polarization EEffect of High
EEfficiency Silicon Solar Cells,” 15thh PVSEC, Shanghaai, China, 2005.
Fig.. 6 Functional Groouping of Studentss in ZEM Prototyppe Construction
BIOOGRAPHY
Raymondd K. Yee iss currently aa
Professor of the DDepartment off
Mechaniical Engineerinng at San Josee
State Unniversity, CA. Professor Yeee
received his BS degreee with Highestt
Honors in Mechanicaal Engineeringg
from Call Poly, San Luuis Obispo, MSS
degree and Ph.D. degree inn
Mechaniical Engineeriing from thee
Unniversity of CCalifornia at Berkeley. HHe is also aa
Reggistered Professsional Mechannical Engineer in the State off
Callifornia. Prior to joining SSan Jose Statte University,,
Proofessor Yee woorked as a Memmber of the Tecchnical Staff att
ATT&T Bell Labbs in Napervville, Illinois and a seniorr
connsulting enginneer in Siliconn Valley. He has served ass
Asssociate Chair and Director of ME Proogram in thee
Deppartment. Hiss areas of interrest in researchh and teachingg
incclude finite element meethod, mechaanical design,,
meechanical behavvior of materiaals, and fracturee mechanics.
Tai-Raan Hsu, a Fellow of ASME,,
is currrently a Professsor and Chairr
of the Department oof Mechanicall
Engineeering at Sann Jose Statee
Univerrsity. He reeceived a BSS
degree from Nationaal Cheng-Kungg
Univerrsity in China; MS and Ph.D.
degrees from Univeersity of Neww
Bruunswick and MMcGill Univerrsity in Canada respectively.
Alll his degrees wwere in mechannical engineerinng. He workedd
forr steam powerr plant equipmment and nuclear industriess
prioor joining tthe academe. He taughht mechanicall
enggineering courrses and served as departmment heads att
uniiversities in both Canada and USA. He has publishedd
oveer 120 techniccal papers in peer reviewedd systems andd
eigght books in fiinite element mmethod in therrmomechanics,,
commputer-aided ddesign, and aa well-receivedd textbook onn
miccroelectromechhanical systemms (MEMS) design andd
maanufacture. The second edittion of the lattter book wass
pubblished in Marcch 2008.
Thuy T. Le is currentlly a Professorr
and Assoociate Chair of Electricall
Engineerinng Departmennt at San Joséé
State Univversity. In the past 20 years,,
he has hheld several research andd
teaching positions at U.S. nationall
laboratories, universitiees, and privatee
industries in the areass of SoC andd
ASSIC design andd verification, hhigh-performannce computingg
andd computationaal nuclear reacttor physics. Hee has served ass
Genneral Chair, TTechnical Program Chair, aand Technicall
Revviewer of manny internationaal conferences and technicall
jouurnals, and puublished over 550 technical ppapers in peerr
revviewed systemms. He earned his B.S., M.S., and Ph.D.
deggrees all from tthe University of California aat Berkeley.