International Scientific and Technological Conference
EXTREME ROBOTICS
October 1-2, 2014, Saint-Petersburg, Russia
RESEARCH OF THE ROBOT'S LEARNING EFFECTIVENESS
IN THE CHANGING ENVIRONMENT
V.Ya. Vilisov
Energy IT LLP, University of Technology, Russia, Moscow Region, Korolev
vvib@yandex.ru
Abstract. The object of the research is the adaptive algorithms that are used by the operator when
educating the robotic systems. Operator, being the target-setting subject, is interested in the goal that
robotic systems, being the conductor of his targets (criteria), would provide a maximum effectiveness
of these targets’ (criteria’s) achievement. Thus, the adaptive algorithms provide the adequate reflection
of the operator’s goals, found in the robotic systems’ actions. This work considers potential possibilities
of such target adaption of the robotic systems used for the class of the allocation problems.
Key words: robot, training, efficiency criteria, distribution task, adaptation potential.
Introduction 𝑛
Lately, the tendency of the robotic 𝐿(𝑥̅)= ∑𝑐 𝑥 . (1)
intellectualization becomes more and more evident.
At that several directions are being developed: as First choice selection criterion; assuming it is
the traditional bionic direction, implemented in the the operator who maximizes the objective
construction of animats [2], so and variants of function:
learning with a teacher [3, 4]. One of the significant 𝑥̅∗ =𝑎𝑟𝑔max𝐿(𝑥̅), (2)
aspects of the robotic intellect increase is the ability
where 𝑐̅= ‖𝑐 ‖ is the objective function
of the robots to adjust (to adapt) to the different 𝑗
environmental factors. This work is devoted to one coefficient vector; 𝑥̅ = ‖𝑥 ‖ is the vector of
of the robotic adaptation directions, i.e. spotting of variable quantities; 𝑥̅∗is the best solution.
the non-evident target preferences of the teacher
LPP functions can be often presented by two
(operator or the decision-maker) while monitoring
groups of inequations - one group reflects the limits
his decisions [1]. Still, it is necessary to note that the
in relation to the distributed resources:
adaptation mechanism, together with other methods
of the parameters’ setting, require some time lag. It
where 𝐴 = ‖𝑎 ‖ is the resources demand matrix;
is clear that should the modification dynamics of the 𝑖𝑗 𝑚𝑛
𝑎̅ = ‖𝑎 ‖ is the vector of the resources that are
operator’s targets and processes be rather high, the 0 𝑖0 𝑚
available for distribution. Another group represents
applied control model may be late in re-educating
limits in relation to the variation range of the
itself. Therefore, it would be only natural to suggest
variable quantities:
that there exists some limit of the target dynamics,
and should it be crossed, the setting algorithm will
(1) – (4) correlations represent the choice
not be already able to get adapted to it. Thus, this
selection model, where, due to the flexible character
work considers the adaptation frontiers basing on
of a practically any operation, performed by the
the criteria (target) non-stationarity of the robotic
modern robotic systems, the prior (and current)
systems’ work.
uncertainty is concentrated in 𝑐̅ vector. Every new
Task Definition
situation of the solution selection (management) is
Allocation problems comprise a significant
share of the problems that are solved by a separate defined by the exact values of 𝑎̅ 0 and 𝑏̅ vectors,
robot or a group of robots [2, 3]. As a main context which, as a rule, can be measured, reflecting the
we shall take the problem of allocating the task or environmental condition. Structure and internal
some limited resource within the robotic group. characteristic of the robotic systems are reflected in
Problems of similar structure can also appear when A matrix, which stays known and practically
managing a separate robot, for example a service unchanged during the operation.
cleaning robot or logistics robots that move the As during the performance of the operation,
cargo along the road network or perform loading executed by the robotic systems, the distribution
and loading works in the warehouse [3]. system of the limited resources selection is repeated
One of the LPP [5] formats can be of the manifold (with different limitations), the problem of
following form. Objective function is: the criteria dependence is expected to be solved by
applying an adaptive LPP form [1], with the basis
being the solution of the reverse LPP as well as the As it is shown in some of the author’s works
justification of 𝑐̅ vector according to the realization [1], the parameters setting of the preference model
results of chosen 𝑥̅ solution. Evaluation of 𝑐̅ vector according to the observations can be performed
that was received in the process of the reverse LPP rather quickly. Still, in some of the applications, the
solution is actually an approximation of the current environment of the robotic systems can change
LPP preferences, which can reflect a multitude of rapidly. New environment can see a change of the
target indices, which, in their turn, are differently value hierarchy in reference to the person, who
interconnected and a priori unpredictable. At that makes the decision, and who, in his turn, is
the settings (evaluation of 𝑐̅ vector) are performed influencing the robotic system. New situation can
either via double-loop circuit, as a rule, in the offline also be caused by the changes happening in the
mode, using the retrospective data of similar robotic system itself, for example by the increase or
operations (or via active optimized experiment [1]), decrease of its functionality. Such changes
or in the online mode, if it is allowed by the demonstrate non-stationarity of the situation
technology and dynamics of the specific robotic (circumstances) where the robotic system is
system. Generally, the structure of the objective working. All the situational changes are caused by
function that is approximating the LPP preferences the fact that in the new circumstances, the person
can be a non-linear one; for example if it possesses who is making the decision receives a new
all the characteristics of the classic utility function preference model (it can be presented as an
[5]. In this case the solution algorithms of the objective function). Changes of the model
reverse problems can also consider such parameters can go smoothly, but there also can be
characteristics. the cases when such changes possess a step-type
When solving reverse LPP, the following nature. Any of these types of changes can be
information can be used: (1) the one connected with considered a demonstration of non-stationarity.
the quality of the received and applied solution and Should the robotic system start working in the
(2) system and current data referring to the situation stationary environment, its education up to the
where the decision should made. In order to simplify accepted level of the functioning effectiveness is
the views, let us assume that the limitations (4) are taking some time τ. In cases of non-stationarity, the
unified and added to the limitations (3). In this case robotic system should be re-educated. It is
{𝐴𝑘},{𝑎̅𝑘},{𝑥̅𝑘} is the observation sequence (with k necessary to note that during the re-education
being the number of observation or planning cycle) period, the effectiveness of its work will be far from
of the system and the data referring to the situation the maximum level. At that, if the re-education
where the decision should made, while 𝑐̂ is the period of the robotic system is defined by the
current vector evaluating the coefficients of the education algorithm (controlled by the person who
integral objective function, which is approximating is making the decision concerning the robotic
the LPP preferences. system, and taking different forms; for example,
passive evaluation in the normal functioning mode
Setting Algorithm
The task of constructing evaluations of the or active probing of the environment and person,
objective function according to the observations making the decision), the non-stationarity dynamics
can be solved in different ways [1]. Let us analyze can be quite unpredictable. This is why, when
one of them, where the following function can be planning the operations, it is very important to be
performed with every observation: aware of and to consider the robotic systems’
1. Using another situation 𝑎̅𝑘 (situation where frontiers in order to alleviate (via re-education) the
negative impact of the objective non-stationarity.
the decision should be made) the person who makes
In cases when the robotic system is acting
the decision chooses (by intuition or with some
within the conditions of the active counter force of
specific mechanisms) the 𝑥̅𝑘 solution, which he
another party, it is possible to set such a task of the
considers the best in this situation (according to the
specific non-stationarity creation, which would
multitude of its evident and non-evident indices).
decrease its effectiveness as much as possible via
2. The 𝑥̅𝑘 solution is applied, with the results
counter reacting with the robotic system. Surely, the
used for evaluation of the solution’s quality
frontier evaluation depends significantly as on the
according to the binary scale: good/bad.
specific type and structure of the robotic system, so
3. The reverse LPP is then solved [1] (for
and on the context of its usage and the problems it
“good“ solutions), which causes the clarification of
is required to solve. Therefore, considering the
𝑐̂ vector that is responsible for evaluation of the
length limitations of this article, we shall use the
objective function.
simplest example to demonstrate the solution of the
When there appears another situation that
problem.
requires a solution, the cycle is repeated again from
clause 1.
Example comprises the observation steps up to the moment
Without providing a detailed description of the when the decisions made referring to the 𝑐̂
numerous imitational experiments, let us comment evaluations with the set probability belief, shall
on the main elements, parameters and results. In the coincide with the decisions, obtained from the
bi-dimensional LPP the coefficients of the true imitating objective function. For the problems
(imitating) objective function of the person making possessing different dimensionality of the 𝑛
the decision, were represented by the vector 𝑐̅ = variables space, this period will differ, so let us
[0.8 0.6]𝑇 in the initial functioning position. define it as τ . Experimental (imitational) research
Within the class of the problems under allows building the dependence of the standard (i.e.
consideration, for the purposes of not losing the equal to [0; 1] interval) average effectiveness of the
similarity, the vectors representing the parameters decisions made by the robotic system as 𝐿(𝑡,𝑛)
of the objective function, are applied in the standard function, where t is a number of the observational
form, i.e. possessing a unit length, with objective step or the decision-making process. For some
function not containing a constant component. If, decisions of the space dimensionality, this function,
after observing the decisions of the person who is built according to the results of the imitational
making them, the robotic system evaluates vector 𝑐̅, experiment, is shown on Picture 1.
then the adaptation period τ is the value that
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15
n=2 n=3 n=5 n=10 Observational Steps
Picture 1. Setting dynamics of the models with different dimensionality
Non-stationarity was imitated by the step-type adequacy level of the preference system that is
modifications of the vector that represented the provided by the person making the decisions
parameters of the objective function. For example, regarding the robotic system and on whose behalf
the initial vector 𝑐̅= [0.8 0.6]𝑇 rapidly the robotic system performs different operations.
transforms into the vector 𝑐̅ = [0.6 0.8]𝑇. During 2. Impact of external and internal factors
such a rapid change, the effectiveness also rapidly referring to the non-stationarity of target
falls down to some level, going up together with the preferences can be alleviated by the re-education of
educational process of the model, used by the the models that are used by the robotic systems for
robotic system for solving the allocation problem. the controlling allocation problems. Still, there exist
Thus, where there exist regular step-type change of critical levels of the objectives’ non-stationarity
the zero preferences (parameters of the objective dynamics, which can lead to the significant
function), the effectiveness chart of any reduction of the functionality of the robotic
dimensionality shall represent a saw-like line with system’s work.
the rapid falls of the effectiveness values and