Review times in peer review: quantitative
analysis of editorial workflows
Maciej J. Mrowinski1,#, Agata Fronczak1, Piotr Fronczak1, Olgica Nedic2, Marcel Ausloos3,4,5
1 FacultyofPhysics,WarsawUniversityofTechnology,
Koszykowa75,PL-00-662,Warsaw,Poland
(#)e-mailaddress: mrow@if.pw.edu.pl
2 InstitutefortheApplicationofNuclearEnergy(INEP),UniversityofBelgrade,
Banatska31b,Belgrad-Zemun,Serbia
3 SchoolofManagement,UniversityofLeicester
UniversityRoad,LeicesterLE17RH,UK;
e-mailaddress: ma683@le.ac.uk
4 eHumanitiesgroup˚,RoyalNetherlandsAcademyofArtsandSciences(NKVA),
JoanMuyskenweg25,1096CJAmsterdam,TheNetherlands
5 GRAPES:,
ruedelaBelleJardiniere483,B-4031,Angleur,Belgium
We examine selected aspects of peer review and suggest possible im-
provements. To this end, we analyse a dataset containing information
about 300 papers submitted to the Biochemistry and Biotechnology sec-
tionoftheJournaloftheSerbianChemicalSociety. Afterseparatingthe
peerreviewprocessintostagesthateachreviewhastogothrough,weuse
aweighteddirectedgraphtodescribeitinaprobabilisticmannerandtest
the impact of some modifications of the editorial policy on the efficiency
of the whole process.
Keywords: peer review, editorial process, weighted directed graph
˚AssociateResearcher
:GroupofResearchersforApplicationsofPhysicsinEconomyandSociology
]hp-cos.scisyhp[
1v43110.8051:viXra
1 Introduction
Despite a variety of criticisms of its effectiveness [1, 2], peer review is a funda-
mentalmechanismforvalidatingthequalityoftheresearchthatispublishedin
today’sscientificliterature[3,4]. Itisacomplex,multi-phaseprocessandthere
appear to be some growing concerns regarding how to improve its functioning.
Given the growth of scientific journals, the increasing number of submitted ar-
ticles, and the limited pool of reviewers, acquiring a good and timely review
is becoming progressively more challenging. Reviews can take even a year, de-
pending on the complexity of the topic, the number of reviewers involved, and
the details of the editorial procedures.
Infaceoftheseproblems,manysuggestionshavebeenproposedtomakethe
peer review and editorial process more efficient and equitable [5]. In particular,
the role of editors in the process of selecting and managing reviewers has been
increasingly discussed [8, 9, 10]. The main focus of these discussions are ethical
issues and general, qualitative recommendations for both the editors and the
reviewers[6,7,11,12]. Whilesuchissuesarecertainlypracticalandsignificant,
there is still the lack of quantitative suggestions that could point out possible
measurableimprovementstothepeerreviewprocess. Dotheeditorssendouta
sufficientnumberofreviewerinvitationstoobtaintwoorthreetimelyreviewsof
a manuscript? How often should they draw on expertise of the same reviewers
consumingtheirtimeandenergy? Howlongshouldtheywaitforareviewbefore
they can repeat an invitation or assume that a response is unlikely? What is
the statistical chance that reviewers will respond? Does it depend on whether
they were previously reviewers for the same journal? Although all editors try
to answer these and other questions while optimizing their work on their own,
they do it somewhat in the dark. Without an intensive discussion that could
help to answer the aforementioned questions in a more systematic way one can
be sure that editorial lags will be increasing in the years to come.
Our paper is meant to fill this gap with the help of quantitative analysis.
Weexamineselectedaspectsofpeerreviewandsuggestpossibleimprovements.
To this end, we analyse a dataset containing information about 300 papers
submitted to the Biochemistry and Biotechnology section of the Journal of the
SerbianChemicalSociety(JCSC).Afterseparatingthepeerreviewprocessinto
stages that each review has to go through, we use a weighted directed graph to
describe it in a probabilistic manner and test the impact of some modifications
of the editorial policy on the efficiency of the whole process.
The paper is organized as follows:
Section2describesthedatasetusedinthepaperaswellasthemethodology
employedtoanalysethedata. Section3isdevotedtothedatadriventheoretical
analysis of the review times. Simulations of various editorial policy scenarios
and their impact on the efficiency of the process are presented in section 4. In
section5weprovidesomeconcludingremarksanddescribeopenproblemsthat
may be researched within the presented methodology in the future.
2 Review process and initial data analysis
The sample we studied contains information about reviews of 58 manuscripts
submitted to one of the editors of JCSC between November 2011 and July
INVITATION
11% 42% 11%
CONFIRMATION
REPORT NO RESP. REJECTION
Figure1: Agraphcorrespondingtothereviewprocesswithtrustedandother
reviewers. Next to each edge are probabilities of a realisation of this process
passing through the edge.
2014. Each of 323 members of the sample corresponds to a single reviewer and
comprisesthegroupthereviewerbelongsto, theIDofthereviewedmanuscript
anddatesassociatedwithphasesofthereviewprocess. Reviewersweredivided
intotwogroups-65trustedreviewersareknownpersonallybytheeditorwhile
258 other reviewers were chosen through various different means.
The review process itself is separable into distinct phases that mirror inter-
actions between the editor, authors and reviewers. It begins when the editor,
afterreceivinganewsubmission,sendsoutinvitationstoanumberofreviewers
(5 on average - 4 other and 1 trusted) and waits for their responses. If any
of the invited reviewers does not respond, then after about 7 days an inquiry
is sent. If that inquiry also remains without an answer for 10 days, then the
reviewprocessforthatparticularreviewerisconsideredfinishedwithanegative
outcome. After receiving the initial invitation or the inquiry, reviewers who do
answer either confirm their willingness to write the review or decline. In the
latter case, much like for reviewers who did not answer at all, the review pro-
cess is considered finished with a negative outcome. In the former, the editor
waits for the report for 25 days before sending an inquiry. This may result in
either the reviewer finishing the review and sending the report - which is the
onlyoutcomeoftheprocessthatisconsideredpositive-oralackofanswer. To
sum it up, there arethree possible outcomes of thereview process - report, no
response or decline.
A directed graph in which nodes correspond to phases and edges connect
subsequent phases can be used as a visual representation of the review process.
Graphsthatdescribeoursamplecanbefoundinfigures1-3. Thevalueexpressed
INVINITVAITTIAOTNION
10% 51% 12%
REJECTION NO RESP.
CONFIRMATION
4% 2% NO RESP.
REPORT RENPOOR RTESP. REJECTION
Figure2: Agraphcorrespondingtothereviewprocesswithonly otherreview-
ers. Next to each edge are probabilities of a realisation of this process passing
through the edge.
INVINITVAITTIAOTNION
5% 69% 26%
NO RESP.
CONFIRMATION
13% NO RESP.
REPORT RENPOOR RTESP. REJECTION
Figure 3: A graph corresponding to the review process with only trusted re-
viewers. Next to each edge are probabilities of a realisation of this process
passing through the edge.
G ... G ... G
1,j i,j n,j
1,j i,j n,j
Figure 4: A schematic representation of a node from the review process graph,
its predecessors and all associated probabilities.
in percent next to each edge is the probability that a realisation of the review
process will pass through the edge - that is, the number of members from our
sample for which the transition between nodes connected by the edge occurred
divided by the size of the sample. Widths of edges were scaled proportionally
to that probability.
Whatisstrikingisthatonly43%ofallinvitationsactuallyresultinafinished
review (figure 1). Most of reviewers - that is 64% - do not even respond to
the initial invitation and 42% ignore the inquiry. These poor results are mostly
drivenbyreviewersthatbelongtotheothergroup(figure2),whichconstitutes
the majority of all reviewers. Only 31% of other reviewers finish the review,
73% ignore the initial inquiry, 51% do not answer at all and 16% reject the
invitation. On the other hand, trusted reviewers - who are in minority - are
far more reliable. Most of them, 74%, respond to the invitation and 89% finish
the review. Only 3% do not answer and 8% reject. As we will show in the
following sections, this disparity between trusted and other reviewers may
play a crucial role in the review process and is the key factor that determines
its effectiveness.
3 Review Times
Review time, that is the number of days between the invitation phase and
report phase, is the most direct and tangible measure of the efficiency of the
review process. Since our sample contains information about the beginning
and end of each phase, we were able to acquire distributions of review time for
trusted and other reviewers, as well as partial distributions of days between
allintermediatephases. Thesepartialdistributionsareespeciallyinteresting,as
they can serve as building blocks with which one can create a simulation of the
entire review process and recreate the cumulative distribution of review time
under various assumptions.
The distribution of review time can be reassembled using partial distribu-
tions in the following way. To each node (phase) j of the review process graph
(figures 1-3) one can assign the probability q that a realisation of the process
willpassthroughnodej andtheprobabilitydistributionG ptqofdaysbetween
the invitation phase and phase j. Similarly, each edge is characterised by the
probabilityp thatthereviewprocesswillpassfromphaseitoj andtheprob-
ability distribution P ptq of days associated with such a transition. Given all
these probabilities, G ptq can be calculated as follows
G ptq“ w pG ˙P qptq (3.1)
j i,j i i,j
where the summation is over set tiu of all predecessors of node j and symbol
˙ represents the discrete convolution
pG ˙P qptq“ G pt1qP pt´t1q. (3.2)
i i,j i i,j
Weights w are defined as
w “ i i,j. (3.3)
and the probability q can be expressed as
q “ q p . (3.4)
Equations 3.1-3.4 are recursive. The distribution G ptq associated with node j
dependsonthecorrespondingdistributionsassociatedwithpredecessorsofnode
j and probabilities q exhibit similar dependence. As such, these equations can
be solved recursively if one assumes appropriate initial conditions for nodes
without parents (in our case it is q “ 1 and G ptq “ δ for the
invitation invitation 0,t
node that corresponds to the invitation phase) and acquires probabilities P
and p from the sample. One last fact worth noting is that the quantity q p
from the numerator in equation 3.3 is actually the same as the probability in
figures 1-3 next to each edge.
Using the aforementioned procedure we recreated the distribution of review
times for both trusted and other reviewers which we then compared with
the corresponding empirical distributions from the sample. According to our
theoretical calculations based on equations 3.1-3.4 the average review time for
trusted reviewers is 23 days with standard deviation of 12 days. Average
review time and standard deviation acquired from the sample are the same.
As for other reviewers, the theoretical average review time is 20 days with
standard deviation of 11 days and the sample, again, yields the same values.
One-sampleKolmogorov-Smirnovtestperformedtocomparethetheoreticaldis-
tribution with the sample gives p-value 0.88 for trusted reviewers and 0.97 for
otherreviewers. Itmeansthatthedistributionsofreviewtimescalculatedusing
partial distributions are essentially the same as the ones obtained directly from
data. Thisisanimportantandnon-obviousobservation,astheonlyunderlying
assumption behind equations 3.1-3.4 is that the review process is memoryless -
that is partial distributions assigned to edges do not depend on the history of
the process. Results presented thus far seem to confirm this assumption and it
is reinforced even further in the following section.
Other than the validity of theoretical distributions, there are two main con-
clusions that can be drawn from results presented in figures 5-8. Firstly, the
Probability
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70
Figure 5: The theoretical probability distribution of review time for trusted
reviewers who responded to the initial invitation (black line), who received an
inquiry (white line) and their sum which gives the distribution for all trusted
reviewers (filled polygon).
Probability
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70
Figure 6: The probability distribution of review time for trusted reviewers:
theoretical - black line, from data - grey bars.
Probability
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70
Figure 7: The theoretical probability distribution of review time for other
reviewers who responded to the initial invitation (black line), who received an
inquiry (white line) and their sum which gives the distribution for all other
reviewers (filled polygon).
Probability
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70
Figure 8: The probability distribution of review time for other reviewers: the-
oretical - black line, from data - grey bars.
5 10 15 20
Number of reviewers
Figure 9: Average time of acquiring two reviews for trusted (empty circles)
and other (filled black circles) reviewers when all reviewer finish their reviews.
review time distribution is bimodal. Reviewers who either confirmed or sent in
their reviews after receiving the invitation are the ones who contribute to the
first maximum (and they are in the majority of those who actually completed
the reports - 69% of other and 82% of trusted). Secondly, distributions of re-
view time are similar for trusted and other reviewers. The difference between
means and standard deviations is negligible from any practical standpoint and
two-sample Kolmogorov-Smirnov test for both empirical distributions gives p-
value0.40. Basedonthesefactonecanmakeaverystrongassumptionthatthe
distributionofreviewtimeisthesameacrosstheentirepopulationofreviewers
and does not depend on the type of reviewer.
4 Simulations of the review process
So far we have considered review times of a single reviewer. However, editors
usually need more than one review in order to judge whether to publish an
article. In the case of our data from JCSC, the editor required two reviews
per article and sent invitations to five reviewers on average - one trusted and
four other. While this review strategy indeed resulted in two reviews per arti-
cle on average (2.34 to be exact), 9 articles were published after receiving only
one review, 24 after 2 reviews, 21 after 3 and 4 after 4 reviews. This discrep-
ancy between the target number of reviews and the number of reviews actually
received stems from the difference in the probability of finishing the report be-
tween trusted and other reviewers. We are going to call this probability the
completion rate.
Using partial distributions we can easily simulate the effects of any editorial
0 5 10 15 20
Number of reviewers
Figure 10: Average time of acquiring two reviews for trusted (empty circles)
and other (filled black circles) reviewers with completion rate taken into ac-
count. Filled polygon represents standard deviation.
strategy and find the number of reviewers needed to achieve a certain number
of reviews per article. We will use the average time of receiving two reviews as
a measure of effectiveness of each strategy. Figure 9 shows these average times
under the assumption that a reviewer always writes the report (the completion
rate is equal 1) for both trusted and other reviewers as a function of the
number of reviewers. The average time decreases as the number of reviewers
increases and results for trusted and other reviewers are very similar. This is
intuitive and consistent with our prediction made in the previous section.
Theassumptionthatreviewersalwayswritethereportisnotrealistic. Ifwe
wanttotakeintoaccountthefactthattheactualcompletionrateofthereview
process for a single reviewer is much smaller, especially for other reviewers,
then some additional strategy needs to be introduced to deal with situations
when two reviews are not received at all. In our simulations we decided to use
a very simple solution - if two reviews are not received, then invitations are
resenttothesamenumberofreviewers. Thisprocedureisrepeatedifnecessary
untilreviewersproducetworeportsintotal. Whilethisisnotthemosteffective
and time-efficient strategy, it still allows us to study the consequences of the
difference between the completion rates of trusted and other reviewers.
Figure 10 is analogous to figure 9 - in that it shows the average time of
receiving two reviews - but this time we used the actual completion rates taken
from the sample (89% for trusted, 31% for other reviewers) and employed
the policy described in the previous paragraph. As can be clearly seen, the
difference in completion rates between trusted and other reviewers results in
acompletelydifferentdynamics. Otherreviewersarefarlesseffectiveandtheir
average times are much higher - for example, two reviews can be received from
0 5 10 15 20
Number of reviewers
Figure 11: Same as figure 10 but with the X axis rescaled for other reviewers.
2trustedreviewersafter32daysbut2otherreviewersfinishthereviewsafter
70 days. Even as the number of reviewers increases, this difference remains
significant.
However, in the last section we have shown that distributions of review
time for trusted and other reviewers are very similar which suggests that the
completion rate is the leading factor during the review process. This claim
is partially supported by results presented in figure 9. If that is indeed the
case, then one trusted reviewer should be ”worth” 89%/31% other reviewers
and conversely one other reviewer is ”worth” 31%/89% trusted reviewers.
By ”worth” we mean that proportionally substituting one type of reviewer for
another should yield the same results. Figure 11, where the X axis for one type
of reviewers was rescaled to match their worth in the other type of reviewers,
confirms this prediction. The average number of days after which 2 reviews are
acquiredaresimilarandstandarddeviations,whilenotexactlythesame-which
is to be expected - are comparable.
So far we have studied separately trusted and other reviewers, however
the group of reviewers invited to review an article usually contains reviewers of
both kinds. Figure 12 shows the average time of acquiring two reviews when
reviewertypesaremixed. Asonecouldexpect, theaveragetimedecreaseswith
the increasing total number of reviewers and trusted reviewers are far more
effective than other. Still, by rescaling the X axis - that is by expressing the
worth of one kind of reviewer using another - we get similar results (figure 13).
Information about average times in groups of mixed reviewers, expressed in
a slightly different way in figure 14 and summarised in table 1 can potentially
beofgreatimportanceforeditorsandactasaguideindeterminingtheoptimal
number of reviewers. For example, in order to receive two reviews after about
30 days, one needs to invite 7 other reviewers, 2 trusted or a mixed group of
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
0 X X 32 25 21 18 16 15 14 13
1 X 42 29 23 20 17 16 14 13 12
2 70 37 27 22 19 17 15 14 13 12
3 53 33 25 20 18 16 15 13 12 11
4 43 29 23 19 17 15 14 13 12 11
5 37 27 22 18 16 15 14 13 12 11
6 33 25 20 17 16 14 13 12 11 10
7 29 23 19 17 15 14 13 12 11 10
8 26 21 18 16 14 13 12 11 11 10
9 24 20 17 15 14 13 12 11 10 10
Table 1: Average number of days needed to receive two reviews from a group
of reviewers with a given number of trusted (columns) and other (rows) re-
viewers. Values for groups of reviewers smaller than two were omitted.
4 other and 1 trusted. That last option is consistent with the choice made by
the editor of JCSC who provided us with the data.
It is important to note that while editors may be tempted to invite only
trusted reviewers - which would lead to shortest review times - such a policy
would not only be not realistic but also inadvisable. Since the pool of potential
trustedreviewersislimited, editorswouldbeforcedtoinvitethesamereview-
ers multiple times within a short time frame. This, in turn, could discourage
reviewers and make them more likely to turn down invitations.
5 Discussion
Our results show that the distribution of review time is similar for all kinds of
reviewers and it is the completion rate that is the main factor that determines
the effectiveness of the review process. Trusted reviewers, that is reviewers
known personally by the editor, are far more reliable than other reviewers.
Theircompletionrateisveryhigh,whichmeansthattheyaremuchmorelikely
toanswertheinvitationandfinishthereview. Ontheotherhand,onlyafraction
of other reviewers answer the initial invitation and write the report. It means
thattrustedreviewersareobjectivelybetterthanotherreviewersandthereis
no advantage in choosing the latter over the former. In an ideal world, editors
would invite only trusted reviewers, which, unfortunately, is not possible.
Onequestionremains,then-whoexactlyisthismythicaltrustedreviewer?
What makes the difference between trusted and other reviewers? In the case
of JCSC, it was a personal relationship with the editor. One can easily imagine
thatthismechanismworksinaverysimilarwayinjournalsofcomparablescope.
What about bigger journals or ones in which editors do not choose reviewers
themselves? Even without knowing the editor, reviewers invited by prestigious
journals with high impact factor may be more inclined to write the review and
thus act as trusted. In the end, it seems that the distinction between trusted
and other reviewers is slightly artificial and was motivated mostly by the way
our data is structured. Instead, the completion rate is a much more intrinsic
property that differentiates between reviewers. It is also important to notice
0 5 10 15 20
Number of reviewers
Figure12: Averagetimeofacquiringtworeviewsforagroupofmixedreviewers.
The X axis - total number of reviewers. Curves correspond to various numbers
of trusted reviewers: 0 trusted - top curve, 10 trusted - bottom curve.
0 5 10 15 20
Number of reviewers
Figure 13: Same as figure 12 but with rescaled X axis.
Figure14: Averagetimeofacquiringtworeviewsforagroupofmixedreviewers.
that the completion rate is not a property of a reviewer, but of his relationship
with other entities - be it journals, editors or even other reviewers. As such,
the same reviewer can be treated as trusted by some journals and as other
by others. Also, since relations between people can change, the completion rate
does not have to be constant and it may evolve with time.
Authors of manuscripts, reviewers and editors form a complex network of
mutual connections, the structure of which have a direct influence on the effec-
tivenessof thereviewprocess. However, sinceeditorsaretheones whoactually
manage the entire process, it would seem that their workflow is equally, if not
evenmoreimportant. Withtherightkindofworkflowonecanpotentiallyover-
come many shortcoming of the behaviour of both authors and reviewers. We
have shown that through very naive and most certainly not optimal means -
by sending invitations to a certain number of potential reviewers - it is pos-
sible to achieve almost any desirable average review time. While it is a very
simple example, our results presented in this manuscript can be used as a foun-
dationnecessarytostudythedynamicsofthereviewprocessanddeterminethe
optimal workflow for an editor, which will be the subject of our future work.
6 Acknowledgements
A.F. & P.F. were supported by the Foundation for Polish Science (grant no.
POMOST/2012-5/5) and by the European Union within European Regional
Development Fund (Innovative Economy). This paper is a part of scientific
activities in COST Action TD1306 New Frontiers of Peer Review (PEERE).