1v6810.0101:viXra
Review on the Advancements of DNA
Cryptography
Beenish Anam Kazi Sakib Md. Alamgir Hossain Keshav Dahal
School of Computing School of Computing School of Computing School of Computing
The Bradford University The Bradford University The Bradford University The Bradford University
West Yorkshire, UK West Yorkshire, UK West Yorkshire, UK West Yorkshire, UK
b.anam@brad.ac.uk k.muheymin-us-sakib@bradford.ac.uk M.A.Hossain1@Bradford.ac.uk k.p.dahal@Bradford.ac.uk
Abstract—Since security is one of the most important issues, DNA synthesis, and DNA digital coding, have only been
the evolvement of cryptography and cryptographic analysis developed [12].
are considered as the fields of on-going research. The latest
Traditional cryptographic systems have long legacy and
development on this field is DNA cryptography. It has emerged
are built on a strong mathematical and theoretical basis.
afterthedisclosureofcomputationalabilityofDeoxyriboNucleic
Acid(DNA).DNAcryptography usesDNA asthecomputational Traditional security systems like RSA, DES or NTRU are
tool along with several molecular techniques to manipulate it. alsofoundinrealtimeoperations.So,animportantperception
Duetovery highstorage capacityof DNA,thisfieldisbecoming needs to be developed that the DNA cryptography is not to
very promising. Currently it is in the development phase and
negatethetradition,buttocreateabridgebetweenexistingand
it requires a lot of work and research to reach a mature stage.
newtechnology.ThepowerofDNAcomputingwillstrengthen
By reviewing all the potential and cutting edge technology of
currentresearch,thispapershowsthedirectionsthatneedtobe the existing security system by opening up a new possibility
addressed further in the field of DNA cryptography. of a hybrid cryptographic system.
This paper gives a simple comparison between traditional
I. INTRODUCTION and DNA cryptographic methods. It gives an insight to the
benefitswhichcanbeachievedwiththehelpofDNAcryptog-
DNA cryptography, a new branch of cryptography utilizes raphyanddiscussesthetechniqueswhicharecurrentlyusedin
DNA as an informational and computational carrier with this field. It also stresses on the need that both the traditional
the aid of molecular techniques. It is relatively a new field and DNA cryptographic techniques should be merged in a
whichemergedafterthedisclosureofcomputationalabilityof waythatresultingcryptographicsystemscanenjoythebenefits
DNA [1]. DNA cryptography gains attention due to the vast fromboththefields. It also pointsoutsomeloopholesin this
storage capacity of DNA, which is the basic computational fieldanddiscussesthatthisfieldneedsfurtherresearchtogain
tool of this field. One gram of DNA is known to store about the stage of realization.
108 tera-bytes. This surpasses the storage capacity of any The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section II
electrical, optical or magnetic storage medium [2], [3]. gives backgroundknowledge which is required to understand
DNA is being proposed to use for many computational DNA cryptography and an insight is given to the field of
purposes. For example, Barish et. al. demonstrated a tile cryptography,DNA and DNA cryptography.In this section, a
system that takes input and produces output using DNA [4]. typicalcryptographicscenarioisalsoexplained,whichisused
The method is now also used to solve many NP-complete in later sections. Section III discusses the techniques which
and other problems. Such as Rothemund et. al. showed that areusedin DNA cryptography.Whathasbeendoneandwhat
DNA can also be used to compute XOR function which is stillneedstobe donewillbe discussedin SectionIV. Finally,
an essential part of cryptosystems [5]. It is a very potential conclusion is drawn in Section V.
field of research, as work which has been done in this field
suggests that it can put many challenges to the modern II. BACKGROUND AND RELATEDWORK
cryptosystems [6]. By utilizing DNA cryptography, several Modern cryptography uses cross disciplinary interactions
methodshavebeendesignedtobreakmanymodernalgorithms betweenmathematics,computerscience,andengineering.Ap-
like Data Encryption Standard (DES) [7], RSA [8], [9] and plications of cryptography include online banking, computer
Number Theory Research Unit (NTRU) [10], [11]. authetication, and e-commerce. The discussion starts with the
The research of DNA cryptosystem is still in its early mostbasicapproachforcryptography,andthenimprovements
stage. Thus, the scope of doing research on this new field are demonstrated.
is multi-dimensional. Work needs to be done from theory
A. Cryptography
to realization, as both of the dimensions yet to be matured.
Recent development showed that some key technologies in Cryptography is a very significant and widely used field,
DNA research, such as Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR), because it is the basis of security of all information. It is a
very old field, but in modern times due to the increased use
of internet, the significance of this field has been multiplied.
Thewholemanualsystemsmostimportantlybanking,defence
and shopping systems are now being converted into web
applications.Thepreciousdatawhichisbeingtransferredover
the internet is vulnerable to many security attacks [13] such
as IP spoofing, man in the middle attack, teardrop etc. To
secure our systems and applications, we rely on the strength
of cryptography.
Cryptanalysisruns parallel to the cryptography.The aim of
the cryptanalysis is to analyse and try to break the security Fig.1. Structure ofDNA(A-Adenine, G -Guanine, C-Cytosine andT
-Thiamine).
systems proposed by the discipline of cryptography [14]. So
that means, how strong a cryptographic system is, depends
on how weak cryptanalysis is possible for that system [15].
• and another is extracting information from the DNA
A great deal of work has been done on the cryptography
chip without having the knowledge about the sequences
and cryptanalysis. And as a result, various systems have been
present in different spots of DNA chip [16].
designed (for example, RSA, ECC, etc.) to achieve high level
A detailed explanation of these technqiues is given in
of security.
Section 3.
B. Cryptographic Scenario
The typical scenario in cryptography is that Alice (sender)
Deoxyribo Nucleic Acid (DNA) is the hereditary material
wants to send some messages secretly to Bob (intended
of almost entire living organisms ranging from very small
receiver). The message which is to be sent is in the ordinary
viruses to complex human beings [17]. It is an information
language understood by all, is called a plaintext. The process
carrier of all life forms. DNA is a double helical structure
ofconvertingplaintextintoaformwhichcannotbeunderstood
with two strands running anti parallel as shown in Figure 1.
without having special information is called encryption. This
DNAisalongpolymerofsmallunitscallednucleotides.Each
unreadable form is called cipher text and the special knowl-
nucleotide consists of three components:
edge is called encryption key.
1) a Nitrogenous base
The conversion of cipher text again into plaintext with
2) a five carbon sugar
a special knowledge is called decryption, whereas special
3) a Phosphate group
knowledge for decryption is called decryption key. Only the
receiver has this special knowledge and only receiver can There are four different nucleotides depending upon the type
decrypt a cipher text with this knowledge called decryption of nitrogenous base they have got. There are four different
key. In traditional cryptography encryption and decryption is bases A, C, T, G called Adenine, Cytosine, Thiamine and
done by algorithms for which currently there is no available Guanine respectively [18], [19].
solution [6]. DNA storesall the hugeand complexinformationaboutan
organism with the combination of only these four letters A,
C. Types of Cryptography C, T and G. These bases form the structure of DNA strands
by forming hydrogen bonds with each other to keep the two
There are three prominent branches or sub fields of cryp-
strandsintact.AformshydrogenbondwithTwhereasCandG
tography [6], named as:
formsbondswithoneanother[20].ItcanbeseeninFigure1.
1) Modern Cryptography
Until 1994, DNA was believed to carry only the bio-
2) Quantum Cryptography
logical information but it was Adleman who revealed the
3) DNA Cryptography.
computational ability of DNA when he solved NP complete
These three fields depend upon different difficult problems Hamiltonian path problem of seven vertices [1]. After that
concerningtodifferentdisciplinesforwhichthereisnoknown DNA has been used as a computational tool as well [21].
solutionuntilnow.Themoderncryptographyisbaseduponthe DNA computers deal with the DNA language that consists
difficult mathematical problems such as prime factorization, of four letters A, C, T and G [17], [18]. The computational
elliptic curve problem, for which there is no known solution ability of DNA is now used in cryptography as well. DNA
found so far. Quantum cryptography which is also relatively cryptography is a very potential field and if manipulated in
a new field, is based upon the Heisenberg uncertainty prin- appropriatemannercangivemuchhardercompetitiontoother
ciple of Physics, and DNA cryptography depends upon the fields of cryptography[22].
difficult biological processes concerning to the field of DNA
technology [6] such as : E. DNA Cryptography
• PolymeraseChainReaction(PCR)forasequencewithout Cryptography is the science that addresses all the aspects
knowing the correct two primer pairs [6], [12] for secure communication over an insecure channel, namely
COMPARISONBETWEENTRADITIONALANDDNACRYPTOGRAPHICMETHODS
Security Time Complexity Storage Medium Storage Capacity Stability
Traditional Cryptography OneFold ≥fewseconds Computer(Silicon) Chips 1gramofsilicon chip Dependant on
carries 16MB[23] implementation environments
DNA Cryptography TwoFold ≥few hours DNAstrands 1gramofDNA Dependant on
carries 108 TB[22] environmental conditions
privacy,confidentiality,keyexchange,authentication,andnon- guage limitations used to encode the algorithm. Whereas the
repudiation. As mentioned above, DNA providesan excellent stability of DNA cryptography is very much dependant on
mean to secure data, the technique has been named as DNA the environmental conditions such as temperature, pH. This
cryptography. In such techniques, plaintext message data is instability of DNA cryptography is discussed later.
encodedinDNAstrandsbytheuseofanalphabetofoligonu-
III. DIFFICULT BIOLOGICAL PROBLEMS USEDIN DNA
cleotide sequences. Natural DNA obtained from biological
CRYPTOGRAPHY
sources may be recoded using nonstandard bases, to allow
for subsequent processing [1], [17]. Input and output of the DNA cryptography utilizes biological methods for encryp-
DNAdatacanbemovedtoconventionalbinarystoragemedia tionanddecryption.Amongthose,PolymeraseChainReaction
by DNA chip arrays. Where binary data may be encoded in (PCR) [6], [12] and DNA chip technology [16] are the most
DNA strands by use of an alphabet of short oligonucleotide prominent cryptographic techniques. However, steganography
sequences. usingDNA,isalsofoundintheliterature.Allthesetechniques
are described below.
InTableI,asimplecomparisonisshownbetweentraditional
and DNA cryptographic techniques by considering attributes A. Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR)
including security provided by the technique, time taken to
PCRisanamplificationandquantificationprocessofDNA.
process the technique, storage medium which is used to store
The purpose of designing PCR is to increase the amount of
the data in the technique, the storage capacity of the storage
DNA,asitisverydifficulttodealwithsmallamountofDNA
medium used and the stability of the results for the particular
strands. The name Polymerase chain reaction comes from the
technique.
enzyme(biologicalcatalyst) knownaspolymeraseusedinthe
By considering security provided by both the techniques, technique and chain represents that this amplification process
it can be seen that DNA cryptographic techniques provide occursin manycyclesone after another.By performingPCR,
two fold security by involving computational difficulties as shortsequencesofDNAcanbeanalysedeveninsamplescon-
wellas thebiologicaldifficulties.InTraditionalCryptography taining only minute quantities of DNA. PCR can select small
security can be said to be one fold as it relies on only strandsofDNA andamplifiesthose.Inpractice,amplification
computational difficulties. Time taken by the efficient cryp- of DNA involves cloning of segments of interest into vectors
tographic algorithms is few seconds, whereas DNA crypto- forexpression.PCR is highlyefficientso thatuntoldnumbers
graphictechniquesthatinvolvePCRandDNAchiptechnology of copies can be made from small selected DNA. Moreover,
can take hours to complete the whole process. Traditional PCR uses the same molecules that nature uses for copying
cryptography generally runs on computers over the network, DNA. To perform PCR, one should know the sequence of
so the storage mediums are silicon chips of the computers, DNA to be amplified to design the right primer for it, where
whereasDNAcryptographydealswiththeDNAstrandswhich primer is a sequence containing few numbers of nucleotides
aremanipulatedbybiologicaltechniques.IfweconsiderDNA complimentary to the specific sequence of DNA which is to
as the storage medium, it has got huge storage capacity be amplified [6]. In short, we can identify the PCR process
as compared to the equivalent amount of the silicon chips. into two phases:
This property of data makes DNA cryptography and DNA • Two ”primers”, short single-stranded DNA sequences to
computing very tempting and beneficial field of research. correspond to the beginning and ending of the DNA
Stability of results of cryptographic techniques refers that stretch.
encryptionanddecryptionalwaysgivesthesameresults.Ifthe • Polymerase enzyme that moves along the segment of
stability of the results of encryption and decryption provided DNA, reading its code and assembling the copy.
is analysed, it can be seen that traditional cryptographic The encryption key, in this case, is compound, consisting
algorithms depends on the implementation conditions [24]. ofbothPCRprimerspairandpublickey.Similarlydecryption
Implementation conditions include the platform and the lan- key consists of complementary primer pairs and private key.
Inthiscontext,thecover isthefileinwhichthedata,
hidden , is hid. The resultant file may also be encrypted
using another key called key . Finally, the stego
stego medium
is the file that will be transported.Usual, mediumof covering
file may include the audio or image file. However, due to its
massive storage capability, DNA is getting popular to be a
steganographic covering medium.
Fig.2. SummaryofCryptographic Technique usingPCR
Theprimitiveidea ofDNA steganographycanbe described
as follows. For encryption, one or more input DNA strands
Encryption starts with the exchange of two primers (forward are taken to be tagged as the plaintext message. One or more
and reverse)between Alice and Bob via a secure channel[6]. randomly constructed secret key strands are appended with
For Encryption, pre-processing can be done, that the whole the input DNA. Resulting ”tagged plaintext” DNA strands
algorithmlikeRSAcanbeappliedfirst.Thisstepisnumbered are hidden by mixing them within many other additional
as 1 in Figure 2. Then cipher text can be converted into ”distracter” DNA strands which might also be constructed
DNA sequence by coding scheme represented by number 2 by random assembly. For decryption, given knowledge of
in Figure 2. By performing this, entirely different cipher text the ”secret key” strands, resolution of DNA strands can be
can be obtained [6]. In literature, cipher DNA refers the term decrypted by a number of possible known recombinant DNA
cipher text which is in the form of DNA sequence, and plain separation methods. Such as plaintext message strands may
textDNAdenotestheplaintextwhichisintheformofDNA. be separated out by hybridization with the complements of
The prepared cipher DNA is then flanked by the secret the ”secret key” strands might be placed in solid support on
primers and mixed with a number of other unknown DNA. magnetic beads or on a prepared surface. These separation
Alice sends this DNA mixture to Bob [6]. For decryption, steps may combined with amplification steps.
Bob can retrieve the cipher DNA by performing PCR using Onesuchmethodisfoundin[26].VivianaI.Riscaproposed
its secretprimer,and reversethe wholeprocesswhichis done asteganographictechniqueusingDNAandstandardbiological
for encryption [6]. Anyone without knowing the two primers protocols. The proposed method encodes the information in
cannot retrieve target cipher DNA [12]. Decryption steps are the sequence of DNA strand, flanked by two secret primer
representedas3and4inFigure2.Inthesamefigure,number targetregions. The techniqueuses monoalphabeticencryption
3denotesthatthecipherDNAcanberetrievedbyusingDNA key to assign random but unique 3-base DNA codons to 40
decryption key (secret primers) and is converted into cipher alpha-numeric and punctuation characters. The key was then
text by using coding scheme. Finally, in the figure, 4 denotes used to encode plaintext messages into the base sequence of
that the cipher text is decrypted by RSA private key. an artificially synthesized oligonucleotide.
The above mentioned PCR technique has numerous differ- The resultant DNA strand is then hidden into a very large
ent implications, such as Guangzhao Cui et. al. proposed a amount of similarly sized garbage DNA strands. To extract
encryptionschemewiththeaidofPCRamplificationandDNA the message, one must know the primers that will bind the
codingschemes[6].Ontheotherhand,Tanakaet.al.deviseda targetregionsonthemessage-containingDNA strandin order
public-key system using DNA as a one-way function for key to selectively amplify the required molecule.
distribution using PCR amplification to restore the plaintext Since, this primitive technique is simple and easily break-
DNA from other distractor DNA strands [12]. Yamamoto et. able,animprovementisproposedbyAsish Gehaniet.al[15].
al. also contributed in cryptography by producing large-scale The idea is to distinguishing the probability distribution of
DNA memory based on the nested PCR [25]. This technique plaintext source from that of distracter DNA stands [15].
ofDNA cryptographyprovidestwo foldsecurityby involving As it is discussed that DNA based steganography converts
both the molecular techniques and modern algorithms. If plaintext into plain text DNA but do not encrypt it. It only
one security level is broken some way, the other can keep hides the plaintext DNA into bulk of other DNA and person
this technique safe [6]. However, the problem of PCR based who knows the primer for it can easily locate the plaintext
techniques lies in the transportation of secret keys between DNA and amplify it. This technique can be very useful as it
the senderandreceiver.Whichhasbeendiscussed in detailin saves the cost of encryption, but it is vulnerable to statistical
Section IV. analysis. So the PCR based cryptography may be considered
B. Steganographyusing DNA to be much safer [6], [22].
Steganography is the technique of hiding information. The C. DNA Chip Technology
goal of cryptography is to make data unreadable by a third
A brief introduction to DNA chip technology is given to
party; on the other hand, the goal of steganographyis to hide
cleartheconceptofthistechniqueusedincryptography.Over
the data from a third party. Formula shown at equation 1 is a
less than a decade, DNA chips and microarrayshave changed
very generic description of the steganographic process:
thewayinwhichscientistscarryouttheirinvestigations.DNA
chips enable researchers to manipulate the vast amounts of
cover +hidden +key =stego (1) data from genome-sequencing [27]. DNA chip technology
medium data stego medium
is very important for the manipulation of biological data. However,thefragmentsoftheplaintextareconvertedtoci-
It is commonly used to find expression of many genes in pherstrandsandplaintextstrandsare dropped.Fordecryption
parallel [11]. These chips like silicon chips can be used to commutative property of bit-wise XOR operation is used, as
handle and store the data in the form of DNA sequences. shown in Equation 4-5.
DNA chips consist of large number of spots embedded on
a solid surface, most commonly used is a glass slide. Each
spot consists of different kind and number of probes, where i i i i i
probes are small nucleotide sequences which are able to bind = M i ⊗(S i ⊗S i ) (4)
to the complimentary nucleotides. Nucleotides which bind to = Mi. (5)
these probes are fluorescently labelled, whenever any DNA
MingXin et. al. used DNA chip technology in a similar
sequence binds to these probes, it is observed under a laser
mannerasdescribedabovetodesignasymmetrickeyencryp-
dye and data is calculated electronically depending upon the
tion scheme, they referred this encryption scheme as DNA
ratio of the bindingof probewith the DNA in each spot [28],
symmetric-key cryptosystem (DNASC) [16]. Recently Lai et.
[29].Manufacturersarenowdevelopingsmallerbiochipswith
al. proposed an asymmetric encryption scheme using DNA
better information handling capabilities that will contribute
chip technology and they also designed signatures using this
more effectively to numerous fields of research including
DNA chip technology so that Alice and Bob can verify each
cryptography.
other [30].
Technique, considering the typical cryptographic scenario,
TheencryptiontechniqueusingDNAchiptechnologyisnot
has following steps:
restrictedtoencryptonlytextualdata,therearealsoencryption
• Encryptionkeyis a collectionof particularprobeswhere schemes which are designed to encrypt and decrypt images.
decryption key is a collection of corresponding probes One such cryptosystem is designed by Gehani et. al. where
having complimentary sequence. The decryption key is they produced a substitution one-time-padsystem and used it
then sent to the Bob in a secure manner. duringtheprocessofencryptionanddecryptionof2Dimages.
• Plaintext is converted into a binary format. This binary It is noteworthy that they also performed PCR to amplify
format is then embedded into DNA chip as a cipher text particularDNA strands[15]. Similar techniqueis also noticed
(cipher DNA). Without knowing the decryption key one in Shyam et. al.’s work, where they proposed a cryptosystem
cannot read the plaintext from the DNA chip. and created plaintext and cipher text pairs using DNA chip
• Bob uses the decryption key and hybridizes the cipher technology but on images [31].
DNA. With the help of a computer software he can
Although DNA chip provides a wide range of parallel data
retrieve plain text [16]. processingcapability,thelackofinteroperabilityofDNAchip
One such cryptosystem is XOR One-time-pad [15]. To and other storage mediums supressed its potentiality at this
construct one-time pad using DNA chip technology, an array moment.
of immobilized DNA strands are used, where multiple copies
IV. SCOPE OF RESEARCH
of a single sequence are grouped together in a microscopic
pixel. The strands are optically addressable. Distinct DNA There are many advantageswhich seem to be associated to
sequences at each optically addressable site of the array can the field of DNA cryptography.The huge storage capacity of
besynthesisedusingvariousmethods.Oneoftheknownsuch DNA makes it a very tempting field for research. Moreover
technologies is combinatorial synthesis conducted in parallel the cryptographictechniqueswhichare designedby involving
at thousands of locations. For preparation of oligonucleotides this field are believed to give very high security level [6].
of length L, the 4L sequences are synthesized in 4n chemical TheresearchwhichhasbeendonesofaronDNAcryptogra-
reactions. physhowsthatseveralDNA-basedmethodscanbedevisedin
Toencrypt,eachplaintextmessagehasbeenappendedwith order to break cryptosystems which are currently being used.
auniqueprefixindexoflengthL0.Acomplementoftheplain- Many cryptosystems used today are based on RSA public
text message tag is created on one-time-pad DNA sequence key encryption. RSA public key encryption is based on the
by appending unique prefix index tag of the same length intractability of prime factorization as there are no known
L0. Using annealing and ligation each of the corresponding efficient algorithms to find the prime factors of sufficiently
pair of plaintext message and a one-time-pad sequence is large numbers. As shown in Equation 6 -
concatenated. After that the message is encrypted by bit-wise
XOR mechanism. XOR operation is shown in Equation 2,
where C is the cipher data or strands, M is the plaintext where p and q are prime numbers, for a given ”n” it is
message and S is a sequence of independently distributed infeasible to find p and q when n is a very large number. If
random bits. there is any technique that can find how to factor given ”n”,
the whole RSA scheme will be broken. There are techniques
which have been devised to break RSA scheme in DNA
C =M ⊗S for=1,,n. (2) cryptography. These techniques used self-assembly of DNA
tiles to fully break RSA scheme [32], [9]. If these techniques Bob, same as the manner in which keys of traditional
are able to break RSA, RSA will no more remain practical. cryptographictechniquesare transported.Then Bob can
Elliptic curve cryptography(ECC) has been applied in key synthesize his own primer pairs in the laboratory con-
exchange and also in the digital signatures. The security of sidering the sequence which is sent to him by Alice.
these cryptosystems is based on the difficulty of solving the During all this processenvironmentalconditionsshould
elliptic curve discrete logarithm problem [33]. DNA-based remain stable.
methods have been developed to break the cryptosystems 2) DNA steganography system can be the complement of
based on elliptic curves. These methods are accomplished by the traditional DNA cryptography, however, potential
means of basic biological operations and have developed a limitations of DNA steganography methods is its vul-
parallel multiplier; a parallel divider and a parallel adder for nerability. Certain DNA steganography systems can be
adding points on elliptic curves [34]. broken,withsomeassumptionsoninformationtheoretic
The encryptionschemes (Ciphers)that uses keysonlyonce entropy of plaintext messages. May be the method is
are said to be one-time pads (OTP). In theory OTP cipher brute force, but cannot be ruled out because of the
is absolutely secure. But practically, key distribution and key advancement of computing technologies. To make the
generationarecriticalissuestoberesolvedfortheuseofOTP situation better, plaintext messages can be compressed
ciphers. Key space should be large enough so that keys can before encrypting, however, in this case, plaintext mes-
onlybe usedonce.DNA havinghugestoragecapacity,canbe sages need to be pre-processed.So the open question is
manipulatedto generate key space to be used for OTPcipher. whetherDNA steganographysystemswithnaturalDNA
There are also some areas that need to be improved. For plaintextinputcanorcannotbemadetobeunbreakable.
example, Time and computational complexity are two of the TheprocessofDNAsteganographyinvolvesthetagging
most important parameters for any kind of cryptographic of plaintext DNA with the primers and is hid in other
systems, DNA cryptography dealing with the manipulation garbage or junk DNA of same length as the plaintext
of DNA sequences takes a lot of time to deal and work out DNA. This is a very simple method to provide confi-
withDNAsequencesascomparedtotimetakenbymanyvery dentiality.Sameissuecanarisehereiftheenvironmental
efficient algorithms of traditional cryptographysuch as, DES, conditionschangethebindingpropertyofDNAwiththe
RSA etc. [8], [9]. primer. There is also a possibility that other garbage
There is also a risk associated to DNA cryptographythat if DNA can bind to the primer, making it difficult to
thecipherDNAgetsimpuredbyunwantedDNAs,thisprocess recover the original plaintext DNA [6], [22].
may collapse.This maybe handledby takingprecautionsand 3) DNA chips contains arrays of Pico moles of DNA
maintaining the laboratory environment pure. Still research sequences,knownas probes.Since an arraycan contain
must be carried on to address the reliability issues. huge number of probes, a DNA chip can accomplish
To summarise the whole discussion, following points are numberof computationin parallel. However,DNA chip
significant. data is difficult to exchange between traditional storage
1) In cryptographic technique involving PCR technology, medium, due to the lack of standardization in fabrica-
it can be examined that there are two encryption keys tion,protocols,andanalysismethods[35].Thisproblem
and two decryption keys. One pair of encryption and is defined as interoperabilityproblem in bioinformatics.
decryption key is (n , e) pair which was used for RSA Moreoverby examining the DNA chip technologyused
publickeycryptosystem.Theotherpairwastheforward in the DNA cryptography, it is seen that encryption
and reverse primers used for tagging the cipher DNA. and decryption processes are performed on DNA chip.
These primers were necessary to be securely shared DNA being a biological molecule; whose properties
among Alice and Bob as DNA can only be recovered are dependent on the environmental conditions. For
if these primer pairs were known. This means that in instance, DNA’s property to bind to other nucleotides
addition to the public and private keys, primer pairs are can be changed by changing environmental conditions.
also to be secretly transported.In public key encryption So encryption and decryption process does not remain
thereisonlyonesecretwhichissharedthatistheBob’s stable.Due tothisinstability,encryptionanddecryption
private key. However in this technique primer pairs are mayshowdifferentresultsunderdifferentenvironmental
also to be secretly transported [6]. The transport of conditions.
primers is not as simple as for the transport of keys
of the traditional cryptographic techniques. InshortitcanbesaidthatDNAcryptographycannottotally
Primer pairs are the sequences of nucleotides; there is be replaced traditional cryptography which is currently being
a probability that these molecules can be affected by used. This field requires a lot of research and work to have a
environmentalconditions. To take accountof this, envi- positioninwhichitcanbeimplementedandusedforpractical
ronmental conditions should be maintained throughout purposes. There is a need that people from traditional cryp-
the process of transport. tography and DNA technology should exchange knowledge
Another possibility is that the sequence of primer pair amongeachotherandcryptosystemsshouldbedevisedinsuch
intheformofA,C,T,Gcanbesentasdigitalformtothe a way that they can enjoy benefit from both the fields.
V. CONCLUSION [11] X.C.Zhang,“BreakingtheNTRUpublickeycryptosystemusingself-
assembly of DNA tilings,” Chinese Journal of Computers, vol. 12, pp.
DNAcryptographyisarelativelynewcryptographicfieldof
2129–2137,2008.
research evolved with the DNA computing. In this particular [12] T.Kazuo,O.Akimitsu,andS.Isao,“Public-key systemusingDNAas
field, DNA is used as message carrier and the bio-technology a one-way function for key distribution,” BioSystems, Elsevier Science,
vol.81,no.1,pp.25–29,2005.
such as PCR, is used as the implementation mechanism. The
[13] N. Galbreath, Cryptography for Internet and Database Applications:
extravagant storage capability and parallel computability of Developing Secret and Public Key Techniques with Java. New York,
DNA molecules are exploited for encryption, authentication, USA:JohnWileyandSons,Inc.,2002.
[14] A. Menezes, P. Oorschot, and S. Vanstone, Handbook of applied
and authorization. In this paper, the existing DNA crypto-
cryptography. CRCPress,1996.
graphictechniquesnamelyPolymeraseChainReaction(PCR), [15] A.Gehani,T.LaBean,andJ.Reif,DNAbasedcryptography. Germany:
Steganography using DNA and DNA chip technology have AspectsofMoleculer Computing, Springer-Verlag., 2004.
[16] L.MingXin,L.XueJia,X.GuoZhen,andQ.Lei,“Symmetric-keycryp-
been discussed. With the summarization of the progress of
tosystemwithDNAtechnology,”ScienceinChinaSeriesF:Information
DNAcryptographicresearch,theadvantages,futuretrendsand Sciences, Springer Verlag,Germany,vol.50,no.3,pp.324–333, 2007.
severalproblemshavealsobeenidentified.Allthethreekinds [17] L. H. N. C. for Biomedical Communications, Handbook on Genetic
CellsandDNA. USA:NationalLibraryofMedicine,NationalInstitutes
of cryptographyhave their own advantagesand disadvantages
ofHealth, Department ofHealthandHumanServices.,2010.
and can be treated as the complement of each other in future [18] M. Zhang, L. Sabharwal, and W. Tao, “Interactive DNA sequence
security applications. However, the difficulties that are identi- and structure design for DNA nanoapplications,” IEEE Transactions on
Nanobioscience, vol.3,no.4,pp.286–292,Dec.2004.
fied in DNA cryptographyare the absence of theoreticalbasis
[19] J. Watson and F. Crick, “A structure for deoxyribose nucleic acid,”
andpracticalmethodologieswhichcanreadilybeimplemented Nature,vol.171,pp.737–738,Apr.1953.
in the field of security. [20] X. Guozhen, L. Mingxin, Q. Lei, and L. Xuejia, “New field of cryp-
tography:DNAcryptography,”ChineseSienceBulletin,SpringerVerlag,
The potentialityof DNA oncomputingcan openup further
Germany,vol.51,no.12,pp.1413–1420, 2006.
biological molecule based computation methods. Once the [21] A. Leier, C. Richter, W. Banzhaf, and H. Rauhe, “Cryptography with
DNA cryptography field is developed and analysed, attempts DNA binary strands,” BioSystems, Elsevier Science, vol. 57, no. 1, pp.
13–22,2000.
can be made to convert the cipher DNA into cipher proteins
[22] G.Cui,L.Cuiling,L.Haobin,andL.Xiaoguang,“DNAcomputingand
or RNA, these can give us another level of security. It will itsapplication toinformationsecurity field,”inIEEEFifthInternational
be possible only by intensive research and practical work on Conference onNaturalComputation, Tianjian, China,Aug.2009.
[23] Farnel. (2010) Silicon storage technology - sst25vf016b-50-4i-
DNA computing.
s2af - 16m flash memory, spi eeprom, soic8. [Online]. Avail-
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
s2af/16m-flash-memory-spi-eeprom-soic8/dp/1368695
The Erasmus Mundus project eLINK - east-west Link for [24] A. A. Jabri, “A statistical decoding algorithm for general linear block
Innovation,NetworkingandKnowledgeexchangeprogramme codes,” in 8th IMA International Conference on Cryptography and
Coding,Cirencester, UK,Dec.2001,pp.1–8.
(EM ECW SGA2008-4949)for funding this study. [25] M.Yamamoto,S.Kashiwamura,A.Ohuchi,andM.Furukawa,“Large-
scale dna memory based on the nested pcr,” Natural Computing, an