]hp-pmoc.scisyhp[
3v84750.7051:viXra
Preprint submitted to arXiv
(typeset using svjour3.cls)
Review on Slip Transmission Criteria in Experiments and Crystal
Plasticity Models
E. Bayerschen · A.T. McBride · B.D. Reddy ·
T. B¨ohlke
ThepublishedversionofthisarticleisavailableintheJournalofMaterialsScience.
Abstract Acomprehensiveoverviewisgivenoftheliteratureonsliptransmissioncriteriaforgrain
boundaries in metals, with a focus on slip system and grain boundary orientation. Much of this
extensiveliteraturehasbeeninformedbyexperimentalinvestigations.Theuseofgeometriccriteria
in continuum crystal plasticity models is discussed. The theoretical framework of Gurtin (2008,
J.Mech.Phys.Solids56,p.640)isreviewedforthe singleslipcase.Thishighlightsthe connections
to slip transmission criteria from the literature that are not discussed in the work itself. Different
geometriccriteriaarecomparedfor the single slipcasewithregardtotheir predictionofsliptrans-
mission.Perspectivesonadditionalcriteria,investigatedinexperiments andusedincomputational
simulations, are given.
Keywords Slip transfer · Transmission criteria · Slip system interaction · Grain boundary
1 Introduction
The plasticdeformationofmetals isinfluencedby the microstructureofthe material,e.g.,bygrain
boundaries (GBs) [1]. Dislocations from adjacent grains interact at the grain boundary by differ-
ent mechanisms [2–7]. The effective transmission and activation behavior of dislocations at grain
boundaries is a result of dislocation reactions [8, 9], the type of dislocations involved [10, 11], and
the microstructural characteristics such as grain boundary type [12–15] or phase composition [16–
18].
E.Bayerschen·T.B¨ohlke
InstituteofEngineeringMechanics(ITM),ChairforContinuumMechanics,KarlsruheInstituteofTechnology(KIT),
Kaiserstr.10,D-76131Karlsruhe,Germany
E-mail:eric.bayerschen@kit.edu, thomas.boehlke@kit.edu
Tel.:+49-721-608-481-33, +49-721-608-488-52
A.T.McBride·B.D.Reddy
CentreforResearchinComputationalandAppliedMechanics(CERECAM),UniversityofCapeTown(UCT),7701
Rondebosch, SouthAfrica
E-mail:andrew.mcbride@uct.ac.za, daya.reddy@uct.ac.za
The authors confirm that no conflicts of interest arise with regard to the research leading to this paper, nor with
publicationofthiswork.
2 E.Bayerschenetal.
Basic dislocation interaction and slip transfer mechanisms are illustrated in Fig. 1. The orienta-
Fig. 1: Slip transfer and dislocation interaction mechanisms in adjacent grains A, B, separated by
grain boundary with normal n .
tions of the slip directions are denoted by dA,dB, and the orientations of the slip plane normals
by nA,nB, respectively.Here, α=1,...,N areslip systemsof grainA atthe GB with normaln .
The number of slip systems is N, and β =1,...,N are the slip systems of grain B. For example,
ReviewonSlipTransmissionCriteriainExperimentsandCrystalPlasticityModels 3
dislocations can pile up at the grain boundary, Fig. 1 a). Subsequently, several mechanisms are
possible. Dislocation sources can be activated, leading to the emission of dislocations in grain B
and in the grain boundary, Fig. 1 b). In addition, dislocations can be dissociated into the grain
boundary,leadingtonodislocationemissioningrainB,atfirst(Fig.1c)).Afterwards,are-emission
ofresolveddislocationsis possible ingrainB,Fig. 1 d). Atransferofa dislocationfromthe pile-up
in grain A to grain B is depicted in Fig. 1 e), leaving a residual dislocation in the grain bound-
ary behind due to the required continuity of the Burgers vector [19]. For an ideal alignment of
slip-directions,thedislocationisentirelytransmittedandnoresidualdislocationisdepositedinthe
grainboundary,Fig.1f).Furthermore,mechanismscanoccurinvolvingincomingdislocationsfrom
both grainsadjacent to the grainboundary like, e.g., the absorptionof two dislocations generating
a new dislocation in the grain boundary, Fig. 1 g). The reflection of a dislocation from the grain
boundary back into grain A is depicted in Fig. 1 h), leading to a residual dislocation in the grain
boundary. It is remarked that the above-depicted mechanisms are simplified schematics intended
for a brief overview of important mechanisms.
Moreinvolvedmechanismsinclude,forexample,theabsorptionofdislocationsintothegrainbound-
ary by either dissociation of the dislocation into DSC dislocations [20] appropriate for the specific
type of grain boundary [21], or by remaining as a localized dislocation. Furthermore, which of
these mechanisms become active (some can also act simultaneously [2]) depends not only on the
lattice orientationsof both grainsand the grainboundary but also onthe type of dislocations,i.e.,
whether these are edge dislocations, screw dislocations or mixed dislocations. Screw dislocations
can, in principle, cross the grain boundary without leaving a residual dislocation [4]. There are
also indications that continuous screw slip bands across a grain boundary are more likely due to a
transfer of dislocations than due to an activation of dislocation sources in the adjacent grain [12].
Grain boundaries can also act as dislocation sources generating dislocations that remain within
the vicinity of the grainboundary, and with subsequent emission into the adjacent grains [22] (not
depicted above). Dislocations can, furthermore, be generated at precipitate interfaces [23].
Transmission of dislocations across GBs corresponds to the transfer of line defects and can be as-
sociated to the transfer of slip by means of the Orowan equation. From an experimental point of
view, the activity of slip systems in the adjacent grains to a GB can be investigated by analysis
of the slip traces [24] on both sides of the GB. However, there are various degrees of continuity or
discontinuity that can be observed [25, 26]. A discontinuous slip trace is schematically shown in
Fig.2a).In[26],someofthedevelopingsliptraces,inthegrainadjacenttoapile-up,wereobserved
to spread over the whole grain (see schematic in Fig. 2 b)), but others reached only a few microns
(Fig. 2 c)) into the grain. The authors of the latter work propose a classification into continuous
and discontinuous slip traces, considering all grain boundaries intersected by dislocation channels.
This alsoincluded grainboundarieswheredislocationchannelsarrestedonthe incoming grain-side
of the grain boundary, and where new channels developed a few microns away from the GB in the
adjacent grain for the same slip system (illustrated in Fig. 2 d)). Furthermore, slip traces can be
continuous on parts of a grain boundary and be discontinuous on other parts [27, 28].
Thetransferoflinedefectsisinfluencedbyboth,theorientationoftheGBs[2],andtheorientation
ofthe slipsystems (see,e.g.,[29]).The better the alignmentoftwo adjacentslip systems,the more
likely a transmission event is to occur between grains [30]. Consequently, such a slip transmission
criterion interconnects the slip activity on both sides of the grain boundary. This geometric crite-
rion seems to be the most substantial one in predicting the correct slip system for a dislocation
transmission [31]. Additional transmission criteria, however, have been proved to be essential, as
well[32].Theseincludeminimizing the residualBurgersvector(RBV)remaininginthe GBupona
4 E.Bayerschenetal.
Fig.2:Discontinuityandcontinuityofsliptracesanddislocationmovementacrossagrainboundary
with normal n between two slip systems α,β in grains A, B.
transmissionas well as maximizing the resolvedshear stress (RSS) on the outgoing slip plane. The
RBV is the Burgers vector necessary to ensure continuity of the Burgers vector upon transmission
from slip system A to B, i.e., b +bB =bA [19]. Thus, the residual Burgers vector vanishes for an
ideal transmissionevent, where both slip directions, i.e., also the Burgers vectors for both slip sys-
tems, are coinciding. The three criteria of a geometric transmissionfactor combined with RSS and
RBV have been investigated experimentally and computationally, mainly for face-centered cubic
(FCC) crystal structured materials, e.g., [33–39] and often for symmetric grain boundaries [40–44]
(see [36] for an overview of investigations on FCC including a list of boundary types). However,
morerecentworksalsoconsidergeneralgrainboundaries[35,45].In[46],itwasconcludedthatthe
criteria are applicable for hexagonal close-packed (HCP) materials, too. For body-centered cubic
(BCC) materials, the existing work is still not exhaustive up to date, e.g., [13, 14, 47, 48]. In the
latter two experimental works, the minimization of the RBV was confirmed for BCC. There were,
however, also indications that transmission criteria might be dependent on the grain boundary
type. Furthermore, in the computational work [35], the applicability was also investigated for an
asymmetric grain boundary. It was found that the inclination of the grain boundary is of minor
importance for the transmission. For a detailed overview on the existing body of works regarding
different crystal structures, it is referred to [49]. The criteria also appear to be applicable for in-
terphase boundaries in alloys[50]. There are,however,also indications that the energetic structure
of interphase boundaries [51, 52] needs to be considered in an extension of the criteria [53] and
that additional criteria are necessary, e.g., for the case of lagging Shockley partials [43]. In [54],
the strengthening mechanisms of incoherent interphase boundaries are found to be length scale
dependent with a peak strength set by the interface resistance to single dislocation transmission.
Continuum theories are commonly used to model the effective material response [55, 56] of met-
als and to support experimental findings [57, 58]. They offer comparably low computational time
requirementandabroadspectrumofapplicabilitytosingle-aswellaspolycrystallinematerials.Ap-
plications include, for example, the prediction of hardening behavior due to plastic anisotropy [59]
and texture evolution [60], modeling phenomena like deformation twinning [61], and shear band-
ing [62]. Whenever the material response is of singlecrystalline type [63] or at least polycrystalline
such that individual grains are not predominant [64], regarding the effective material response,
ReviewonSlipTransmissionCriteriainExperimentsandCrystalPlasticityModels 5
continuumapproachesarevaluabletouse sincethemicrostructureofthematerialdoesnotneedto
be accounted for, explicitly. In cases when microstructural characteristics of the material become
predominant,continuummodels needto be enrichedby additionalconsiderations,like the incorpo-
ration of strain gradients [65] and explicit modeling of the influence resulting from interfaces, e.g.,
in bimetallic materials [66]. Modeling grain boundary mechanisms is an ongoing challenge in the
development of continuum models and has been approached, e.g., by the development of gradient
crystal plasticity theories, e.g., [67–69]. It is known that five macroscopic and three microscopic
degrees of freedom are necessary to specify a general grain boundary [70]. Continuum models,
however, commonly neglect the microscopic degrees of freedom, i.e., the translations between slip
systems from adjacent grains at a grain boundary are not accounted for due to the coarsening
made. Only the macroscopic degrees of freedom are then considered which define the rotations
between slip systems and the grain boundary, respectively. For large-grained microstructures [49],
the GB modeling is of utmost importance since the GB presence and influence on the dislocation
movement leads to pile-ups of dislocations that can, in turn, dominate the material behavior. As-
sociatedoccurringphenomena aresize effects, e.g.,[71, 72]. Size effects canbe modeled in gradient
plasticity models by different approaches. The free energy can be enhanced by terms taking into
account excess dislocations [73, 74]. Thereby, gradient stresses or back-stresses are induced which
enter the equations for slip rates. Such an approach neglects the influence of grain boundaries or
other obstacles on the dislocation structures. If, for example, dislocation structures in dual-phase
steels are to be described on the grain scale taking into account interaction of ferrit grains and
the coverageof ferrit grains by martensite particles, then such an approachis insufficient [75]. The
aforementioned grain interactions can be incorporated by a grain boundary yield condition [68]
which mimics the slip interaction on grain boundaries by additional constitutive equations which
can take into account the misorientation [69], the orientationof the grain boundary relative to the
grain orientations [67], and additionally the grain boundary defect energy. By this grain boundary
yield mechanism, a (grain) size effect is induced.
In continuum models, conservative glide of dislocations is often assumed and dislocation trans-
fer across interfaces like GBs is modeled, usually, from a phenomenological perspective, e.g., [76].
Thereby the discrete causes of, e.g., strain fields close to grain boundaries can, however, not be
distinguished anymore.For instance, continuum models incorporatinggrainboundary yielding can
not distinguish between strain fields caused by dislocation transmission across the GB and strain
fields caused by absorption of dislocations from adjacent grains into the GB [77]. However, more
sophisticated continuum models have also been developed that incorporate physical mechanisms
like,for example,climbing ofdislocations[78].The modelof[79] considersthe redistributionofde-
fects along the grainboundary in anaveragedsense via a diffusion-type equation for the spreading
of the net-defect content of the grain boundary along its planar surface. Dislocation transport is
consideredinthemodelsof[80,81].Inthelatterwork,fluxequationsareexplicitlyaccountedforat
the interfaces,thereby modeling the transportacrossthem. It has been experimentally determined
that the changes in line energy, accompanying dislocation motion, are important in the context of
grain boundary dislocations [82]. The framework [83] takes into account the transport of disloca-
tions in the bulk and curvature-induced line-length production by coupling a physically enriched
continuum dislocation dynamics model [84] with a simplified gradient plasticity model [68].
ExistingcontinuumgrainboundarymodelsthataccountforsliptransmissioncriteriaacrossGBsare
limited.Manymodelsareonlytwo-dimensionalintheirnature,e.g.,[69,85],orintheirimplementa-
tion[86].Researcherstryingtoincorporatesliptransmissioncriteriaincontinuummodelsarefaced
with the challenge that there are several geometric slip transmission criteria, e.g., [5, 30, 87, 88].
6 E.Bayerschenetal.
Related articles commonly include a brief overview on selected works from the experimental lit-
erature (see for example [31, 49, 66, 89]). A comprehensive overview, however, that includes all
geometrical slip transmission criteria in a unified and compact notation to ease the comparability
of the geometrical concepts is still missing in the literature to date.
The outline of this work is as follows. At first, an overview is givenon the geometric slip transmis-
sion criteria used in experiments and computational models including perspectives on additional
criteria and considerations. Then, the sophisticated GB theory of [67] (recently implemented in
threedimensionsin[90])isanalyzedforthesingleslipcaseandtheconnectionstothetransmission
criteria are discussed. Finally, the geometrical criteria are compared for the single slip case and
conclusions are drawn on limitations of these geometric factors.
2 Slip transmission criteria
2.1 Criteria that account for slip system orientations
Livingston and Chalmers [87] were among the first to use geometric slip transmission criteria in
experiments to predict the activated slip system in a grain adjacent to a dislocation pile-up. Their
geometric criterion accounts for the orientations of the slip directions dA,dB, and the orientations
of the slip plane normals nA,nB, respectively (Fig. 3). The used transmission factor matrix reads
Fig.3:Nomenclaturefor slipsystems α,β in adjacentgrainsA,B,separatedby grainboundaryΓ.
andhasN ×N components.Withthiscriterion,theactivationstressofthe outgoingslipsystemis
calculated[87].Itisbasedontheapproximationthatthestressstateintheadjacentgrain,resulting
from the pile-ups of the incoming slip system at the grain boundary, is of pure shear stress type.
Thus, the shear stresses on the incoming and on the outgoing slip systems are interconnected by
the individual transmissionfactors.This purelygeometriccriterionis alsousedin [3], followingthe
interpretation of an activation of dislocationsources due to pile-ups. A slightly modified versionof
ReviewonSlipTransmissionCriteriainExperimentsandCrystalPlasticityModels 7
thegeometrictransmissionfactormatrix(1)isemployedin[88].Thesecondtermof (1)isdropped,
and the transmission factor then reads
αβ α β α β
ThisfactoriscombinedwiththeSchmidfactors[91]andastressintensityfactorresultingfrompile-
ups (basedon [92]) in the transmissionevaluationof [31]. It wasfound that a lower stressintensity
factor(leadingtoalowerRSS)ontheemissionslipsystemcorrelatedtolargerRBVs.Forcontrolling
the slip system activation, good alignment of slip systems has provedto be more important than a
highSchmid factor.The importance of misalignmentofslip systems for sliptransmissionprocesses
has also been demonstrated with the preceding geometric factor in micro-hardness measurements
of GBs [93].
2.2 Criteria that account for slip system orientations and grain boundary orientation
In [5], using (1) is compared to a different transmission factor incorporating the grain boundary
orientation via
αβ α β α β
where lA,lB are normalized vectors of the lines of intersection, see Fig. 3. They can be obtained
from, e.g., lA =(nA×n )/|(nA×n )|. Here, n denotes the GB normal. In combination with a
stress criterion based on maximizing the Peach-Koehler force on the emitted dislocation, (3) was
shownto successfully predict allslip system activations,whereasthe purely geometriccriterion(1)
did not. The geometric criterion (3) determines the slip plane, and the stress criterion determines
the slip direction of the emitted dislocation in this procedure. These criteria were also used to
predict the activation of slip systems in [2].
The criteria for slip transmission were further extended in [32] to account for the RBV, where
was used instead of (3). In a first step, the slip plane for a possible transmission is determined by
finding the slip plane normal that maximizes the scalar product between the lines of intersection.
Thiscorrespondstoaminimizationoftheangleδ,see“1.”inFig.4.Then,theslipdirectiononthe
given slip plane is determined by finding the maximum RSS on the outgoing slip directions (2. in
Fig.4).Incaseofmultiple slipdirectionswithsimilarRSS,thedirectionischosenwhichminimizes
the RBV b left behind in the GB by a transmission event. Thus, the angle κ between the slip
directionsis minimized (3.in Fig.4).This approachremovedremaininginconsistencieshighlighted
in the approach of [2], and was used by [28].
In [94], it is proposed that the criteria of maximum RSS and minimum RBV need to be combined
as they are competitive in nature (see also [4]). It was found, however, that minimizing the RBV
is of dominant influence for the slip transmission.In [30], it is outlined, with reference to [95], that
this combinedcriterionis not applicable to multiple active slip systems.For the caseof intermetal-
lic phase boundaries, the combined criteria by [94] were confirmed to be applicable with a slight
refinement [50]. This refinement considers metals with multiple types of slip systems. The purely
geometric criterion (3) is applied in [47], while in [96], it is both applied and combined with inves-
tigations regarding the RBV criterion and incompatibility stresses. The importance of considering
the RBV in the slip transmission prediction is emphasized in [97], as well.
8 E.Bayerschenetal.
Fig. 4: Combined criteria [32] for slip transmission from grain A to B, separated by grain bound-
ary Γ.
ReviewonSlipTransmissionCriteriainExperimentsandCrystalPlasticityModels 9
2.3 Criteria that consider threshold values for the slip system and grain boundary angles
The geometrical criteria outlined in the previous sections were evaluated for each slip system,
individually,todeterminethemostlikelysystemforsliptransferacrossgrainboundaries.However,
it has also been proposed in the literature to calculate an overall measure of slip transfer by, e.g.,
summingovertheindividualcomponentsofallpossibleslipsystemcombinations.Suchanapproach
is used in [98]. The mismatch between slip systems in adjacent grains is taken into account via a
sum of the form
λ= cos arcos nA·nB cos arcos dA·dB . (5)
(cid:18) ω
(cid:19) (cid:18) κ
c (cid:16)
α β (cid:17)(cid:19)
Here, ω and κ are critical angles above which no slip transfer is expected to occur on the associ-
ated slip systems. Thus, these slip system combinations are not considered and removed from the
sum if their shared angle is too large. As it is discussed in [98], the mismatch between slip plane
normals was taken into account, rather than the mismatch between lines of intersection on Γ. The
GB orientation was difficult to measure. The critical angles, above which slip transmission is not
expected to occur, are taken to be κ =45 and ω =15 for α/α- and α/β-phase boundaries in
brass. For β/β-phase boundaries ω =30 is used as critical angle for the slip plane normals. The
limitangleω =15 wasmotivatedbytheworkof[3]using (1),wherethecriticalangleδ between
the lines of intersectionis estimated to be in the range of 10 −20 .Furthermore,it is arguedthat
the angle of lines of intersection for a pair of slip systems on adjacent sides of a GB cannot exceed
the angle between adjacent slip plane normals, i.e., δ ≤ω →lA·lB ≤nA·nB. Thus, ω is used in
place of δ, see Fig. 3. The approach of [98] confirmed the experimental behavior of phase- / grain
boundaries with regard to their slip permeability.
In [99], however, (5) was used in combination with the Schmid factors to investigate both criteria
regardingthe tensile strength of the considered material.It was found that the trend of the tensile
strength was opposite to that of the calculated transmission number λ, i.e., a high value of λ did
not lead to an increased yield strength.
In [53], the angle δ between the lines of intersection is taken into account, rather than the an-
gle ω between the slip plane normals. Furthermore, instead of the summation in (5), individual
components
χˆ =cos arcos lA·lB cos arcos dA·dB (6)
c (cid:16)
α β (cid:17)(cid:19) (cid:18) κ
c (cid:16)
α β (cid:17)(cid:19)
are considered. The same critical angles as in the previous works, however, are utilized. The geo-
metrical criterion was combined with the Schmid factors and further considerations regarding the
interface shear strength [100–102].
2.4 Criteria that consider weighted sums of geometric transmission factors
Besides (5), other summation approaches exist in the literature, additionally, considering weights
fortheslipsystemcontributions.Suchanapproachistakenin[89]sincenoclearcorrespondenceto
the transmission events could be established using only the geometric factor (2). Several weighted
sumapproachesforasliptransmissionfactorareproposedin[89].These scalarmeasuresarebased
onthe abovedescribedgeometricfactors.Theyareobtainedby the summationoverallslipsystem
10 E.Bayerschenetal.
transmission factors and weighting each one with plastic slips γA or the Schmid factors mA,mB.
Two such criteria are proposed in [89] by
m ′ = NˆmodmAmB mAmB, (7a)
Xα,β .Xα,β
Xα,β .Xα,β
Measure (7a) connects the geometric mismatch with the RSS due to the employed weighting using
Schmid factors. Two other measures are also given in [89] by
Xα,β .Xα,β
Xα,β .Xα,β
For the sample investigated in [89], all four measures give similar distributions along the grain
boundaries. This raises the question if the weighting by resolved shear stresses or by plastic slips
is applicable.Furthermore,in (8a) the slip system normals seemto be double-accountedfor due to
the combination of the geometric factors (2) and (4).
The slip transmission criteria used in experiments are summarized in Table 1.
Table 1: Slip transmission criteria in the experimental literature. Abbreviations used are RSS:
Resolved shear stress / Schmid factors, RBV: Residual Burgers vector, PKF: Peach-Koehlerforce,
IBS: Interface barrier strength, SIF: Stress intensity factor, SW: Slip weights, SFW: Schmid factor
weights.
Transmission Additionalcriteria TF Additionalcriteria
factor(TF) Reference Reference
RSS/IBS - RSS
SW,SFW LRBγ,sγ SW,SW
3 Computational modeling
3.1 Computational investigation of slip transmission criteria
The criteriaofcombiningageometrictransmissionfactor(GTF), RSS,andRBVwereinvestigated
in atomistic simulations (see [103] and [104] for an overview) and molecular dynamics simula-
tions[37].However,ithasbeenfoundthatthe localenergeticstructureandthe localstressstateof
ReviewonSlipTransmissionCriteriainExperimentsandCrystalPlasticityModels 11
the GB can not be neglected in the context of dislocation interactions near GBs, in general [103].
Additionalconsiderationsinclude,e.g.,the interfaceshearstrength[100–102].Intheatomisticsim-
ulations [105] and in the combined computational / experimental approaches [28], the importance
of the RBV for the slip transmission has been demonstrated. The barrier provided for dislocation
motion by two twist and tilt grain boundaries, respectively, was found to be proportional to the
RBV magnitude. This was also the case for an investigated twin boundary. The coupled atomistic
/ discrete dislocation framework [43] also confirms the three basic slip transmission criteria (GTF,
RSS, RBV) for a tilt grain boundary impinged by edge dislocations. It is proposedthere, however,
thatadditionalcriteriaarenecessaryforthecaseofGBdislocationnucleation.Forthecaseofscrew
dislocations impinging onthe same grainboundarytype (and other symmetric tilt boundaries),no
transmission but only nucleation was observed in [44]. In [106], dislocations of mixed character
wereinvestigatedforthe sametypes ofboundaryasin[44].The setofcriteriaoutlined in[44]were
extended since the effects of local GB structure are not accounted for by the classic criteria. They
were incorporated additionally by quantitative criteria [106].
By physically detailed simulation approaches like atomistics, the interaction of dislocations, e.g.,
with twin boundaries [107], can be investigated very thoroughly. However, contrary to many con-
tinuummodels,immensecomputationalcostsariseduetothedetailedmodelingofinteractionsand
the inherent discreteness of the models. This limits using discrete models for larger structures and
necessitates the development of, e.g., mesoscale approaches like crystal plasticity models.
3.2 Crystal plasticity models taking into account geometrical slip transmission criteria
The previously described criteria allow for the evaluation of slip transmission prediction by dislo-
cation based crystalplasticity models [108]. They can also be explicitly incorporatedin continuum
modelstoaccountforthetransmissionmechanisms.Continuummodels,however,lackthediscrete-
ness inherent to simulation approaches like discrete dislocation dynamics or molecular dynamics.
Therefore,theincorporationofdislocationtransmissionandactivationprocessesnearGBscanonly
be performed in an averaged sense. In the model of [109], for example, a functional relationship
is proposed for the GB (slip transmission) strength. The strength depends on the minimum angle
between the slip directions of slip systems in adjacent grains via
β (cid:16) (cid:17)
The higher the minimum angle ϕAB, the higher is the GB strength. This criterion, however, does
consider the orientations of the GB normaland slip plane normals. The resolved shear stresses are
accounted for in the flow rule for the slip systems. Thereby, it is ensured that slip systems with
large resolved shear stresses do yield while others with lower resolved shear stresses do not.
In[110,111],(3)isutilizedincombinationwithaRSScriterion.Incasethegeometrictransmission
factor is greater than a critical threshold, and if the ratio of resolved shear stress of an outgoing
systemwithrespecttoa(withdislocationdensityevolving)referenceshearstressislargerthanone,
dislocation density can pass the GB in this model and increase the density in the adjacent grain.
The thermally activated transmission approach of [112] assumes that the slip lines of dislocations
alignwiththe GB during transmission.They proposea criterionthat is basedonthe minimization
of the energy for a transmission event. This incorporates the RBV in the GB as well as the slip
systemandGBorientation.Intheemployedflowrule,theRSSesareconsideredandacuttingstress
12 E.Bayerschenetal.
is calculated which models forest dislocations as well as the GB activation energy barrier. Thus,
the flow rule connects the minimization of the RBV upon transmission with the maximization of
RSSes.
The GB model [67] has been implemented within a two-dimensional setting in [86] and, recently,
also within three dimensions [90]. In this model, so-called inter-action coefficients describe the
interaction of slip systems in adjacent grains,
αβ α β α β
Infact, the inter-actioncoefficients in(10) areformallyidenticalto the geometricsliptransmission
factor (3). The model in [67], furthermore, accounts for the RBV criterion and the RSS criterion,
aswell(see Section4).Thesuperscripts{A,B}distinguishthe inter-actioncoefficientsfromthe so-
calledintra-actioncoefficients.Theintra-actioncoefficientsdeterminetheinteractionofslipsystems
within each grain based on (10), applied to each grain {A,B}, individually. They read CˆAA, and
CˆBB, respectively.
3.3 Criteria that consider threshold values for the slip system and grain boundary angles
In [113], (4) is extended to account for the slip plane normals intersection angle via an additional
αβ α β α β
Critical angles (motivated by [3] and [98]) are used with ω =35 and δ =15 . The employed
slip transmission factor is purely geometric, but it is combined with the dislocation densities and
their evolution on the adjacent sides of GBs. The RSSes are considered in the flow rule. For deter-
mining a possible transmission of dislocation density across the GB, the signs of the slip rates are
checked,i.e., it is determined whether dislocations in a pile-up move towardsthe GB or awayfrom
it. Thereby, the geometric factor is connected to the RSSes.
In the work of [66], (6) is used to penalize slip transfer on geometrically unfavorable slip system
combinations across bimetallic interfaces by increasing the corresponding slip resistances depend-
ing on the mismatch. The modified slip resistance enters the flow rule and, thus, connects the
geometrical factors to the RSSes in the flow rule. Slip transmission criteria in continuum models
are summarized in Table 2.
Table 2: Slip transmission / interaction criteria in crystal plasticity models. Abbreviations used
are RSS: Resolved shear stress / Schmid factors, RBV: Residual Burgers vector. The approaches
by [67, 86] utilize Mˆ rather as an inter-action coefficient than as a classic transmission factor.
Additionalcriteria RSS RSS RBV/RSS RBV/RSS RSS RSS
Reference [109] [110,111] [67,86] [112] [113] [66]
ReviewonSlipTransmissionCriteriainExperimentsandCrystalPlasticityModels 13
4 A connection between Gurtin’s grain boundary theory and slip transmission
criteria used in experiments
Thesingle-crystalplasticityframeworkof[74]usesthemeasureofaBurgerstensorfieldtocharacter-
izetheBurgersvectorsofgeometricallynecessarydislocations.ThismeasureisdefinedbyG=curl(Hp)
forthegeometricallylinearcase,whereHp = γ d ⊗n istheplasticdistortion.Precisely,the
defect contribution to the free energy is formuPlated in dependence of this quantity. The need for a
defect contribution to the free energy in continuum models results from the coarsening error made
by the continuum modeling of the elastic energy [114]. By considering the Burgers tensor in the
free energy, dependences of the related higher-order stresses on this measure can be introduced on
the individual slip systems, subsequently. These stresses are considered in the flow rule for the slip
systems and, thus, influence the model response.
In [115], the theory has been extendedby considerationofinterfaces suchasgrainboundaries.The
associatedboundaryconditionsareprescribedby the limits ofmicrofreeandmicrohardconditions.
Subsequently, the framework [67] has been developed incorporating the misorientation of adjacent
grains and its influence on the slip transfer behavior at the grainboundaries. This is accomplished
by considering the Burgers tensor field on the grain boundary. The magnitude |G| is used as a
measure of defect in the GB free energy. From the GB energy, internal (energetic) microforces can
be derived. These, in turn, are balanced on the GB with the projections of the vectors of gradient
stresses from each grain. Furthermore, these gradient stresses enter a microforce balance for each
slip system α in which the RSSes enter as well.
Although one might expect Gurtin’s theory of grain boundaries [67] to be connected to criteria of
slip system interaction that have been used in experiments, the framework used in the mentioned
workis notdiscussedfromthis point ofview.Therefore,a singleslip caseis consideredin the work
at hand showing the connections between [67] and the criteria of GTF / RSS / RBV. For conve-
nience, in the following,the single slip systems in grainA and B are labeled A and B, respectively.
For brevity, the slip plane normals of the two slip systems on adjacent sides of the GB are consid-
eredtobe coinciding,i.e., nA =nB =n,andto be perpendicular to the GB normaln .Thus,the
angles δ =ω =0, while κ6=0, see also Fig. 3. The RBV can be defined as the difference between
the Burgers vectors of interacting, i.e., transmitting slip systems, b +bB =bA [19]. Its magnitude
can be approximated by the magnitude of the difference between the two slip directions dA,dB,
i.e., |b |=|dA−dB| [28]. Furthermore,the definition [67] of the jump of the plastic distortion Hp
across the GB is considered. For the single slip transmission case at hand, this jump reads
This gives a GB Burgers tensor G [67] of
Assuming, for simplicity, the same slip on both slip systems, i.e., γA =γB =γ, gives
Note that the GB free energy with respect to |G| can, thus, be expressed in dependence of |b |,
the magnitude of the RBV b , for the special case under consideration.Consequently, Gurtin’s GB
14 E.Bayerschenetal.
theory takes into account the residual dislocation content of the GB.
The quantity |G|2 can most generally be expressed by (cf. [67])
which depends on the intra-action coefficients CAA,CBB and on the inter-action coefficients CAB.
Following from (15) and from the discussion below (10), it can be concluded that Gurtin’s theory
of GBs has a mechanism to account for the geometric slip transmission criterion (3).
For the case under consideration, the intra-action coefficients are CAA =CBB =1 while all other
intra-action coefficients vanish. The inter-action coefficients vanish, as well, except for CAB =
CBA =dA·dB. Equation (15) then reads
(cid:16) (cid:17)
Combining (16) with (14) yields |b |2 =2 1−(dA·dB) . For the special case of coinciding slip
(cid:16) (cid:17)
directions, dA =dB, this gives |b |2 =0, and for the case of perpendicular slip directions, |b |2 =2
is obtained. Thus, the GB RBV magnitude is a function of the mismatch between slip systems in
adjacent grains. The GB Burgers tensor magnitude |G| is a function of the mismatch as well, as is
the GB free energy of [67] formulated with respect to this quantity.
Concluding, it can be stated that Gurtin’s GB theory considers the geometrical slip transmission
factor (3) in the formulation of the GB free energy (via inter-action coefficients). They are also
incorporated in the formulation of the flow rule [67]. In addition, the RSSes on the outgoing slip
systems (microforce balance / flow rule) are consideredin the theory, as is the RBV left in the GB
upon a transmission event (GB free energy).
5 Comparison of geometric criteria for the single slip case
The geometric transmission factors from the preceding sections are compared for a single slip case
in order to discuss their differences and limitations in more detail with regard to the crystallo-
graphic orientation of the grains and the grain boundary. In the following, it is assumed that slip
is occurring on the incoming slip system of grain A and that, subsequently, slip is activated on the
outgoing slip system in grain B. Four cases are considered as depicted in Fig. 5 a)-d). In the cases
a)-c), the slip system in grain B is rotated by the angle ϕ about the depicted r-axis for each case.
In a separatecase,the grainboundaryis rotatedby angleϕ about the r-axisdepicted in Fig. 5 d).
For this case, at first, the slip system in grainB is left unaltered to isolate the influence of the GB
inclination. Then, the slip system in grain B is pre-rotated by an angle of 15 about an arbitrarily
chosenaxis a=e +e +e ,andthe influence ofthe rotationofthe GB is investigatedagain.By
this approach, a more general case than the ideal alignment of the two slip systems is considered.
Plots of the geometric transmissionfactors are depicted in Fig. 6. Eachcolumn shows results of all
geometricfactorsfortherespectivecasesdepictedinFig.5.Thefactorsare,additionally,referenced
bythe correspondingequationnumbersinFig. 6.Since singleslipisinvestigated,the sumsofsome
of the geometric factors contain only one component. Thus, weighting with, e.g., Schmid factors
would not appear to be applicable here. In the same spirit, for each geometric factor matrix, only
the single occurring component is investigated.
ReviewonSlipTransmissionCriteriainExperimentsandCrystalPlasticityModels 15
Fig.5:RotationsemployedonasingleslipsystemingrainBandonthegrainboundary,respectively,
in order to compare the geometric transmission factors. The vectors n˜B and d˜B are obtained by
rotating nB,dB by 15 ◦ about the axis a=e +e +e .
Forarotationofthe slipsystemBaboutthe slipdirection(Fig.5a)),the geometricfactors(1)-(4)
predict the same behavior.At ϕ=90 , all these factors vanish due to the slip plane normals being
perpendicular to each other. Factor (8a) also shows essentially the same behavior but its values
remain positive due to the multiplication of two (negative) factors.For ϕ=180 , all the preceding
factorspredictidealalignment,takingintoaccountopposingslipplanenormals.Thefactors(5),(6)
and (11) also vanish at ϕ=90 . The angular region, however, where slip transmission can occur,
is far less pronounced than for the previous factors. This is due to the inherent limits, imposed
by the critical angles for slip transmission, see, e.g., (5) in Fig. 6, column a). In addition, the fac-
tors (5), (6), and (11) are different in their transition behavior: while (5), (6) predict a steep but
smooth transition from possible slip transfer to no slip transfer, (11) shows a less steep transition
at first, then a jump to “no transmission“.This is caused by the scaling that is included in (5), (6)
butnotin(11).Thefactor(9)vanishesforthiscase.Thiscorrespondstofullypossibletransmission
since (9) is used in the resistance of the grain boundary against slip transmission. However, the
applicability of this factor is limited due to the neglect of the slip plane orientations.
Rotating the slip direction by angle ϕ about the slip plane normal (Fig. 5 b)) gives identical re-
sults for factors (1)-(3) as in the previous case. However, (4) is not affected by this rotation since
it only considers the lines of intersection with the GB, and not the slip directions. One should,
nevertheless, keep in mind that (4) is combined with additional considerations regarding the slip
directions (see Fig. 4). The product (8a) of (4) and (2) is identical to (4), as a consequence of (4)
being constant for the investigatedcase. The factors (5), (6) again show a transition behavior that
is, however,less steep due to the higher critical angle employed for slip directions. Contrary to the
case of rotation a), (11) is not affected by the rotation and is, therefore, constant. This appears to
be unphysical and is caused by the neglect of the slip directions in this factor. For the employed
rotation of the slip direction, (9) approachesinfinite resistance of the GB against slip transmission
at ϕ=90 .
For a rotation of both slip direction and slip plane normal about an axis perpendicular to them
(Fig. 5 c)), (1) predicts optimal transmissionat ϕ=90 . This appears to be unphysical since both
slip direction and slip plane normal in grain B are perpendicular to their counterparts in grain A
which would severely restrict transmission. The factors (2)-(3), however, predict no transmission
at this angle. Factor (4) is constant for this case since the lines of intersection do not change for
the employedrotation.The depictedjump is ofnumericalnature anddoes notalterthe qualitative
16 E.Bayerschenetal.
Fig. 6: Plots of geometric transmission factors (1)-(6), (8a), (9), and (11) for single slip. Rotations
employed on slip system of grain B (first three columns) according to Fig. 5 a-c), and on grain
boundary (last column) according to Fig. 5 d). The dashed lines correspond to a pure rotation of
the grain boundary for identical slip systems. The solid lines (in the last column) correspond to a
rotation of the grain boundary for the pre-rotated slip system in grain B, see Fig. 5 d).
ReviewonSlipTransmissionCriteriainExperimentsandCrystalPlasticityModels 17
behavior.Factor(5) considerstwocriticalangles,andthus,in this casethe smalleranglelimits the
transmission regime. Although (6) also takes into account two critical angles, the larger one limits
the transmission in the investigated case. This is due to the consideration of the angle between
the lines of intersection (which do not change in this case) and the neglect of slip directions. The
product (8a) shows a slightly larger regime of no transmission, compared to the previous two cri-
teria. For (11), the critical angle to be considered is the angle between the slip directions since the
lines of intersection are unaltered. This gives a slightly larger regime of possible slip transmission
than for rotation a). In this context, it is also questionable why limit values should be employed
for both the lines of intersection and the slip plane normals. The angle between slip plane normals
is always larger than the angle between the lines of intersection (see also [98]). The criterion (9)
shows identical behavior as in the previous case. This is also questionable since the alignment of
slip planes has been found to be more substantial in predicting slip transmission and, thus, would
be expected to limit transmissibility upon applying identical rotation to the slip direction and the
slip plane normal.
In the last case, the grain boundary is rotated about an axis perpendicular to the slip directions
and the slip plane normals of both grains (Fig. 5 d)). The slip systems, however, are not altered,
at first. This case, thus, isolates the influence of the GB when comparing the different geometrical
transmission factors. Interestingly, the orientation of the GB does not influence any of the investi-
gated factors for this case (dashed lines in Fig. 6, column d)).
Then, the slip system in grain B is pre-rotated by 15 ◦ about an axis a (Fig. 5 d)). The GB is
rotatedagainaboutthedepictedaxisr (Fig.5d)).Bothfactors(1)and(2)arenotaffectedbythis
rotation since they do not account for the GB orientation. Both give constant results for this case
(slightly smaller than ”one“, since the slip directions are only changed initially). Factor (5) does
also not account for the GB orientation and shows a constant result. Factors (3) and (4), however,
both account for the GB orientation. The product (8a) also considers the orientation of the GB.
Factor (6) is clearly affected by the GB orientation,and factor (11) also shows slightchanges upon
the employed rotation of the GB. An effective cut-off angle of ϕ≈61 is obtained for both (6)
and (11) (see Fig. 6 d)) due to the inherent limiting angle for the lines of intersection alignment.
Furthermore, the GB orientation is not considered by (9) at all. The slightly higher value than in
the previous case is a result of the employed initial rotation for the slip direction in grain B.
6 Conclusion
In the past, geometric criteria have been shown to be the most important ones in predicting the
slip transmissionacross grain boundaries in experiments on metals as well as computational inves-
tigations using discrete methods. Here, a comprehensive overview on the geometric criteria used
in both experiments and computational models, focusing on continuum approaches,is given in the
work at hand.
Regarding the experimental and computational verification of slip transmission criteria, there are
more investigations dealing with specific grain boundary types, e.g., symmetrical boundaries [37,
116, 117]. Although some experimental works [118, 119] and recent computational works [35, 38]
also consider more general grain boundaries, various findings exist in regard to the influence of
the grain boundary type. While in [12–14] transmission was found to depend on the type of the
investigatedsymmetricgrainboundaries,in[93],thebehaviorofcoincidencesitelatticeboundaries
and general boundaries did not appear to be substantially different regarding slip transmission.
Open questions from an experimental point of view also include the evaluation of continuity of
18 E.Bayerschenetal.
slip traces. Several types of continuity and discontinuity exist, as briefly discussed in the work at
hand and shown in detail, e.g., in [26]. Computational models that incorporate slip transmission,
consequently, also need to define ad hoc the continuity of plastic slip.
In the contextof embedding sliptransmissioncriteriain continuum models,severalapproachesex-
ist.ThedetailedcomparisonofGurtin’s grainboundarymodel[67]tothe sliptransmissioncriteria
showsthat this theory canbe interrelatedto the three maincriteria usedinexperiments. Common
to most continuum models is the incorporation of the resolved shear stresses due to the inherent
modeling of plastic slip with flow rules. This can be combined with geometric transmission factors
and, e.g., as in the case of [67], a grain boundary energy considering the residual Burgers vector.
Openquestionsforcontinuummodelsincludetheappropriatebalancebetweencomputationaleffort
and the necessary level of physical enrichment of interface kinematics. The latter can be obtained
from consideration of experiments and atomistic simulations showing the discrete mechanisms of
sliptransfer.Thebroadbasisofexperimentalandcomputationalinvestigationsinregardto(3),(4),
and the natural incorporation of it in [67] in combination with the other criteria outlined recom-
mend further investigation of this approach in extended simulations.
The comparison of the geometric criteria in this work results in various findings. First of all, the
geometriccriterion(1) contradictsthe commonunderstanding of slip transmissionsince it predicts
fully possible transmission for two slip systems with slip directions being perpendicular to each
other. The factor (2), however, predicts no transmission for this case but neglects the orientation
of the grain boundary. Factors (3) and (4) account for the orientation of the grain boundary and
have shown better agreement with experiments if combined further with additional considerations
regarding the residual Burgers vector and the resolved shear stresses [30, 32, 94]. Whether the
inclination of the grain boundary needs to be considered in such criteria is debatable. In [35], for
example,noinfluence ofthe grainboundaryinclinationonthe sliptransmissionprocesswasfound.
Indicationsinthis directionarealsopresentin[120],wherethe influenceofthegrainboundaryori-
entationwithregardtotheloadingdirectionwasfoundtobeofminorimportanceforthenucleation
processes investigated in ice crystals. A further open question is whether critical angles need to be
used, e.g., employed in (5), (6), and (11). These criteria predict a far less pronounced regime for
possible slip transmission than criteria without such angles. In addition, the experimental founda-
tionforthe criticalanglesisnotexhaustive.Infact,someofthem(e.g.,[98])havebeendetermined
based on an observed range of possible slip transmission [3]. Criterion (11) does not seem to be
applicable for general slip transmission processes since the orientation of the slip directions is not
consideredwhichcontradictsexperiments.Inthesamespirit,(9)neglectstheslipplaneorientations
and thus is not applicable when the slip planes for a transmission process are distinct. The use of
(weighted) sums of geometric slip transmission factors necessitates further investigations. In [89],
similar distributions of such weighted approaches were found, although different geometric factors
and weightswere employed.Furthermore,there are apparentcontradictionsbetween the use of (5)
and experimental findings [99], also questioning the use of this factor. It would be desirable to
compare the geometric transmission criteria including additional criteria (RSS, RBV) for multiple
slip systems, preferably also for different crystal structures.
Acknowledgements Theauthorsacknowledge thefollowingsupport:
T. B¨ohlke and E. Bayerschen: German Research Foundation (DFG) under Grant BO1466/5-1, part of the DFG
ResearchGroup1650 ”DislocationbasedPlasticity”, andKarlsruheHouseofYoung Scientists (KHYS)forfunding
ReviewonSlipTransmissionCriteriainExperimentsandCrystalPlasticityModels 19
a stay of the first author of this work at CERECAM, UCT. The support by E. Ramani in preparing the plots in
Section5isacknowledged.
B.D.ReddyandA.T.McBride:NationalResearchFoundationofSouthAfrica(SA)throughtheSAResearchChair
inComputational Mechanics.