Chua, K. & Arshad, M. R. / Robotics Vision-based Heuristic Reasoning for Underwater Target Tracking and
Navigation, pp. 245 - 250, International Journal of Advanced Robotic Systems, Volume 2, Number 3 (2005), ISSN
Robotics Vision-based Heuristic Reasoning for Underwater
Target Tracking and Navigation
Chua Kia & Mohd Rizal Arshad
Underwater Robotics Research Group (URRG),
School of Electrical and Electronics Engineering, Universiti Sains Malaysia,
Penang, Malaysia,
rizal@eng.usm.my
Abstract: This paper presents a robotics vision-based heuristic reasoning system for underwater target tracking and
navigation. This system is introduced to improve the level of automation of underwater Remote Operated Vehicles
(ROVs) operations. A prototype which combines computer vision with an underwater robotics system is successfully
designed and developed to perform target tracking and intelligent navigation. This study focuses on developing image
processing algorithms and fuzzy inference system for the analysis of the terrain. The vision system developed is capable
of interpreting underwater scene by extracting subjective uncertainties of the object of interest. Subjective uncertainties
are further processed as multiple inputs of a fuzzy inference system that is capable of making crisp decisions
concerning where to navigate. The important part of the image analysis is morphological filtering. The applications
focus on binary images with the extension of gray-level concepts. An open-loop fuzzy control system is developed for
classifying the traverse of terrain. The great achievement is the system’s capability to recognize and perform target
tracking of the object of interest (pipeline) in perspective view based on perceived condition. The effectiveness of this
approach is demonstrated by computer and prototype simulations. This work is originated from the desire to develop
robotics vision system with the ability to mimic the human expert’s judgement and reasoning when maneuvering ROV in
the traverse of the underwater terrain.
Keywords: fuzzylogic, underwater target tracking, autonomous underwater vehicles, artificial intelligence, simulation,
robot navigation, vision system.
1. Introduction and mission completion. To achieve such confidence, the
system can be trained by expert (Howard. A. et al, 2001).
Most of underwater pipeline tracing operations are In order to enable robots to make autonomous decision
performed by remote operated vehicles (ROVs) driven that guide them through the most traversable regions of
by human operators. These tasks are often requiring the terrain, fuzzy logic techniques can be developed for
continue attention and knowledge/experience of human classifying traverse using computer vision-based
operators to maneuver the robot (Foresti. G.L. and reasoning. Computing with words is highly
Gentili.,2000). In these operations, human operators does recommended either when the available information is
not require an exact measurement from the visual too imprecise to use numbers or when there is a tolerance
feedback, but based on the reasoning. for imprecision which can be exploited to get tractability
For these reasons, it is desirable to develop robotics and a suitable interface with the real world (Zadeh. L,
vision system with the ability to mimic the human mind 1999).
(human expert’s judgement of the terrain traverse) as a Current position based navigation techniques cannot be
translation of human solution. In this way, human used in object tracking because the measurement of the
operators can be reasonably confident that decisions position of the interested object is impossible due to its
made by the navigation system are sound to ensure safety unknown behavior (Yang Fan and Balasuriya, A, 2000).
The current methods available to realize target tracking large amount of small region of connected pixels (noise).
and navigation of an AUV used optical, acoustic and Each region is labeled and the largest connected region is
laser sensors. These methods have problems mainly in identified as object of interest. In the labeling process,
terms of complicated processing requirement and the connected pixels are labeled as either object of
hardware space limitation on AUVs (Yang Fan and interest or unwanted objects by examining their
Balasuriya, A, 2000). Other relevant research consists of connectivity’s (eight-connectivity) to neighboring pixels.
neural-network based classifier of the terrain can be Label will be assigned to the largest connected region
found in (Foresti. G.L. and Gentili.,2000) and (Foresti, that represents the object of interest.
G. L. and Gentili, 2002).Also, existing method using At this stage, feature extraction is considered completed.
Hough transform and Kalman filtering for image Object of interest is actually pipeline laid along the
enhancement has also been very popular (Tascini, G. et perspective view of the camera. Image is then
al, 1996), (Crovatot, D. et al, 2000), (El-Hawary, F. and horizontally, from image bottom to top, divided into 5
Yuyang, Jing, 1993) , (Fairweather, A. J. R. et al ,1997) segment and be processed separately for terrain features
and (El-Hawary, F. and Yuyang, Jing, 1995). as multiple steps of inputs for the fuzzy controller. In
order to investigate more closely each specific area
2. Research Approach within the image segment, each segment is further
divided into 6 predefined sub segments in the image.
Visible features of underwater structure enable humans Each sub segment (as illustrated by Figure 2) is defined
to distinguish underwater pipeline from seabed, and to as follows.
see individual parts of pipeline. A machine vision and
image processing system capable of extracting and • Sub segment 1 = Upper left segment of the image
classifying these features is used to initiate target
• Sub segment 2 = Upper right segment of the image
tracking and navigation of an AUV.
The aim of this research is to develop a novel robotics • Sub segment 3 = Lower left segment of the image
vision system at conceptual level, in order to assist
• Sub segment 4 = Lower right segment of the image
AUV’s interpretation of underwater oceanic scenes for
the purpose of object tracking and intelligent navigation. • Sub segment 5 = Upper segment of the image
Underwater images captured containing object of interest • Sub segment 6 = Lower segment of the image.
(Pipeline), simulated seabed, water and other unwanted
noises. Image processing techniques i.e. morphological
A mask image with constant intensity is then laid on the
filtering, noise removal, edge detection, etc, are
image as shown in Figure 3. This is actually an image
performed on the images in order to extract subjective
addition process whereby it will produce a lighter
uncertainties of the object of interest. Subjective
(highest intensity value) area when intersects the region
uncertainties became multiple input of a fuzzy inference
of interest. The remaining region with highest intensity
system. Fuzzy rules and membership function is
value then be calculated its coverage area in the image as
determined in this project. The fuzzy output is a crisp
shown in Figure 4. The area, A of the image is
value of the direction for navigation or decision on the
determined by.
control action.
2.1 Image Processing Operations A=∑ ∑B[i, j] (2)
For this vision system, image analysis is the first process
and the end product shall be the extraction of high-level
information for computer analysis and manipulation. Sub segment 5-6 are being determined its location
This high-level information is actually the morphological relative to the image center. Coverage area and location
parameter for the input of a fuzzy inferences system of object of interest in each sub segment is finally be
(linguistic representation of terrain features). accumulated as multiple input of the fuzzy inference
When an RGB image is loaded, it is converted into gray system.
scale image. RGB image as shown in Figure 1. Then
gray-level thresholding is performed to extract the object
or region of interest from the background. The intensity
levels of the object of interest are identified. The binary
image B[i,j], is obtained using object of interest’s
intensity values in the range of [T , T ] for the original
gray image F[i,j]. That is,
⎩0 otherwise
The thresholding process producing a binary image with
a large region of connected pixels (object of interest) and Fig. 1. Typical input image (RGB)
Input variable 1 universe of discourse, U(x ) = [0.1 -
• Input variable 2, x = Pipeline area at upper right
segment in the image
Input variable 2 fuzzy term set, T(x ) = {Small,
Medium, Large}
Input variable 2 universe of discourse, U(x ) = [0.1 -
• Input variable 3, x = Pipeline area at lower left
segment in the image
Input variable 3 fuzzy term set, T(x ) = {Small,
Medium, Large}
Fig. 2. Show image sub segment
Input variable 3 universe of discourse, U(x ) = [0.1 -
• Input variable 4, x = Pipeline area at lower right
segment in the image
Input variable 4 fuzzy term set, T(x ) = {Small,
Medium, Large}
Input variable 4 universe of discourse, U(x ) = [0.1 -
• Input variable 5, x = End point of pipeline relative to
image center point
Input variable 5 fuzzy term set, T(x ) = {Left, Center,
Input variable 5 universe of discourse, U(x ) = [0.1 -
Fig. 3. Mask on threshold, removed noise image 1.0]
• Input variable 6, x = Beginning point of pipeline
relative to image center point
Input variable 6 fuzzy term set, T(x ) = {Left, Center,
Input variable 6 universe of discourse, U(x ) = [0.1 -
The only fuzzy output.
• Output variable 1, y = AUV steering command set
Output variable 1 fuzzy term set, T(y ) = {Turn left,
Go straight, Turn right}
Output variable 1 universe of discourse, V(y ) = [0 -
Fig. 4. Acquired area information The input vector, x is.
2.1 The Fuzzy Inference System (FIS) x = (x , x , x , x , x , x )T (3)
1 2 3 4 5 6
The fuzzy controller is designed to automate how a
human expert who is successful at this task would The output vector, y is.
control the system. The multiple inputs to the controller
are variables defining the state of the camera with respect y = (y )T (4)
to the pipeline, and the single output is the steering
command set point. Consider the situation illustrated by Gaussian and π-shaped membership functions are
figure 5. The fuzzy logic is used to interpret this heuristic selected in this case to map the input to the output.
in order to generate the steering command set point. In Gaussian curves depend on two parameters σ and c and
this case, the set point of AUV has a certain amount are represented by.
(ΔX) to the right.
Basically, a human operator does not require a crisp /
accurate visual input for mission completion. There are f(x;σ,c)=exp
total of six inputs based on the image processing
algorithm.
• Input variable 1, x = Pipeline area at upper left π-shaped membership function are represented by.
segment in the image
Input variable 1 fuzzy term set, T(x ) = {Small,
Medium, Large}
There are totally 13 fuzzy control rules. The rule base as
⎧S(x;c−b,c−b/2,c) for x≤c
f(x;b,c)= ⎨ (6) shown in figure 8.
⎩1−s(x;c,c+b/2,c+b) for x >c
where S(x; a, b, c) represents a membership function
defined as.
⎧0 for x< a
for a ≤ x<b
⎪⎪ (c−a) 2
1− for b≤ x ≤c
⎪ Fig. 8. Rule viewer for fuzzy controller
⎪⎩1 for x >c
In order to obtain a crisp output, the output fuzzy set is
In the above equation, σ, a, b and c are the parameters then aggregated and fed into a centroid (center of
that are adjusted to fit the desired membership data. gravity) method defuzzification process. The defuzzifier
Typical input variable and output variable membership determines the actual actuating signal, y' as
function plot are shown in figure 6 and figure 7.
follows.y'= i=1
3. Simulation and Experimental Results
The simulation procedure is as follows:
a. Defined the envelope curve (working area) of
prototype.
b. Given the real position and orientation of pipeline
defined on a grid of coordinates.
c. Predefined the AUV drift tolerance limit (±8.0cm)
away from the actual pipeline location.
d. Initiate the algorithm.
e. AUV navigating paths are recorded and visualized
graphically.
The algorithm has been tested on computer and
prototype simulations. For comparative purposes, the
Fig. 5. Illustration of tracking strategy results before and after fuzzy tuning are presented.
Typical examples of results before fuzzy tuning are
shown in Figure 9 and Table 1.
Fig. 6. Typical input variable membership function plot
Fig. 7. Typical output variable membership function plot Fig. 9. AUV path (no proper tuning)
AUV Actual Simulated Drift Percentage 4. Conclusions
path location result of
x-axis x-axis Drift This paper has introduced a new technique for AUV
(cm) (cm) (cm) (%) target tracking and navigation. The image processing
algorithm developed is capable of extracting qualitative
5 47.5 69.5 +22.0 275.0
information of the terrain required by human operators to
maneuver ROV for pipeline tracking. It is interesting to
4 58.5 71.7 +13.2 165.0
note that fuzzy control system developed is able to
mimic human operators’ inherent ability for deciding on
3 69.6 73.3 +3.7 46.3
acceptable control actions. This has been verified
experimentally and the result is favourable that is within
2 80.8 78.3 -2.5 31.3
8.0 cm of drift tolerance limit in a 1.5m x 2.0m working
1 91.9 75.7 -16.2 202.5 envelope. One of the most interesting parts being the
system ability to perform target tracking and navigation
Table 1. Data recorded (without proper tuning)
from the knowledge of interpreting image grabbed in
perspective view from the terrain.
Typical examples of results after fuzzy tuning are shown
It should also be noted that the system offer another
in Figure 10 and Table 2.
human-like method of representing human experience
and knowledge of operating a ROV, rather than being
expressed in differential equations in the common PID-
controller. Obviously, the system does not require
sophisticated image processing algorithm such as
Kalman filtering or Hough transform techniques. All
input variable required are merely an approximate value
for mission completion, just like a human vision system.
The simplicity of the system is further recognized when a
priori knowledge of the terrain is not necessary as part of
the algorithm. Currently a priori knowledge is required
by some of the available pipeline tracking techniques
such as (Evans, J, et al, 2003) and (Arjuna Balasuriya
and Ura, T, 2002). The processing time is therefore
reduced.
In general the whole computational process for this
prototype is complex and it usually takes about 60
seconds to arrive at its desired output for 5 steps (22.5cm
Fig. 10. AUV path (with proper tuning) for each step), which is not practical for commercial
standard requirement that is at least 4 knot (2m/s) of
AUV Actual Simulated Drift Percentage AUV speed. Commercial standard requirement of a
path location result of survey AUV can be found in (Bingham, D. ,2002).
x-axis x-axis Drift However, the proposed system would be a workable
(cm) (cm) (cm) (%) concept for its capability to look forward and perceive
the terrain from perspective view.
5 47.5 55.2 +7.7 96.3
4 58.5 57.4 -1.1 13.8
3 69.6 68.5 -1.1 13.8
2 80.8 88.1 +7.3 91.3
1 91.9 85.9 -6.0 75.0
Table 2. Data recorded (with proper tuning)
The simulation results show that the drift within
tolerance limit is achievable when proper tuning
(training) is applied to the fuzzy system. The percentage
of drift is considered acceptable , as long as it is less than
100%, since this implies the path is within the boundary.
The effectiveness of the system has been further
demonstrated with different target orientation and
lighting condition. Fig. 11. AUV path and its image capturing procedure
As illustrated in Figure 11, the perceived conditions from NAFIPS International Conference, Vancouver, B.C.,
the second image captured could be processed Canada, pp. 7-12, July 2001
concurrently while the AUV completing the forth and
Tascini, G. , Zingaretti, P. , Conte, G. and Zanoli, S.M,
fifth step based on the previous image information. This
“Perception of an underwater structure for inspection
will improve the processing time to support high speed
and guidance purpose,” Advanced Mobile Robot,
AUV application.
1996., Proceedings of the First Euromicro Workshop
In addition, further studies on improving the program
on , 9-11 Oct. 1996, pp. 24 – 28, 1996.
structure and calculation steps may help to achieve better
Yang Fan and Balasuriya, A, “Autonomous target tracking
computation time. Future development of transputer for
by AUVs using dynamic vision,” Proceedings of the
parallel processing or higher speed processor can also be
2000 International Symposium on Underwater
expected to bring the system into practical use.
Technology, pp. 187-192, 23-26 May 2000.
6. References Zadeh. L, “From computing with numbers to computing
with words –from manipulation of measurements to
manipulation of perceptions,” IEEE Transactions on
Arjuna Balasuriya; Ura, T, “Vision-based underwater
Circuits and Systems, 45(1), pp. 105-119, 1999.
cable detection and following using AUVs” Oceans '02
MTS/IEEE, 29-31 Oct. 2002, Vol. 3, pp. 1582-1587,
Bingham, D. , Drake, T. , Hill, A. , and Lott, R, “The
Application of Autonomous Underwater Vehicle
(AUV) Technology in the Oil Industry – Vision and
Experiences,” FIG XXII International Congress
Washington, D.C. USA, April 19-26 2002.
Crovatot, D. , Rost, B. , Filippini, M. , Zampatot, M. and
Frezza, R, “Segmentation of underwater Images for
AUV navigation,” Proceedings of the 2000 IEEE
international conference on control applications, 25-27
September 2000, pp. 566-569, 2000
El-Hawary, F. and Yuyang, Jing, “A robust pre-filtering
approach to EKF underwater target tracking,”
Proceedings of OCEANS '93. Engineering in Harmony
with Ocean, 18-21 Oct. 1993, Vol.2, pp. 235-240,
1993.
El-Hawary, F. and Yuyang, Jing, “Robust regression-based
EKF for tracking underwater targets,” IEEE Journal of
Oceanic Engineering, Vol.20, Issue.1, pp.31-41, Jan.
1995.
Evans, J.; Petillot, Y.; Redmond, P.; Wilson, M.; Lane, D,
“AUTOTRACKER: AUV embedded control
architecture for autonomous pipeline and cable
tracking” OCEANS 2003. Proceedings, 22-26 Sept.
2003, Vol 5, pp. 2651-2658, 2003.
Fairweather, A. J. R. , Hodgetts, M. A. and Greig, A. R,
“Robust scene interpretation of underwater image
sequences,” IPA97 Conference, 15-17 July 1997,
Conference Publication No. 443, pp. 660-664, 1997.
Foresti. G.L. and Gentili. S, “A vision based system for
object detection in underwater images,” International
journal of pattern recognition and artificial intelligence,
vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 167-188, 2000
Foresti, G. L. and Gentili, S, “A hierarchical classification
system for object recognition in underwater
environments” IEEE Journal of Oceanic Engineering,
Vol. 27, No. 1, pp 66-78, 2002.
Howard. A. , Tunstel. E. , Edwards. D. and Carlson. Alan,
“Enhancing fuzzy robot navigation systems by
mimicking human visual perception of natural terrain
traversability,” Joint 9th IFSA World Congress and 20th