Roles and Needs of Laboratory Astrophysics in NASA’s Space and Earth Science Mission
Submitted by the
American Astronomical Society Working Group on Laboratory Astrophysics
Nancy Brickhouse - Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics
nbrickhouse@cfa.harvard.edu, 617-495-7438
John Cowan - University of Oklahoma
cowan@nhn.ou.edu, 405-325-3961
Paul Drake - University of Michigan
rpdrake@umich.edu, 734-763-4072
Steven Federman - University of Toledo
steven.federman@utoledo.edu, 419-530-2652
Gary Ferland - University of Kentucky
gary@pa.uky.edu, 859-257-879
Adam Frank - University of Rochester
afrank@pas.rochester.edu, 585-275-1717
Wick Haxton - University of Washington
haxton@u.washington.edu, 206-685-2397
Eric Herbst - Ohio State University
herbst@mps.ohio-state.edu, 614-292-6951
Keith Olive - University of Minnesota
olive@physics.umn.edu, 612-624-7375
Farid Salama - NASA/Ames Research Center
Farid.Salama@nasa.gov, 650-604-3384
Daniel Wolf Savin* - Columbia University
savin@astro.columbia.edu, 1-212-854-4124,
Lucy Ziurys – University of Arizona
lziurys@as.arizona.edu, 520-621-6525
1. Introduction
Laboratory astrophysics and complementary theoretical calculations are the foundations of
astronomy and astrophysics and will remain so into the foreseeable future. The mission enabling
impact of laboratory astrophysics ranges from the scientific conception stage for airborne and
space-based observatories, all the way through to the scientific return of these missions. It is our
understanding of the under-lying physical processes and the measurements of critical physical
parameters that allows us to address fundamental questions in astronomy and astrophysics. In
this regard, laboratory astrophysics is much like detector and instrument development at NASA.
These efforts are necessary for the success of astronomical research being funded by NASA.
Without concomitant efforts in all three directions (observational facilities, detector/instrument
development, and laboratory astrophysics) the future progress of astronomy and astrophysics is
imperiled. In addition, new developments in experimental technologies have allowed laboratory
studies to take on a new role as some questions which previously could only be studied
theoretically can now be addressed directly in the lab. With this in mind we, the members of the
AAS Working Group on Laboratory Astrophysics (WGLA), have prepared this White Paper on
the laboratory astrophysics infrastructure needed to maximize the scientific return from NASA’s
space and Earth sciences program.
The field of laboratory astrophysics comprises both theoretical and experimental studies of
the underlying physics that produce the observed astrophysical processes. We have identified six
areas of physics as relevant to astronomy and astrophysics. Astronomy is primarily an
observational science detecting photons generated by atomic, molecular, and solid matter
physics. Our understanding of the universe also relies on knowledge of the evolution of matter
(nuclear and particle physics) and of the dynamical processes shaping it (plasma physics).
Hence, our quest to understand the cosmos rests firmly on scientific knowledge in atomic,
molecular, solid matter, nuclear, particle, and plasma physics. Chemistry is implicitly included
here as part of molecular physics. Additionally, it is worth noting that there is not always a 1-to-1
correspondence between observational band-passes and the needed laboratory astrophysics. For
example, standard UV/visible diagnostics for probing astrophysical environments are redshifted
to longer wavelengths in high z objects. Also, models of chemical processes involving photons
at one wavelength are used to understand environments at other wavelengths.
This White Paper is organized as follows: In Section 2 we highlight some of the recent
notable mission-enabling accomplishments of laboratory astrophysics. Section 3 presents a brief
historical overview of the funding and infrastructure support for laboratory astrophysics. In
Section 4 we highlight some of the key issues necessary to ensure a healthy and vital laboratory
astrophysics community. Proposed actions to be taken and estimated levels of support needed
are provided in Section 5. In Section 6 we give a brief summary of the current state of the field
and in Section 7 we list our recommendations to ensure a vibrant laboratory astrophysics
community in the coming decade. A more detailed discussion of the expected scientific impact
of laboratory astrophysics in the next decade is given in Appendices I-V.
The findings presented here are based largely on material prepared by the WGLA for the
National Research Council Astronomy and Astrophysics Decadal Survey (Astro2010). The body
of this white paper is drawn from the Position Paper submitted to the Subcommittee on the State
of the Profession, in specific to the Facilities, Funding, and Programs (FFP) Infrastructure
Study Group. The reports presented in the Appendices were prepared for the Subcommittee on
Science and the five associated Science Frontier Panels: Cosmology and Fundamental Physics
(CFP), Galactic Neighborhood (GAN), Galaxies across Cosmic Time (GCT), Planetary Systems
and Star Formation (PSF), and Stars and Stellar Evolution (SSE).
This report also builds on the findings from the 2006 NASA Laboratory Astrophysics
Workshop which was charged by the NASA Science Mission Directorate (SMD) Universe
Working Group (UWG) to draw up a White Paper (NASA Laboratory Astrophysics Workshop
White Paper 2006)
1. “addressing the major science goals as defined in the 2006 NASA Strategic Plan and
then providing details on the critical laboratory astrophysics data requirements that
will have to be met, if the desired science results are actually to be achieved,
2. reporting of recent significant astronomical results where the input from laboratory
astrophysics was of critical importance, and
3. discussing in detail the specific laboratory astrophysics efforts that will need to be
undertaken in direct support of missions and programs that are on the near horizon,
specifically Herschel, SOFIA, JWST, Hubble servicing, and ALMA (the latter of
primary concern to NSF).”
2. Recent Notable Mission-Enabling Successes of Laboratory Astrophysics
Astrophysical discoveries are propelled forward in part by experimental and theoretical
advances in laboratory astrophysics. Presented below are selected examples of significant
astrophysical results that arose from recent laboratory and theoretical efforts in this field. This
incomplete selection is taken largely from the White Paper from the Proceedings of the 2006
NASA Laboratory Astrophysics Workshop.
• New laboratory data, specifically experimental transition probabilities and radiative
lifetimes have played a critical role in recent astronomical abundance studies (e.g.,
Lawler et al. 2006). These new experimental data have led to much more accurate and
improved abundances, particularly for the rare earth elements, for the halo stars in the
Galaxy, among the oldest stars in the Universe. As a result of these studies, and the
increasingly more precise abundance determinations, we have gained a much deeper
understanding of the nuclear processes involved in the formation of the heavy elements.
Thus, for example, abundance determinations for old metal-poor halo stars using the
Hubble Space Telescope and ground-based observations suggest that two different rapid
neutron-capture processes may exist for nucleosynthesis beyond the iron peak (Cowan et
al. 2005). This insight is the result of new laboratory oscillator strengths for high Z
elements (e.g., Ivarsson et al. 2003). These new data have also allowed for improvements
in radioactive dating using Th/Eu ratios and are yielding reasonable cosmochronometric
age estimates for halo stars (Sneden et al. 2008).
• In the well-studied AGN NGC 3783, the warm absorber density and location have been
found, respectively, to be smaller and closer to the central black hole than expected
(Krongold et al. 2005). This discovery is a major success of theoretical atomic physics,
which identified the numerous unknown absorption lines in the high resolution Chandra
and XMM-Newton spectra of warm absorbers. These lines were shown to be inner-shell
absorption transitions for the low charge states of Fe and were also used as a powerful
new plasma diagnostic (Behar et al. 2001).
• Measuring the atmospheric temperature of the extra-solar planets TrES-1 (Charbonneau
et al. 2005) and HD 209458b (Deming et al. 2005) with the Spitzer Space Telescope is
partly a success of stellar atmosphere spectral synthesis and laboratory studies of
molecular opacities. Transit searches for extra-solar planets also use synthetic stellar
spectra as templates against which to correlate measured radial velocities (Konacki et al.
2003), a method which is at the core of NASA's Kepler Mission. For these and other
cases, the increasing completeness of the calculated line lists and opacities (Bautista
2004) has been a critical factor.
• Using the Kuiper Airborne Observatory (KAO), important molecules have been detected
in the interstellar medium (ISM) whose emission had been inaccessible by ground-based
astronomy. Of particular note are H D+, a cornerstone species in the ion-molecule theory
of interstellar chemistry, HCl, a fundamental hydride, and H O+, a direct tracer of the
water abundance (e.g., Zmuidzinas et al. 1995; Timmerman et al. 1996), as well as the
pure rotational lines of NH , OH, and CH (e.g., Stacey et al. 1987). The KAO has also
been invaluable in detecting ro-vibrational transitions of heavier species such as C in
molecular clouds (e.g., Giesen et al. 2001). Studies of these species have led to
breakthroughs in our understanding of the molecular component of the interstellar
medium. These discoveries were only made possible by preceding high resolution,
laboratory spectroscopy (e.g., Brown et al. 1993; Harrison et al. 2006). Such laboratory
measurements are needed for the sensitive spectral-line surveys proposed for Herschel.
• High rotational lines of CO (up to J=45) have been discovered in the Orion-KL nebula
using the KAO and the Infrared Space Observatory (Gonzalez-Alfonso et al. 2002).
These spectral lines gave the first early glimpses of the process of high mass star
formation with associated shocks and high velocity outflows (e.g., Hollenbach et al.
1995; Ceccarelli et al. 1996). These studies would not have been possible without
previous high resolution laboratory spectroscopic work; the understanding of the
dynamics in this environment rests on past investigations of collisional excitation. This
and the preceding example reveal the exciting results anticipated at sub-millimeter
wavelengths with SOFIA and Herschel and from new approaches to molecular synthesis
on grains in shock-heated regions (Madzunkov et al. 2006).
• FUSE observed UV absorption of H and HD in the ISM from a range of excited
rotational levels (Snow et al. 2000, 2008; Ferlet et al. 2000), providing new insights into
the physics and chemistry of translucent clouds and a tool to evaluate the ISM deuterium
abundance. These observations and their interpretations were made possible by
laboratory studies of the electronic transitions and processes relevant to the formation of
H .
• Aromatic infrared bands (AIBs), commonly dubbed “PAH bands”, are now routinely
observed with the Spitzer Space Telescope and used to probe dust in extragalactic
environments (Hogg et al. 2005; Wu et al. 2006) and to measure redshift (Yan et al.
2005; Weedman et al. 2006). Such emission measured in a recent Spitzer survey of
elliptical galaxies indicates that the carriers, attributed to polycyclic aromatic
hydrocarbons (PAHs) and their derivatives, are a probe of recent merger activity in these
galaxies (Kaneda et al. 2005). It certainly looks like the AIB emission is correlated with
star formation (Lutz et al. 2005; Wu et al. 2005). This progress has only been possible
thanks to laboratory emission and absorption spectra of PAH-type species, including
ions. Furthermore, the signature of individual PAH-like molecules can now be sought in
astronomical spectra at UV and visible wavelengths, making it possible, for the first time,
to detect specific aromatic compounds in space.
• The interpretation of stellar distances using period-luminosity relations for Cephied
variables, which involves a very wide range of instruments including for example Spitzer
(Freedman et al., 2008), is grounded in detailed opacity calculations by codes such as
OPAL. These in turn are grounded upon detailed opacity measurements in plasma
systems (Springer, et al. 1997).
• The analysis of the first cometary and interstellar sample returned from the Stardust
mission will provide key information on grain formation and processing in space.
Observations with ISO and Spitzer have revealed the presence of specific minerals (e.g.,
crystalline silicates) in a variety of Galactic environments, including outflows from
evolved stars and protoplanetary disks (Waelkens et al. 1996; Waters et al. 1996). This
work is critical to understanding dust processing during its lifetime, and is only possible
thanks to laboratory measurements of the infrared spectra for candidate grain materials
(Begemann et al. 1994; Jäger et al. 2003).
• Observations from Chandra of emissions from the Puppis A SNR, in which a shock wave
is destroying a clump of material, have been directly interpreted (Hwang et al. 2005)
using results from well-scaled laboratory plasma experiments of the same phenomenon
(Klein et al. 2003).
• Analysis and interpretation of HST observations of heterogeneous protostelar jet
structures were carried out in light of pulsed power laboratory investigations (Lebedev et
al 2005, Ciardi et al. 2009). The plasma experiments showed that early onset, non-
destructive instabilities would create collimated clumps with dispersion in velocity. HST
observations showing heterogeneous or “clumpy” jets (Hartigan & Morse 2007) were
then interepeted in light of these MHD radiative jet experiments. Astrophysical
simulations based on these experiments confirmed the applicability of heterogeneous jets
to key observational properties of real YSO outflows (Yirak et al. 2008)
• Chandra observations of Cas A pulsar have been interpreted by Laming et al. (2006)
using magnetic tower experiments of Lebedev et al (2005). In the Laming et al. study the
parameters of the Cas A plasma jet have been analyzed using the steroidal field
acceleration and collimation mechanisms demonstrated in pulsed power laboratory
experiments. Laming et al also explored the connections to GRB models.
• Studies of dust and ice provide a clear connection between astronomy within and beyond
the solar system (Strazzulla et al. 2005). Planetary surface temperatures are derived from
ice measurements in the NIR (Grundy et al. 2002), while planetary atmospheres (Europa,
Ganymede, etc.) are explained by laboratory studies of ices (Hansen et al. 2005).
• Recent advances in X-ray astronomy with observatories such as Beppo-SAX, Chandra,
XMM_Newton, RXTE, and INTEGRAL have provided a wealth of data on the
thermonuclear explosions that accompany accretion onto the surfaces of white dwarfs
and neutron stars (X-ray Universe Symposium 2008). The observables depend
sensitively on the nuclear physics of reactions for both stable and unstable nuclei, many
of which remain poorly measured. Construction will soon begin on the Facility for Rare
Isotope Beams, a new accelerator at Michigan State University, which will define for the
first time the nuclear physics of neutron-deficient nuclei that participate in the αp-process
and rapid-proton-capture process powering X-ray bursts (Rare Isotope Science
Assessment Committee 2007). Much improved measurements can also be made on
stable isotopes using a new generation of low-energy accelerators mounted deep
underground, away from cosmic ray backgrounds. Data from the first such facility,
LUNA in the Gran Sasso Laboratory, significantly increased age estimates for the oldest
globular cluster stars (Broggini et al. 2006) – resulting in a value that overlaps, within
errors, WMAP’s age for the universe, 13.7 billion years. The NSF hopes to create a
second-generation accelerator facility in the US, within the Deep Underground Science
These examples demonstrate the rich astrophysics enabled by laboratory astrophysics. They
are, however, by no means the only notable advances. We are limited here only by the
constraints of space.
3. Historical Overview
In past decades, much of the laboratory astrophysics work required to move astronomy and
astrophysics forward was funded by programs in atomic, molecular, solid matter, plasma,
nuclear, and particle physics,. In the past, the needs of astronomy and astrophysics were
substantially synergistic with the directions of forefront, fundamental research in these fields. As
a result, astronomy and astrophysics benefited from laboratory astrophysics research in these six
areas without having to support them at a level anywhere close to that required to meet the actual
need.
The last decade, however, has seen the funding reality change drastically. A number of NSF
and DOE programs that previously supported laboratory astrophysics research are no longer
doing so, particularly in the critically important areas of atomic, molecular, and solid matter
physics. The research currently supported by these programs has diverged from the needs of the
astronomy and astrophysics community. Atomic physics has moved heavily into cold atoms,
Bose-Einstein condensates (BEC), and quantum computation and cryptography (collectively
known as photonics) as well as ultrafast lasers. Molecular physics has acquired a biological
orientation and solid matter physics has moved over to nano-science. From a funding
perspective, laboratory astrophysics now lies on the boundary between fields and as a result, its
support is now insufficient to keep up with the demands of astronomy and astrophysics.
Laboratory plasma astrophysics has for the most part developed more recently. Some of this
work benefits at present from an overlap with the fundamental needs of certain subsets of plasma
research. Most ongoing and potential research, however, also lies on the boundary between fields
and so suffers accordingly.
University support for laboratory astrophysics has also diminished drastically over the past
decade as many faculty members have retired and departments have opted to move in new
research directions. Areas related to photonics, ultrafast lasers, biology, environmental, or nano-
technology are very much in vogue, as opposed to classic atomic, molecular, and solid matter
physics. As a result, few new faculty members have been hired in laboratory astrophysics, thus
threatening the future supply of researchers knowledgeable in this field. These faculty members
are necessary not just to carry out the needed laboratory astrophysics research but also to train
graduate and undergraduate students, i.e., the next generation. Student participation in research
is critical for the future vitality of the field. The reduced numbers of faculty members and their
associated laboratories has also led to a diminishing of the infrastructure in laboratory
astrophysics. Most of the instrumentation associated with lab astrophysics research is not
commercially available, and loss of personnel also results in a loss of technical expertise - a
commodity that cannot easily be replaced.
4. Ensuring the Future Mission-Enabling Capabilities of Laboratory Astrophysics
Increased and steady support for laboratory astrophysics from NASA is critical. Current
support for laboratory astrophysics comes from a small number of insufficiently funded
programs. Robust funding programs are necessary to maintain the core competency of the
community and to ensure the development of future generations of laboratory astrophysicists. If
the funding for current programs is not increased, significant research capabilities that have
required decades to develop will be lost. These research programs cannot be turned off and on at
will and if stopped would require a large infusion of financial support and many decades to re-
achieve previous capabilities. For instance, a new laboratory can cost up to several million
dollars, much more than is needed to support, maintain, and enhance current facilities. The
impending lack of sufficient and appropriate laboratory astrophysics groups and facilities will
impact the scientific return from future astronomy and astrophysics projects, which typically
have budgets that dwarf the level of support needed by laboratory astrophysics.
Explicit support for laboratory astrophysics by missions is essential to maximize their
astronomical and astrophysical scientific return, by using core competencies to deliver data
meeting specific needs of the mission. Current laboratory astrophysics funding is insufficient to
produce all the critical data needed to ensure successful scientific return from missions and
programs. Mission and project support of laboratory astrophysics through competitively run
three-to-four year grants at a level comparable to those grants supporting core competency will
make a significant impact on the production of the needed laboratory astrophysics data. The
current support arising from one-year grants linked to observing cycles does not reflect the long-
term nature of laboratory astrophysics research.
Faculty development in laboratory astrophysics is necessary to ensure the health and vitality
of laboratory astrophysics on university teaching faculties. We urge that NASA offer awards for
the creation of new tenure-track faculty positions within the intellectual disciplines that comprise
laboratory astrophysics. This is a particularly important issue as start-up packages for laboratory
astrophysics hires can be costly. The aim of these awards should be to integrate research topics
in laboratory astrophysics into basic physics, astronomy, chemistry, electrical engineering,
geosciences, biology, meteorology, computer science, and applied mathematics programs, and to
develop laboratory astrophysics programs capable of training the next generation of leaders in
this field.
Establish fellowships and prizes in the area of laboratory astrophysics. Recognition for
research in laboratory astrophysics should be given greater visibility in the community. The
creation by NASA of graduate and post-doctoral fellowships in laboratory astrophysics will help
to train the next generation of researchers in this field. The establishment of sanctioned awards,
analogous to those given in other research areas, would serve to raise the profile of laboratory
astrophysics. Possible societies to consider for the creation of such awards include the American
Astronomical Society (AAS), the American Chemical Society (ACS), the American Physical
Society (APS), or similar professional societies.
Strong Instrumentation, Technology, and Facilities Development Programs in laboratory
astrophysics are needed to support the development, construction, and maintenance of state-of-
the-art laboratory astrophysics instrumentation and facilities. Such programs exist for detector
and instrument development for missions. No similar programs dedicated to laboratory
astrophysics currently exist. Such programs are vital for ensuring not just that the capabilities of
the laboratory astrophysics community remain current with present astronomy and astrophysics
needs but that they also prepare for planned future astronomy and astrophysics needs. The time
scale for developing new laboratories and technical capabilities is comparable to that for new
missions. Correspondingly, support for long term laboratory astrophysics development is
critically needed. A range of instrumentation, technology, and development programs at NASA
should be developed that would be able to respond to a variety of needs for infrastructure that
promote basic research in laboratory astrophysics. The instrument and technology development
component should provide funds for the design and construction of state-of-the-art as well as
innovative instruments and technologies that will enable new laboratory astrophysics
measurements or calculations. The facility development component should provide support for
open facilities dedicated to laboratory astrophysics needs.
Provide adequate funding for databases. Critically evaluated data are needed by those
analyzing astronomical measurements and modeling the associated environments. True
understanding is only possible when collections of the highest quality laboratory astrophysics
data are utilized. NASA needs to coordinate its efforts with other relevant agencies and
departments. Database compilation and the associated, vital critical evaluation, is a skill that is
developed over decades in many cases. Long term commitment of funds is essential.
Maintain a vibrant community of scientists conducting laboratory astrophysics. The synergy
between laboratory work in a university setting and in NASA laboratories must be fostered. A
model for funding needs to include a continued level of baseline support, involving strengthened
R&A programs, with occasional term-limited spikes for the topical needs of new missions. An
example of the latter is the two-year grants in support of the Herschel mission. This is the only
viable model to maintain core competency in the field, ensure rapid response to ongoing mission
and project needs, and provide a healthy balance among energy bands and among disciplines.
Finally, there should be coordination among the federal agencies (NASA, NSF, DOE) that fund
all these activities.
The NRC should conduct a study charged with identifying and detailing the specific
laboratory astrophysics needed by the astronomy and astrophysics community. Such a study
should build on the finding of this Space Studies Board study and of the Decadal Survey and
follow those findings down to a level of detail which is beyond the scope of this study or of the
Decadal Survey. Specific items to address include, but are not limited to, the following:
1. Within the six areas of laboratory astrophysics, what are the specific sub-areas needed by
the astronomy and astrophysics community?
2. What is the number of university groups working in each distinct sub-area needed to meet
current laboratory astrophysics needs in each sub-area and to train the future generations
to insure continued capabilities in each sub-area?
3. How to encourage and retain faculty, in terms of ensuring the future supply of laboratory
astrophysicists and maintaining/revitalizing infrastructure in the field?
4. How to foster graduate student participation and Ph.D. theses in these areas?
5. How to support the development and maintenance of laboratories and their unique
instrumentation for ground-breaking research?
6. How to coordinate the activities of the agencies and departments that benefit from a
robust effort in laboratory astrophysics?
7. How to combine interdisciplinary teams and/or centers focused on solving specific
complex problems (e.g., NASA’s Astrobiology Institute) while continuing to fund
programs to support ground-breaking ideas of individual researchers that could
potentially revolutionize aspects of astrophysics and increase the scientific return from
observatories?
5. Proposed Actions to be Taken and Estimated Levels of Support Needed
At NASA, much of the support for laboratory astrophysics has come through programs such
as the Astronomy and Physics Research and Analysis program (APRA). This and other
programs historically have supported research in atomic, molecular, and solid matter laboratory
astrophysics. Over the past four funding competition cycles the APRA program has received ~
29 laboratory astrophysics proposals each year. Of these typically ~ 9 are selected for funding
each year. Including new and continuing grants, the APRA program supports ~ 27 laboratory
astrophysics proposals at a total level of approximately $3 million per year. Considering the vast
scope of atoms, ions, molecules, and solids for which data are needed, and that the need for these
data ranges from the far infrared to the x-ray regime, supporting only 9 new such projects each
year is woefully inadequate. Additionally, the average award size of approximately $110,000
per year is barely enough to support a graduate student researcher (which is needed in order to
sustain expertise in laboratory astrophysics over time), one month salary for the PI, computers,
conferences, and travel. Perhaps this may be sufficient for a theory group, but for an
experimental group such a level is insufficient to cover the additional expenses of upgrading
hardware and supporting technical staff.
If the mandate of the APRA and similar programs remains unchanged, then a trebling of the
funding level would make a significant positive impact on the vitality for atomic, molecular, and
solid matter laboratory astrophysics. Such an increase would accomplish two goals. First, it
would provide support for the many highly rated proposals that must currently be declined due to
insufficient funds. Second, an increase in funding will initially increase the odds of receiving an
award. This increase in the likelihood of obtaining funding will serve to draw new researchers
into laboratory astrophysics, thereby growing our national capabilities in this area and laying the
foundation for a vibrant and strong future.
If, however, the mandate of APRA and similar programs were extended to include plasma,
nuclear, and particle laboratory astrophysics, then a dramatically larger increase would be
needed. An expansion of the scope of the laboratory astrophysics covered by these programs
without a corresponding increase in the level of funding would have a serious detrimental effect
on the laboratory astrophysics capabilities of this nation. While new research in plasma, nuclear,
and particle laboratory astrophysics would be initiated, fewer researchers in atomic, molecular,
and solid matter laboratory astrophysics would be able to obtain funding. The only way to offset
changes to the mandates of current programs is to make certain that the changes are accompanied
by meaningful increases in the funding level available. For that reason, we propose that adding
plasma, nuclear, and particle laboratory astrophysics to programs such as APRA should be
accompanied by at least a doubling of the available funding. This is in addition to the proposed
factor of 3 increase discussed in the preceding paragraph. Taken together, for example, these
changes and increases would grow the laboratory astrophysics portion of the APRA program to a
level of approximately $18 million per year.
Announcement of opportunities (AOs) and requests for proposals (RFPs) for all future
airborne and space-based observatories should include an explicit request for a detailing of the
laboratory astrophysics data needed to analyze the astronomical data from these missions in
order to maximize the scientific return. It is no longer appropriate to think of these data needs as
someone else’s problem. The responsibility for ensuring the needed data are there when the
observatory comes on line should lie with the proposers of the mission. For this reason, we
propose an appropriate fraction for the budget of each mission be allocated to relevant laboratory
astrophysics studies. Considering the hundreds of millions to billions spent on each mission and
the few millions that would be allocated to laboratory astrophysics, it is clear that the lever arm is
long and the return on the support for laboratory astrophysics research will be greatly magnified.
Faculty development programs are needed to create the infrastructure at universities
necessary to train the next generation of laboratory astrophysicists. We propose the creation of a
program similar to the unrelated NSF Division of Atmospheric Sciences (ATM) Faculty
Development program which was closed in 2004. That program funded grants of up to $400,000
per year for up to 5 years. We urge the creation of such programs at the NASA at funding levels
similar to those of the closed ATM program but adjusted for inflation.
Instrumentation and technology development programs specifically designed for laboratory
astrophysics are vital in order for the capabilities of the laboratory astrophysics community to
keep pace with the astronomy and astrophysics needs of this nation. Support for a number of
grants each year at a level per three year grant of up to several million dollars per grant would go
a long way toward filling this vital need. This program could be modeled on the existing
programs at NASA. The need for such programs specifically tailored for laboratory astrophysics
is highlighted by the fact that none of these existing instrumentation and technology
development programs have a history of supporting laboratory astrophysics.
Facilities and databases require long term commitments extending beyond typical
competitively run three year research grants. Additionally the support needed for facilities can
often exceed that provided by instrumentation and technology development programs. For
example, upcoming missions will study the chemistry of the cosmos. This will require
laboratory studies of cold molecules using facilities such as electrostatic ion storage rings. No
such facilities currently exist in the United States. The construction capital costs for such a
facility are estimated at approximately $15 million and the operating costs at approximately $2
million per year. The US should begin to develop the physics and computational facilities
required to meet the long-term laboratory astrophysics needs of astronomy and astrophysics.
6. Summary
Laboratory astrophysics has added greatly to the scientific return of NASA missions.
Measurements conducted before and after the launch of the Copernicus satellite provided the
basis for an improved understanding of interstellar gas. This continued in support of the UV
observations conducted with the Goddard High Resolution Spectrograph and the Space
Telescope Imaging Spectrograph, where further progress was achieved in both interstellar and
stellar research. Many advances at x-ray wavelengths were the combined result of laboratory
experiments and related theoretical calculations on the one hand and superb data from Chandra
on the other. Laboratory astrophysics is also allowing detailed analyses of solid material seen in
spectra with the Spitzer Space Telescope. The community who will soon use the Herschel Space
Telescope are keenly aware of their laboratory needs to obtain the greatest scientific impact.
Future advances are being jeopardized because the current state of affairs in laboratory
astrophysics is dire.
Ensuring the vitality and future of astronomy and astrophysics requires strong national
support for a healthy and viable laboratory astrophysics program. Over the past 10 years there
have been a series of NASA-sponsored workshops dedicated to the assessment of the state of
laboratory astrophysics (NASA Laboratory Astrophysics Workshop 1998, 2002, 2006). These
workshops have tracked the increasing direness of the situation. The reports and white papers
resulting from these workshops have been published and are listed in the references section.
Laboratory astrophysics has reached a point where it is ceasing to be a viable, productive
field, just at a time when advances in experimental technology are opening new vistas in its
applicability. We urge the Space Studies Board committee studying mission-enabling activities
in NASA’s space and Earth sciences program to consider the laboratory astrophysics
infrastructure needs for astronomy and astrophysics. We also urge the committee to follow the
prioritized proposals they make all the way through to the underlying laboratory astrophysics
data needed and to recommend sufficient funding to ensure the future mission-enabling
capabilities for the long term vitality of laboratory astrophysics and thereby of astronomy and
astrophysics as a whole.
Without laboratory astrophysics, the scientific return from current and future NASA missions
will diminish significantly. Funding for laboratory astrophysics has a long lever arm and any
additional support will have significant impact on missions and facilities. Without laboratory
astrophysics the future progress of astronomy and astrophysics will be greatly hindered.
7. Recommendations
• Increased and steady support for laboratory astrophysics at NASA is critical.
• Explicit support for laboratory astrophysics by missions is essential to maximize
their astronomical and astrophysical scientific return.
• Faculty development in laboratory astrophysics is necessary to ensure the health
and vitality of laboratory astrophysics on university teaching faculties.
• Establish fellowships and prizes in the area of laboratory astrophysics.
• Strong Instrumentation, Technology, and Facilities Development Programs in
laboratory astrophysics are needed to support the development, construction, and
maintenance of the state-of-the-art laboratory astrophysics instrumentation and
facilities that are vital to the success of pending and future missions.
• Provide adequate funding for critically evaluated databases which are needed by
those analyzing astronomical measurements and modeling the associated
environments.
• Maintain a vibrant community of scientists conducting laboratory astrophysics.
• The NRC should conduct a study charged with identifying and detailing the specific
laboratory astrophysics needed by the astronomy and astrophysics community.
8. References
Bautista 2004, A&A, 420, 763.
Begemann et al. 1994, ApJ, 423, L71.
Behar et al. 2001, ApJ, 563, 497.
Broggini et al. 2006, Prog. Part. Nucl. Phys., 57, 343.
Brown et al. 1993, ApJ, 414, L125.
Ceccarelli et al. 1996, ApJ, 471, 400.
Charbonneau et al. 2005, ApJ, 626, 523.
Ciardi et al. 2009, ApJL, 691, L147.
Cowan et al. 2005, ApJ, 627, 238.
Deming et al. 2005, Nature, 434, 704.
Ferlet et al. 2000, ApJ, 538, 69.
Freedman et al. 2008, ApJ 679, 71.
Giesen et al. 2001, ApJ, 551, L181.
Gonzalez-Alfonso et al. 2002, A&A, 386, 1074.
Grundy et al. 2002, Icarus, 155, 486.
Hansen et al. 2005, Icarus, 176, 305.
Harrison et al. 2006, ApJ, 637, 1143.
Hartigan & Morse 2007, ApJ, 660, 426.
Hogg et al. 2005, ApJ, 624, 162.
Hollenbach et al. 1995, ASP Conf. Ser., 73, 243.
Hwang et al. 2005, ApJ, 635, 355.
Jäger et al. 2003, J. Quant. Spectr. Rad. Transf., 79, 765.
Ivarsson et al. 2003, A&A, 409, 1141.
Kaneda et al. 2005, ApJ, 632, L83.
Klein et al. 2003, ApJ, 583, 245.
Konacki et al. 2003, Nature, 421, 507.
Krongold et al. 2005, ApJ, 622, 842.
Laming et al. 2006, ApJ, 644, 260.
Lawler et al. 2006, ApJS, 162, 227.
Lebedev et al. 2005, MNRAS, 361, 97.
Lutz et al. 2005, ApJ, 625, L83.
Madzunkov et al. 2006, Phys. Rev., A 73, 020901(R).
NASA Laboratory Astrophysics Workshop White Paper 2006, S. Federman, N. Brickhouse, V.
Kwong, F. Salama, D. Savin, P. Stancil, J. Weingartner, L. Ziurys, in NASA Laboratory
Astrophysics Workshop, Ph. Weck, V. Kwong, F. Salama, editors, NASA Conference
Proceedings, NASA STI, NASA-Ames Research Center, NASA/CP 214549, 1 (2006);
NASA Laboratory Astrophysics Workshop White Paper 2002, F. Salama, D. Leckrone, J.
Mathis, M. McGrath, Miller, R. T. Phillips, W. Sanders, P. Smith, T. Snow, A. Tielens, in
NASA Laboratory Astrophysics Workshop, F. Salama editor, NASA Conference
Proceedings, NASA STI, NASA-Ames Research Center, NASA/CP 211863, 3 (2002);
NASA Laboratory Astrophysics Workshop Report 1998, W. H. Parkinson, K, Kirby, and P. L.
Smith, editors , Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics, internal document.
Rare Isotope Science Assessment Committee 2007, “Scientific Opportunities with a RARE-
ISOTOPE FACILITY in the United States”, The National Academies Press.
Sneden et al. 2008, ARA&A, 46, 241.
Snow et al. 2000, ApJ, 538, 65.
Snow et al. 2008, ApJ, 688, 1124.
Springer, et al. 1997, J. Quant. Spectrosc. Radiat. Transf., 58, 927.
Stacey et al. 1987, ApJ, 313, 859.
Strazzulla et al. 2005, Icarus 174, 31.
Timmerman et al. 1996, ApJ, 463, L109.
Waelkens et al. 1996, A&A, 315, L245.
Waters et al. 1996, A&A, 316, L361.
Weedman et al. 2006, ApJ, 638, 613.
Wu et al. 2005, ApJ, 632, L79.
Wu et al. 2006, ApJ, 639, 157.
Yan et al. 2005, ApJ, 628, 604.
Yirak et al. 2009, ApJ, in press.
X-ray Universe Symposium 2008,
Zmuidzinas et al. 1995, ASP Conf. Ser., 73, 555.
Appendix I: New Discoveries in Cosmology and Fundamental Physics through Advances in
Laboratory Astrophysics
1. Introduction
As the Cosmology and Fundamental Physics (CFP) panel is fully aware, the next decade will
see major advances in our understanding of these areas of research. To quote from their charge,
these advances will occur in studies of “the early universe, the microwave background, the
reionization and galaxy formation up to virialization of protogalaxies, large scale structure, the
intergalactic medium, the determination of cosmological parameters, dark matter, dark energy,
tests of gravity, astronomically determined physical constants, and high energy physics using
astronomical messengers.”
Central to the progress in these areas are the corresponding advances in laboratory
astrophysics which are required for fully realizing the CFP scientific opportunities within the
decade 2010-2020. Laboratory astrophysics comprises both theoretical and experimental studies
of the underlying physics which produce the observed astrophysical processes. The 5 areas of
laboratory astrophysics which we have identified as relevant to the CFP panel are atomic,
molecular, plasma, nuclear, and particle physics.
Here, Section 2 describes some of the new scientific opportunities and compelling scientific
themes which will be enabled by advances in laboratory astrophysics. In Section 3, we provide
the scientific context for these opportunities. Section 4 briefly discusses some of the
experimental and theoretical advances in laboratory astrophysics required to realize the CFP
scientific opportunities of the next decade. As requested in the Call for White Papers, Section 5
presents four central questions and one area with unusual discovery potential. Lastly, we give a
short postlude in Section 6.
2. New scientific opportunities and compelling scientific themes
Some attempts to unify gravity with the strong and electroweak forces suggests the
possibility for temporal and spatial variations of the fundamental “constants” such as the fine-
structure constant α=e2/ħc and the electron/proton mass ratio µ=m /m (Uzan 2003).
Astrophysical research is uniquely situated to address the question of whether these constants are
so or if they vary over the lifetime of the universe.
Measuring cosmological parameters has reached amazing levels of precision. Data from the
angular power spectrum of the CMB can be used to determine several key cosmological
parameters including relative densities of baryonic matter, dark matter, and dark energy as well
as test models of inflation (Wong et al. 2008). Observations can also constrain the specific
entropy of the universe (Sunyaev & Chluba 2008), the primordial helium abundance (Peimbert et
al. 2008), and the CMB monopole temperature (Hamann & Wang. 2008). Studies in these areas
lie on the cutting edge of cosmology.
Cosmologists want to probe the structure and reionization of the universe during the dark
ages, the period between recombination and the formation of the first stars (Pritchard & Loeb
2008). Such observations are expected to begin in the next decade.
There is now a multitude of evidence for the existence of non-baryonic dark matter. In
addition to the above mentioned CMB measurements, there is a host of astronomical
observations including the measurement of galactic rotation curves, X-ray emission from clusters
of galaxies, and gravitational lensing. All observations are consistent with dark matter
comprising roughly 20% of the total energy density in the Universe. Numerous laboratory
experiments are currently actively searching for the direct detection of dark matter. A positive
detection from these experiments coupled with future data from the Large Hadron Collider
(LHC) at CERN may determine the identity of the dark matter in addition to firmly establishing
its existence.
Studies of the IGM and the Lyman α forest can be used to constrain the spectral shape and
history of the metagalactic radiation field, the chemical evolution of the universe, and the initial
mass function of the earliest generation of stars.
3. Scientific context
In the standard model of electroweak interactions, fermion masses as well as the weak gauge
boson masses are generated through the Higgs mechanism. The standard model contains a
fundamental scalar field, the Higgs boson, with self-interactions which allow for the dynamical
generation of a non-zero vacuum expectation value. As a consequence, all particles, interacting
with the Higgs boson, acquire mass. In an analogous manner, unified theories such as string
theory contain additional scalar fields for which there is no fixed background value. If these
fields couple to electric and magnetic fields, their background value, which may evolve in an
expanding universe, determine the gauge coupling constants, such as the fine structure constant.
In these unified theories, variations of the gauge couplings may lead to variations of Yukawa
couplings (the couplings of the Higgs bosons to fermions) as well as the variation of the scale at
which strong interactions become non-perturbative Λ . As a result, in addition to variations in
α, variations in the ratios of particle masses such as m /m may occur.
Quasar absorption spectral observations have been used to probe for variations in
fundamental constants (King et al. 2008, Murphy et al. 2008). Variations in α can be determined
from detailed atomic and molecular absorption features. One particularly sensitive test is the
many-multiplet method based on the relativistic corrections to atomic transitions using several
lines from various elemental species and allows for sensitivities which approach the level of 10-
6. Similarly, measurements for the variability of µ rely on Lyman and Werner transitions of the
H molecule.
While the standard model of cosmology can be simply formulated in the context of general
relativity, a precise description relies on several key parameters which include the relative
densities of baryonic and dark matter, as well, as the dark energy, the rate of expansion of the
universe characterized by the Hubble parameter, the shape of the angular power spectrum, the
optical depth to the last scattering of the CMB, as well as others. WMAP has achieved an
enormous leap in the accuracy of these parameters and with the launching of Planck, the third
generation CMB satellite, a new level of precision will be achieved for CMB temperature and
polarization anisotropies (Wong et al. 2008). These measurements can be used to constrain
various models for inflation.
CMB observations at decimeter wavelengths are planned for the near future. Any detected
CMB distortions will provide an additional means to determine some of the key parameters of
the universe such as the specific entropy of the universe, the CMB monopole temperature, and
the primordial helium abundance (Sunyaev & Chluba 2008).
Plans have been made to probe the dark ages through observations of the redshifted 21-cm
hyperfine line in neutral hydrogen (Bowman et al. 2007). The first generation experiments to
carry out these observations are currently under construction.
The first indication for dark matter came from the observations of high velocities of galaxies
within clusters of galaxies and required an additional source of gravity beyond that which could
be accounted for from light-producing galaxies in the cluster. Similarly, the rotation of stars and
gas in spiral galaxies also pointed to the notion that galaxies were embedded in a large and
massive halo of dark gravitating matter. The presence of hot X-ray emitting gas also requires a
significant amount of gravity to prevent the hot gas from flying off into space. Observations of
distant galaxies along the line of sight of a large cluster of galaxies show clear signs of the
gravitational lensing of the light. Indeed, recent claims to direct evidence for dark matter came
from observations of a collision of clusters of galaxies showing lensing which is directly
associated with (non-dissipative) dark matter in tact with the two clusters whereas the
(dissipative) hot gas has been stripped from the cluster by the collision (Clowe 2006).
The standard model of strong and electroweak interactions has been very well established by
precision measurements at LEP and SLAC. At the energies achieved so far, there are precious
few discrepancies which can be taken as a sign of new physics beyond the standard model. Of
course a key missing constituent of the standard model is the Higgs boson. Its discovery is the
primary goal for the LHC which will begin operations this year. Nevertheless, particle physics
models beyond the standard model are known to possess particle candidates for the dark matter.
For example, axions are particles which appear in models which attempt to solve the so-called
strong CP problem associated with the strong nuclear force.
One problem associated with the presence of fundamental scalar particles in the standard
model is known as the hierarchy problem. Put simply, in the context of a unified theory with
physics at a very high energy scale, it is very difficult to maintain the scale of the breakdown of
the electroweak theory to energies as low as 100 GeV. An elegant solution to this problem is
known as supersymmetry which is a theory relating particles which differ in their spin statistics
by a ½ integer (in units of ħ). Each known particle in the standard model is associated with a
superpartner, yet to be discovered. The discovery of superpartners is also one of the main goals
for the LHC. The unification of running gauge couplings at high energy in unified theories also
requires an extension of the standard model similar to the supersymmetric extension. The lightest
of all the new supersymmetric particles is expected to be stable as its decay is protected by the
conservation of a new quantum number in much the same way that the proton is protected by the
conservation of baryon number or the electron by the conservation of electric charge. This new
massive particle is an ideal candidate for dark matter.
The planned dramatic increase in collecting area for the next generation of ground-based
observatories, going from 10 m to 30 m telescopes, is expected to revolutionize observational
and theoretical studies of the IGM and the Lyman α forest. Such studies will dramatically
improve our ability to constrain the spectral shape and history of the metagalactic radiation field,
the chemical evolution of the universe, and the initial mass function of the earliest generation of
stars.
4. Required advances in Laboratory Astrophysics
Advances particularly in the areas of atomic, molecular, plasma, nuclear, and particle physics
will be required for the scientific opportunities described above. Here we briefly discuss some of
the relevant research in each of these 5 areas of laboratory astrophysics. Experimental and
theoretical advances are required in all these areas to fully realize the CFP scientific
opportunities of the next decade.
4.1. Atomic Physics
Spectroscopic observations of quasar absorption systems to search for variations in the
fundamental constants require accurate transition frequencies and their dependence on these
constants for many different atomic systems. Strong systematic uncertainties arise from
inaccurate laboratory measurements and some systems of particular importance include ions of
Ti, Mn, Na, C, and O (Berengut et al. 2004). Atomic clocks and laboratory transition frequency
determinations can also be used to constrain variations in the fundamental constants (Lea 2007).
Interpreting observations from Planck will require a precise knowledge of the cosmological
recombination history. The complete lack of understanding of the profile of the CMB last-
scatter surface dominates the error budget for calculating the cosmological power spectrum.
Reducing these uncertainties requires high precision calculations for the cosmological
recombination process which in turn rely on accurate data for hydrogen and helium
recombination and related processes (Wong et al. 2008).
Observations of the cosmological recombination spectrum can in principle be used to
measure the specific entropy of the universe, the primordial He abundance, and the CMB
monopole temperature. Interpreting these observations will also require accurate atomic data for
recombination spectra in hydrogen and helium and particularly for two photon processes
(Sunyaev & Chluba 2008).
Interpreting the planned red-shifted 21-cm observations will require a detailed model of the
underlying atomic processes affecting the population of the hyperfine levels. These include
resonant scattering of Lyman-alpha photons, spin changing collisions of the hyperfine levels, and
related processes (Pritchard & Loeb 2008).
Observations of H II regions are used to infer primordial helium abundances to test the
standard model for big bang nucleosynthesis (BBN). Reliable recombination rate coefficients
are needed for the observed H I and He I lines as well as for ions of O, Ne, Si, and S (Peimbert et
al. 2007).
Interpreting spectra of the IGM Lyman α forest is carried out using both single-phase models
and cosmological models of the IGM employing semianalytical approximations for
hydrodynamical simulations. These various models used different approximations and
assumptions. However, one thing they all have in common is the need to calculate the ionization
structure of the photoionized IGM. This is typically carried out using plasma codes written
specifically for modeling the ionization structure of photoionized gas. One of the most
commonly used codes for this purpose is CLOUDY (Ferland et al. 1998). Fundamental to the
accuracy of such plasma codes and any inferred astrophysical conclusions is calculating the
correct ionization balance. This requires reliable photoionization, radiative recombination,
dielectronic recombination, and charge transfer data (Savin 2000). Accurate data are also needed
for photoabsorption (photoexcitation), electron impact excitation, and radiative lifetimes to
generate accurate model spectra.
4.2. Molecular Physics
Quasar observations of molecular absorption lines can be used to constrain temporal and
spatial variations in fundamental constants. For this accurate transition frequencies and their
dependence on these constants for many different molecular systems are needed. Some of the
more important systems include H (King et al. 2008) and OH (Kanekar et al. 2005). Molecular
clocks and laboratory transition frequency studies can also be used to constrain variations in the
fundamental constants (Lea 2007).
4.3. Plasma Physics
Plasma physics at high energy density can produce photoionized plasmas that can benchmark
models of the IGM and the reionization of the universe. This is accomplished by producing an
intense x-ray source that can irradiate a plasma volume containing relevant species, and
measuring the ionization balance and other properties that result. Work in this direction has
begun (Foord et al. 2006; Wang et al. 2008). Much more will be possible in the coming decade
as higher-energy facilities come online.
4.4. Nuclear Physics
A critical intersection between cosmology and laboratory nuclear astrophysics comes from
the role of neutrino mass. Neutrinos are the one identified component of the dark matter, though
laboratory bounds and cosmological observations rule out neutrinos as the principal component.
Their effect on cosmological evolution, however, is not neglible and oscillation experiments
place a lower bound on the contribution. This is important because cosmology can determine the
sum of the neutrino mases, a quantity that cannot be extracted from oscillation experiments,
which test only m2 differences. The mass scale, in cosmological analyses, is correlated with the
parameters of the dark energy
equation of state and other neutrino-physics inputs, such as the possibility of additional
sterile neutrinos. Thus an independent determination of this scale would be significant.
The best laboratory limit on the sums of the neutrino masses comes from tritium beta decay
in combination with oscillations, yielding a bound of 6.6 eV. The inadequacy of this limit is
apparent from the more model dependent, but more stringent, result from cosmological analyses
of about 0.7 eV. A new tritium endpoint experiment is underway (KATRIN) that is expected to
improve this laboratory limit by an order of magnitude, thus providing a check on the current
cosmological bound. There are also ambitious new double beta decay experiments that probe,
somewhat less directly, the neutrino mass scale. These experiments - carried out by groups in
both nuclear and particle physics - have much greater reach and could potentially establishing
bounds on the order of 0.05 eV, if mounted at the requested one-to-ten-ton scale. It is anticipated
that the cosmological bound will also improve rapidly: analyses based on PLANCK plus SDSS
and on CMBpol plus SDSS may be able to reach 0.21 and 0.13 eV, respectively. With future
data from weak lensing surveys, this bound could move below 0.1 eV.
The concordance between laboratory and cosmological neutrino mass determinations could
be of great importance. One can envision a cosmological mass determination and measurement
of the currently unknown third mixing angle (the subject of current reactor and long-baseline
programs) in the next decade. In total there would be six constraints (two mass differences, three
mixing angles, the mass scale) imposed on the double beta decay Majorana mass. A lack of
concordance would yield new physics, e.g., constraining the relative CP of the mass eigenstates
and/or their Majorana phases.
The detection of neutrinoless double beta decay would have another important implication
for cosmology: it is the only practical low-energy tool for establishing lepton number violation
and Majorana masses, ingredients in theories that invoke leptogenesis as a mechanism for
generating the cosmological baryon number asymmetry.
The first stars are thought to have formed ~ 100 Myr after the Big Bang: dark matter halos of
105-6 solar masses at redshift z ~ 30 attract enough primordial gas to produce significant baryon
densities and temperatures. By z ~ 20 sufficient cooling has occurred to produce gravitational
instability. The first stars played an important role in the evolution of the early universe. Prior
to their formation the universe consisted mostly of neutral hydrogen and helium, and was dark
due to the absorption of light by these atoms. The ultraviolet photons from these early stars
helped reionize the early universe, ending the “cosmic dark age”. These stars thus influenced
conditions for early galaxy formation (e.g., the first 1 Gyr), through their radiation, heavy
element production, kinetic energy input, and generation of shock waves and electromagnetic
fields. This epoch is interesting cosmologically because it is accessible: WMAP and studies of
distance quasars by SDSS have provided some information on the universe’s reionization
history, while VLT, Subaru, and Keck have helped us understand the early evolution of metals.
Nuclear physicists are involved in this interdisciplinary field through their efforts to
understand the structure, very rapid evolution, and death of these massive, extremely low
metalicity stars - and how this evolution affects the interstellar medium. The work includes the
evolution of progenitor models and large-scale numerical simulations to understand the
mechanisms for their deaths (e.g., pair instability supernovae vs. collapse to a black hole). They
are also very interested in understanding the patterns of the metals that might emerge from the
ejecta - a problem that connects observations of metal-poor stars to laboratory measurements of
nuclear masses and decays.
Nuclear transitions are possible candidates for measuring the time variation in α. One system
of particular interest is 229Th (Litvinova et al. 2009). Such studies will require highly accurate
nuclear model calculations.
4.5 Particle Physics
The search for dark matter has become a multi-faceted research enterprise. The search for
candidates associated with supersymmetric theories exists on three fronts: accelerator searches,
direct detection searches and indirect detection searchs. Accelerator searches are geared towards
new particle discoveries. Supersymmetry predicts many new massive particles and the discovery
of any of these particles would go a long way in our understanding of the possible nature and
identity of dark matter. However, as it is expected that the dark matter is neutral under strong
and electromagnetic interactions, it is not likely that the LHC will detect the dark matter; rather
this new particle would be expected to escape the detectors and appear as missing energy much
like neutrinos.
Similarly, indirect detection experiments look at by products of interactions of dark matter.
For example, dark matter annihilation in the galactic halo could provide unique signatures found
in the gamma ray, positron, or antiproton backgrounds. Many experiments are currently running
looking for these signatures. Most notable perhaps is Fermi, mapping out the gamma ray sky.
Another potential signature comes from the scattering and eventual trapping of dark matter
particles in the sun. Annihilations in the sun, would produce high energy neutrinos from the sun
and provide a unique signature for dark matter. The Amanda and IceCube detectors active at the
South Pole are geared for the indirect detection of dark matter.
In contrast to accelerator and indirect detection searches, direct detection experiments
are key to the actual discovery of dark matter. These laboratory experiments look for the elastic
scattering of dark matter particles with nuclei in low background environments located deep
underground. There has been dramatic improvement in the sensitivity of these detectors over the
last several years. These detectors are designed to look for weakly interacting massive particles
(WIMPS) with masses between 10 GeV and 10 TeV through the nuclear recoil (with energies
between 1 and 100 keV) of an elastic scattering event. There are several running experiments
with detectors consisting of a wide range of nuclear targets. The best limits on the elastic
scattering cross section come from two experiments, CDMS and XENON10. CDMS, currently
located in the Soudan mine in Minnesota, uses cryogenic Ge and Si detectors. XENON10 ,
located at Grand Sasso, uses liquid Xe as its active component. Current limits are at the level of
a few times 10-8 pb. Both experiments have planned upgrades.
Terrestrial experiments search for axions by looking for their conversion to photons in a
strong magnetic field (Sikivie 1983). Two high “Q” cavities are currently running. The ADMX
experiment at LLNL uses electronic amplifiers with low noise temperature to enhance the
conversion signal. Currently this experiment has set limits on the axion mass, excluding masses
between 1.9 and 3.3 µeV if the axion constitutes the dark matter. This experiment is being
upgraded with the use of SQUID amplifiers. A second experiment CARRACK in Kyoto uses
highly excited atoms to detect microwave photons resulting from the axion conversion. This
experiment excludes masses around 10 µeV and is being upgraded to a sensitivity capable of
probing masses between 2 and 50 µeV.
5. Four central questions and one area with unusual discovery potential
5.1 Four central questions
• Are the fundamental “constants” truly constant?
• How accurately can we measure the cosmological parameters?
• What is the nature and identity of the dark matter?
• What is the shape and history of the metagalatic radiation field, the chemical
evolution of the universe, and the initial mass function for the first stars?
5.2 One area with unusual discovery potential
• What is the history and structure of the universe during the dark ages?
6. Postlude
Laboratory astrophysics and complementary theoretical calculations are the part of the
foundation for our understanding of CFP and will remain so for many generations to come.
From the level of scientific conception to that of the scientific return, it is our understanding of
the underlying processes that allows us to address fundamental questions in these areas. In this
regard, laboratory astrophysics is much like detector and instrument development; these efforts
are necessary to maximize the scientific return from astronomical observations.