]NG.oib-q[
1v4682.9041:viXra
StatisticalScience
2014,Vol.29,No.2,214–226
(cid:13)c InstituteofMathematicalStatistics,2014
Scalable Genomics with R
and Bioconductor
Michael Lawrence and Martin Morgan
Abstract. This paper reviews strategies for solving problems encoun-
tered when analyzing large genomic data sets and describes the imple-
mentation of those strategies in R by packages from the Bioconductor
project. We treat the scalable processing, summarization and visual-
ization of big genomic data. The general ideas are well established and
include restrictive queries, compression, iteration and parallel comput-
ing. We demonstrate the strategies by applying Bioconductor packages
to the detection and analysis of genetic variants from a whole genome
sequencing experiment.
Keywords and phrases: R,Bioconductor,genomics,biology,bigdata.
1. INTRODUCTION within the memory of a current commodity com-
puter, and is not processed in a timely and inter-
Big data is encountered in genomics for two rea-
active manner. To successfully wrangle a large data
sons: the size of the genome and the heterogeneity
set, we need to intimately understand its structure
of populations. Complex organisms, such as plants
and carefully consider the questions posed of it.
and animals, have genomes on the order of billions
Therearethreeprimarytypesofdataingenomics:
of base pairs (the human genome consists of over
sequence vectors, annotated ranges and feature-by-
three billion base pairs). The diversity of popula-
sample matrices of summary statistics (Figure 1).
tions, whether of organisms, tissues or cells, means
Biological sequences are represented as strings of
we need to sample deeply to detect low frequency
characters from a restricted alphabet. For example,
events. To interrogate long and/or numerous ge-
a DNA sequence consists of the letters A, C, G and
nomicsequences,manymeasurementsarenecessary.
T, each referring to a particular type of nucleotide.
For example,a typical whole genomesequencing ex- A genome consists of a set of DNA sequences, one
periment will consist of over one billion reads of 75– for each chromosome. We generalize the concept of
100 bp each. The reads are aligned across billions sequence and define the term sequence vector to
of positions, most of which have been annotated meaneitherasequenceoravector thatrunsparallel
in some way. This experiment may be repeated for to a sequence. The latter may be some curated or
thousands of samples. Such a data set does not fit computed value, such as the cross-species conserva-
tion or coverage from a sequencing experiment. The
Michael Lawrence is Computational Biologist, coverage is a common summary that represents the
Genentech, 1 DNA Way, South San Francisco, number of features overlapping each position in the
California 94080, USA e-mail: michafla@gene.com. reference sequence.
Martin Morgan is Principal Staff Scientist, Fred Aswelearnmoreaboutagenome,weannotatege-
Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, 1100 Fairview nomic ranges with information like gene structures
Ave. N., P.O. Box 19024, Seattle, Washington 98109, and regulatory binding sites. The alignment of se-
USA e-mail: mtmorgan@fhcrc.org.
quences to a reference genome is another type of
range-based annotation.
This is an electronic reprint of the original article
published by the Institute of Mathematical Statistics in Tocomparedataacrosssamples,weoftensumma-
Statistical Science, 2014, Vol. 29, No. 2, 214–226. This rize experimental annotations over aset of reference
reprint differs from the original in pagination and featurestoyieldafeature-by-samplematrix.Forex-
typographic detail. ample, we might count read alignments overlapping
M. LAWRENCEAND M. MORGAN
Fig.1. Cartoonvisualizationofallthreetypesofgenomicdata:genome-lengthvectors,ranged,featuresandsummaries(from
bottom to top). Data from two samples are compared (red vs. blue). The bottom plot displays the coverage, a genome-length
vector. The exon ranges are shown in the middle. The top plot presents summaries, the per-exon read counts.
a common set of genes across a number of sam- abstractions that make it accessible to statisticians
ples. Larger matrices often arise in genetics, where and bioinformatics professionals who are not soft-
thousands of samples are compared over millions of ware engineers per se. One aspect of R that is par-
SNPs, positions that are known to vary within a ticularly useful is its “copy on write” memory se-
population. In every case, the summaries are tied to mantics, which insulates the user from the details of
a genomic range. reference-based memory management. The funda-
To analyze the results of an experiment, we need mental R data structure is the atomic vector, which
to integrate data of different types. For example,
is both convenient and efficient for moderately sized
we might have alignments for a ChIP-seq experi-
data. Anatomic vector is homogeneous indata type
ment, where the sequences have been enriched for
andsoeasilystoredinonecontiguous blockofmem-
binding to a particular transcription factor. A typ-
ory. Many vector operations are implemented in na-
ical analysis involves checking coincidence with an-
tive (C) code, which avoids invoking the R inter-
notated binding sites for that transcription factor,
preterasititeratesovervectorelements.Inatypical
as well as looking for correlation between gene ex-
multivariate data set, there is heterogeneity in data
pression and binding signal upstream of the gene.
type across the columns and homogeneity along a
The gene expression values might be drawn from a
column, so vectors are naturally suited for column-
geneby asamplematrix summarizedfroman RNA-
oriented data storage, as in the basic data.frame.
seq experiment. The genomic range is the common
Vectorized computations can usually be expressed
threadthatintegratesallthreetypesofdata.These-
with simpler and more concise code compared to
quence,thatis,thegenome,actsasthescaffold,and
explicit iteration. The strengths of R are also its
ranges coordinate the annotations and summarized
weaknesses: the R API encourages users to store en-
features by locating them on the same sequence.
The R language [13] is widely applied to prob- tire data sets in memory as vectors. These vectors
lems in statistics and data analysis, including the areimplicitlyandsilentlycopiedtoachievecopy-on-
analysis of genomic data [8], as evidenced by the write semantics, contributing to high memory usage
large number of available software packages provid- and poor performance.
ing features ranging from data manipulation to ma- There are general strategies for handling large
chine learning. R provides high-level programming genomic data that are well suited to R programs.
SCALABLE GENOMICS
Sometimes the analyst is only interested in one as- Dynamic generation requires fast underlying com-
pect of the data, such as that overlapping a single putations to load, filter and summarize the data,
gene. In such cases, restricting the data to that sub- and fast rendering to display the processed data on
set is a valid and effective means of data reduction. the screen.
However, once our interests extend beyond a single This paper describes strategies to surmount com-
regionortheregionbecomestoolarge,resourcecon- putational and visualization challenges in the anal-
straints dictate that we cannot load the entire data ysis of large genomic data and how they have been
setintomemoryatonce,andweneedtoiterate over implemented in the R programming language by a
the data to reduce them to a set of interpretable number of packages from the Bioconductor project
summaries. [5]. We will demonstrate their application to a
real data set: the whole-genome sequencing of the
Iteration lends itself to parallelism, that is, com-
HapMapcelllineNA12878,thedaughterintheCEU
puting on multiple parts of the same problem si-
trio. The GATK project genotyped the sample ac-
multaneously. Thus, in addition to meeting mem-
cordingtotheirbestpractices andincludedthecalls
ory constraints, iteration lets us leverage additional
in their resource bundle, along with the alignments
processing resources to reduce overall computation
for chr20, one of the shortest chromosomes. Real-
time. Investing in additional hardwareis often more
istically, one would analyze the data for the entire
economical than investment in software optimiza-
genome, but the chr20 subset is still too large to be
tion. This is particularly relevant in scientific com-
processed on a commodity laptop and thus is suffi-
puting, where we are faced with a diverse, rapidly
cient for our purposes.
evolving set of unsolved problems, each requiring
specialized software. Thecosts of investment in gen-
2. LIMITING RESOURCE CONSUMPTION
eralpurposehardwareareamortizedovereachprob-
lem, rather than paid each time for software opti- Our ultimate goal is to process and summarize a
large data set in its entirety, and iteration enables
mization. This also relates to maintainability: opti-
this by limiting the resource commitment at a given
mization typically comes at a cost of increased code
point in time. Limiting resource consumption gen-
complexity. Many types of summary and filter op-
eralizes beyond iteration and is a fundamental tech-
erations are cheap to implement in parallel because
nique for computing with big data. In many cases,
the data partitions can be processed independently.
it may render iteration unnecessary. Two effective
We call this type of operation embarrassingly paral-
approaches for being frugal with data are restric-
lel.For example,thecountingofreadsoverlappinga
tion and compression.Restriction means controlling
gene does not dependon thecounting for a different
which data are loaded and lets us avoid wasting re-
gene.
sourceson irrelevantor excessive data. Compression
Given the complexity and scope of the data, an-
helps by representing the same data with fewer re-
alysts often rely on visual tools that display sum-
sources.
maries and restricted views to communicate infor-
mation at different scales and level of detail, from 2.1 Restricting Queries
the whole genome to single nucleotide resolution.
Restrictionisappropriatewhenthequestionofin-
Plotinteractivity isalways ausefulfeaturewhenex-
terest requires only a fraction of the available data.
ploring data, and this is particularly true with big
Itisapplicableindifferentways tosequencevectors,
data.Theviewisalways restrictedintermsofitsre-
range-based annotations and feature-by-sample ma-
gion and detail level, so, in order to gain a broader
trices. We can restrict data along two dimen-
and deeper understanding of the data, the viewer sions: row/record-wise and/or column/attribute-
will need to adjust the view, either by panning to wise, with genomic overlap being an important row
a different region, zooming to see more details or filter. Sequences and genomic vectors are relatively
adjusting the parameters of the summary step. The simple structures that are often restricted by range,
sizeofthegenomeandtherangeofscalesmakeitin- that is, extraction of a contiguous subsequence of
feasible to pre-render every possible view. Thus,the per-position values. Row-wise restriction is useful
views need to be generated dynamically, in lazy re- when working with large sets of experimentally gen-
action to the user. Performance is an important fac- erated short sequences. The sequence aligner gen-
tor in interpretability: slow transitions distract the erates alignments as annotations on a reference se-
viewer and obfuscate relationships between views. quence, and these alignments have many attributes,
M. LAWRENCEAND M. MORGAN
such as genomic position, score, gaps, sequence and analysis to a particular region and include all of the
sequence quality. Restriction can exclude the irrele- reads falling within it.
vant attributes. Analysts often slice large matrices, To optimize range-based queries, we often sort
such as those consisting of SNP calls, by both row and index our data structures by genomic coordi-
(SNP) and column (individual). nates. We should consider indexing an investment
A special mode of restriction is to randomly gen- because an index is generally expensive to generate
erate a selection of records. Down-sampling can ad- but cheap to query. The justification is that we will
dress many questions, especially during quality as- issue a sufficient number of queries to outweigh the
sessment and data exploration. For example, short initial generation cost. Three primary file formats
reads are initially summarized in FASTQ files con- follow thispattern:BAM,Tabix andBigWig [7,10].
taining a plain text representation of base calls Each format is best suited for a particular type of
and corresponding quality scores. Basic statistics of data. The BAM format is specially designed for se-
quality assessment such as the nucleotide count as quencealignmentsandstoresthecomplexalignment
a function of sequencing cycle or overall GC con- structure, as well as the aligned sequence. Tabix is
tent are very well characterized by random samples meant for indexing general range-based annotations
of a million reads, which might be 1% of the data. stored in tabular text files, such as BED and GFF.
This samplefits easily in memory. Computations on Finally, BigWig is optimized for storing genome-
this size of data are very nimble, enabling interac-
length vectors, such as the coverage from a sequenc-
tiveexplorationoncommoditycomputers.Anessen-
ing experiment. BAM and Tabix compress the pri-
tialrequirementisthatthedatarepresentarandom
mary data with block-wise gzip compression and
sample.
save the index as a separate file. BigWig files are
The ShortRead package is designed for the QA
similarly compressed but are self-contained.
and exploratory analysis of the output from high-
The Rsamtools package is an interface between R
througput sequencing instruments. It defines the
and the samtools library, which implements access
FastqSamplerobject, which drawsrandom samples
toBAM,Tabixandotherbinaryfileformats.Rsam-
from FASTQ files. The sequence reads in our data
tools enablesrestrictionofBAMqueriesthroughthe
set have been extracted into a FASTQ file from the
ScanBamParamobject.Thisobjectcan beusedasan
publicly available alignments. We wish to check a
argument to all BAM input functions, and enables
few quality statistics before proceeding. We begin
restriction to particular fields of the BAM file, to
by loading a random sample of one million reads
specific genomic regions of interest and to proper-
from the file:
ties of the aligned reads (e.g., restricting input to
paired-end alignments that form proper pairs).
One common scenario in high-throughput se-
quencing is the calculation of statistics such as cov-
erage (the number of short sequence reads overlap-
ping each nucleotide in the genome). The data re-
With the sequences loaded, we can compute some
quired for this calculation usually come from very
QA statistics, like the overall base call tally:
large BAM files containing alignment coordinates
(including the alignment “cigar”), sequences and
quality scores for tens of millions of short reads.
Only the smallest element of these data, the align-
In a complete workflow, we would generate an ment coordinates, is required for calculation of cov-
HTML QA report via the report function. erage.Byrestrictinginputtoalignmentcoordinates,
An example of a situation where random sam- we transform the computational task from one of
pling does not work is when prototyping a statis- complicated memory management of large data to
tical method that depends on a significant amount simple vectorized operations on in-memory objects.
of data to achieve reasonable power. Variant call- We can directly implement a coverage estimation
ing is a specific example: restricting the number of by specifying a ScanBamParam object that restricts
readswouldleadtolesscoverage,lesspowerandless to the alignment information. The underlying cov-
meaningful results. Instead, we need to restrict the erage calculation is implemented by the IRanges
SCALABLE GENOMICS
package, which sits at the core of the Bioconduc- concerned about regions with extremely high cover-
tor infrastructure and provides fundamental algo- age: these are often due to alignment artifacts.
rithmsanddatastructuresformanipulatingandan-
notating ranges. It is extended by GenomicRanges
to add conveniences for manipulating ranges on the
genome:
Calculating the sum is then more efficient than
with conventional vectors:
This is only an estimate, however, because we have
ignored the complex structure of the alignments,
Sometimes we are interested in the values of a
for example, the insertions anddeletions. Rsamtools
genomic vector that fall within a set of genomic fea-
provides a convenience function for the more accu-
tures. Examples include the coverage values within
rate calculation:
a set of called ChIP-seq peaks or the conserva-
tion scores for a set of motif hits. We could ex-
2.2 Compressing Genomic Vectors tract the subvectors of interest into a list. However,
large lists bring undesirable overhead, and the data
Some vectors, in particular, the coverage, have
would no longer be easily indexed by genomic po-
long stretches of repeated values, often zeroes. An
sition. Instead, we combine the original vector with
efficient compression scheme for such cases is run-
the ranges of interest. In IRanges, this is called a
length encoding. Each run of repeated values is re-
Viewsobject.ThereisanRleViewsobjectfordefin-
duced to two values: the length of the run and the
ing views on top of an Rle.
repeated value. This scheme saves space and also
To demonstrate, we slice our original coverage
reduces computation time by reducing computation
vector by our high coverage cutoff to yield the re-
size. For example, the vector 0,0,0,1,1,5,5,5 would
gions of high coverage, overlaid on the coverage it-
have run-values 0,1,5 and run-lengths 3,2,3. The
self, as an RleViews object:
data have been reduced from a size of 8 to a size of
6 (3 values plus 3 lengths). TheIRanges Rleclass is
a run-length encoded vector that supports the full
R vector API on top of the compressed representa-
tion. Operations on an Rle gain efficiency by taking
advantage of the compression. For example, the sum
methodcomputes a sumof therunvalues,usingthe
run lengths as weights. Thus, the time complexity
is on the order of the number of runs, rather than
the length of the vector. This lets us efficiently calculate the average cov-
The cov object we generated in the previous sec- erage in each region:
tion is a list of Rle objects, one per chromosome.
The Biostrings package [12] provides XString-
Views for views on top of DNA, RNA and amino
acid sequences. XString is a reference, rather than
a value as is typical in R, so we can create multiple
For this whole-genome sequencing, the data are XStringViews objects without copying the under-
quite dense and complex, so the compression actu- lying data. This is an application of the fly-weight
ally decreases efficiency. However, in the course of design pattern: multiple objects decorate the same
analysis we often end up with sparser data and thus primary data structure, which is stored only once in
better compression ratios. In this analysis, we are memory.
M. LAWRENCEAND M. MORGAN
We can apply XStringViews for tabulating the region:
nucleotides underlying the high coverage regions.
First, we need to load the sequence for chr20, via
the BSgenome package and the addon package for
human:
Therepeats.splitobjectisnotanordinarylist.
Long lists are expensive to construct, store and
While the human genome consists of billions of
process. Creating a new vector for each group re-
bases, our genome object is tiny. This is an exam-
quires time, and there is storage overhead for each
ple of lazy loading: chromosomes are loaded, and
vector. Furthermore, data compression is less effi-
cached,asrequested.Inourcase,werestricttochr20
cientwhenthedataaresplitacrossobjects.Depend-
and form the XStringViews.
ingontheimplementation ofthelistelements, these
costs can be significant. This is particularly true of
We verify that the cached sequence occupies the the S4 object system in R [2]. Another detriment to
same memory as the subject of the views: R lists is that list elements can be of mixed type.
Thus, there are few native routines for computing
on lists. For example, the R sum function efficiently
sumstheelementsofahomogeneousnumericvector,
but there is no support for calling sum to calculate
Finally, we calculate and compare the nucleotide
the sum of each numeric vector in a list. Even if
frequencies:
such routines did exist for native data types, there
are custom data types, such as ranges, and we aim
to facilitate grouping of any data that we can model
as a vector.
While the R sum function is incapable of comput-
ing group sums, there is an oddly named function
Wenoticethatthehighcoverage regionsareA/T-
called rowsum that will efficiently compute them,
rich, which is characteristic of low complexity re-
given a numeric vector and a grouping factor. This
gions.
hints that a more efficient approach to grouping
2.3 Compressing Lists may be to store the original vector along with a
partitioning. The IRanges R package includes a
The high coverage regions in our data may be
CompressedList framework that follows this strat-
associated with the presence of repetitive elements
egy. A CompressedList consists of the data vec-
that confuse the aligner. We obtain the repeat an-
tor, sorted by group, and a vector of indexes where
notations from the UCSC genome browser with the
each group ends in the data vector (see Figure 2).
rtracklayer package, which, in addition to a browser
IRanges providesCompressedListimplementations
interface, handles input and output for various an-
for native atomic vectors and other data types in
notation file formats, including BigWig. Our query
the IRanges infrastructure, and the framework is
for the repeats is restricted to chr20, which saves
extensible to new data types. A CompressedList
download time. We subset to the simple and low
is homogeneous, so it is natural to define methods
complexity repeats, which are the most likely to be
on subclasses to perform operations particular to a
problematic:
type of data. For example, there is a sum method
for the NumericList class that delegates internally
to rowsum. This approach bears similarity to stor-
ing data by columns: we improve storage efficiency
by storing fewer objects, and we maintain the data
Ourgoalistocalculatethepercentofeach highcov- in its most readily computable form. It is also an
erage region covered by a repeat. First, we split the application of lazy computing, where we delay the
repeats according to overlap with a high coverage partitioningofthedatauntilacomputationrequires
SCALABLE GENOMICS
ThenascentXVector packageaimstodothesame
for other R data types, such as integer, double and
logical values.
3. ITERATING
3.1 Splitting Data
Iterative summarization of data may be modeled
as three separate steps: split, apply and combine
[15]. The split step is typically the only one that de-
pends on the size of the input data. The apply step
Fig. 2. Grouping via partitioning vs. splitting into multiple
operates on data of restricted size, and it should re-
objects.Top:theinputvector,withelementsbelongingtothree
differentgroups:red,blueandyellow.Middle:typicalsplitting ducethedatatoascalethatfacilitates combination.
of vector into three vectors, one per group. This brings the Thus,themostchallenging stepis thefirst:splitting
overhead of multiple objects. Bottom: the data are virtually the data into chunks small enough to meet resource
split by a partitioning, encoded by the number of elements in
constraints.
each group (the vector is assumed to be sorted by group).
Twomodesof splittingare particularly applicable
to genomic data: sequential chunking and genomic
it. We are then in position to optimize the parti- partitioning. Sequential chunking is a popular and
tioning according to the specific requirements of the generaltechnique thatsimplyloads recordsinfixed-
operation. count chunks, according to the order in which they
Sincerepeats.listisaCompressedList,wecan are stored. Genomic partitioning iterates over a dis-
take advantage of these optimizations: joint set of ranges that cover the genome. Typical
partitioning schemes include one range per chromo-
some and sub-chromosomal ranges of some uniform
size. Efficient range-based iteration, whether over a
partitioning or list of interesting regions, depends
on data structures, file formats and algorithms that
This value can be compared to the percent of are optimized for range-based queries.
chr20 covered: Under the assumption that repeat regions are
leading to anomalous alignments, we aim to filter
from our BAM file any alignments overlapping a re-
peat.Aswewillbeperformingmanyoverlap queries
Instead of a CompressedList, we could have
againsttherepeatdataset,itisworthindexingitfor
solvedthisproblemusingcoverageandRleViews.
faster queries. The algorithms for accessing BAM,
Thedownsideof compression is that thereis over-
Tabix and BigWig files are designed for genome
head to explicit iteration because we need to ex-
browsers and have not been optimized for process-
tract a new vector with each step. The Biostrings
ing multiple queries in a batch. Each query results
package has explored a solution. We can convert
in a new search. This is unnecessarily wasteful, at
our XStringViews object chr20.views to a DNA-
least when the query ranges are sorted, as is often
StringSet that contains one DNAString for each
thecase.We could improvethealgorithm bydetect-
view window. The data for each DNAString has
ingwhetherthenextrange is inthesamebin and,if
never been copied from the original chr20 sequence,
so, continuing the search from the current position.
andany operations on aDNAStringoperatedirectly
The IRanges package identifies interval trees [3] as
on the shared data. While this solution may seem
an appropriate and well-understood data structure
obvious, it relies heavily on native code and is far
for range-based queries, and implements these using
from the typical behavior of R data structures:
a combination of existing C libraries [6] and new
C source code. The query is sorted, and every new
searchbeginsatthecurrentnode,ratherthanatthe
root. We build a GIntervalTree for the repeats:
M. LAWRENCEAND M. MORGAN
The GIntervalTree from GenomicRanges enables The memory usage started at about 500 MB and
thesameoptimizationwhendataarealignedtomul- peakedatabout1200MB,sotheiterationconsumed
tiple chromosomes. up to 700 MB. With 8 GB of ram, we might be able
To configure streaming, we specify a yieldSize to process up to 10 million reads at once, assuming
whenconstructingtheobjectrepresentingourBAM linear scaling.
file. We will filter at the individual read level, but it Asanalternativetostreamingoverchunks,wecan
should be noted that for paired-end data Rsamtools iterate over a partitioning of the genome or other
supportsstreamingbyreadpair,suchthatmembers domain. Genomic partitioning can be preferable to
of the same pair are guaranteed to be in the same streaming when we are only interested in certain re-
chunk. Since BAM files are typically sorted by po- gions.ThetileGenomefunction isa convenience for
sition, not pair, this is a significant benefit: generating a set of ranges that partition a genome.
We rely on it to reimplement thecoverageiterative
calculation with a partitioning:
To filter the BAM, we first need to define a
filter rule that excludes reads that overlap a re-
peat.Thelow-level Rsamtools interfaceprovidesthe
read data as a DataFrame, which we convert into a
GAlignments object from the GenomicAlignments
package, which provides data structures and utili-
ties for analyzing read alignments:
A caveat with partitioning is that since many
query algorithms return ranges with any overlap of
thequery,caremustbetakentointersecttheresults
with each partition, so that reads are not double
counted, for example.
SincewearewritinganewBAMfile,thisisiteration
By computing the coverage, we have summarized
with a side effect rather than a reduction.
the data. Computing summaries is often time con-
To demonstrate reduction, we will calculate the
suming, but since the summaries are smaller than
coverage inan iterative fashion,whichendsupiden-
the original data, it is feasible to store them for
tical to our original calculation:
later use. Caching the results of computations is an
optimization technique known as memoization. An
analysis rarely follows a linear path. By caching the
data at each stage of the analysis, as we proceed
from the raw data to a feature-level summary, often
with multiple rounds of feature annotation, we can
avoid redundant computation when we inevitably
Choosing an appropriate yield size for each iter- backtrack and form branches. This is an application
ation is important. There is overhead to each iter- of incremental computing. We export our coverage
ation, mostly due to I/O and memory allocation, as a BigWig file, for later use:
as well as the R evaluator. Thus, one strategy is to
increase the size of each iteration (and reduce the
number of iterations) until the data fit comfortably 3.2 Iterating in Parallel
in memory. It is relatively easy to estimate a work-
There are two basic modes of parallelism: data-
able yield size from the consumption of processing a
level and task-level. Embarrassingly parallel prob-
singlechunk.Thegcfunctionexposesthemaximum
lems illustrate data parallelism. Work flows might
amount of memory consumed by R between resets:
less frequently involve task parallelism, where dif-
ferent tasks are applied to the same data chunk.
These are generally more challenging to implement,
especially with R, which does not offer any special
support for concurrency. The Streamer package has
explored this direction.
SCALABLE GENOMICS
Multicore and cluster computing are similar in of an abstraction oriented toward genomics work-
that they are modular, and scaling algorithms to flows.TheBiocParallel packagedefinesthisabstrac-
usemultiplecoresormultiplenodescaninvolvecon- tion and implements it on top of BatchJobs, parallel
ceptually similar steps, but there are some critical andforeach to supportthemost common configura-
differences. Multiple cores in the same system share tions. An important feature of BiocParallel is that
thesamememory,as well as other resources.Shared it encapsulates the parallelization strategy in a pa-
memory configurations offer fast inter-thread data rameter object that can be passed down the stack
transfer and communication. However, the shared to infrastructure routines that implement the itera-
resourcescanquicklybecomeexhaustedandpresent tion. Thus, for common use cases the user can take
a bottleneck. Computing on a cluster involves sig- advantage of parallelism by solely indicating the ap-
nificant additional expertise to access and manage propriateimplementation. Iteration is carried outin
cluster resources that are shared between multiple a functional manner, so the API mirrors the *apply
functions in base R: bplapply, bpmapply, etc.
users and governed by a scheduler. Interacting with
To illustrate use of parallel iteration, we diagnose
a scheduler introduces an extra step into a work-
the GATK genotype calls introduced earlier. One
flow. We place jobs in a queue,and the jobs are exe-
approach is to generate our own set of nucleotide
cuted asynchronously. Another complication is that
tallies, perform some simple filtering to yield a set
we need to share the data between every computer.
of variant calls, and compare our findings to those
A naive but often sufficient method is to store the
from GATK. The set of nucleotide tallies is a more
data in a central location on a network file system
detailed form of the coverage that consists of the
and to distributethedata via thenetwork. Thenet-
count of each nucleotide at each position, as well as
work overhead implied by this approach may penal-
some other per-position statistics. Tallies are useful
ize performance.
fordetectinggeneticvariantsthroughcomparisonto
When the ratio of communication to computation
a reference sequence.
time is large, communication dominates the overall
The VariantTools package provides a facility for
calculation. The main strategies for addressing this
summarizing the nucleotide counts from a BAM
are to (a) ensure each task represents a significant
file over a given range. We can iterate over the
amount of work and (b) identify points where data
tiling in parallel using the bplapply function.
sizes of inputs (e.g., file names) and outputs (e.g.,
The BPPARAM argument specifies the parallel im-
vector ofcounts across regions of interest) aresmall.
plementation. MulticoreParam is appropriate for
Data partitioning is usually conveyed to workers in-
a multicore workstation, whereas we might use
directly, for example, via specification of the range
BatchJobsParam for scheduling each iteration as a
of data to be processed, rather than inputting and
job on a cluster:
explicitly partitioning data. This approach reduces
thecommunicationcostsbetweentheserialandpar-
allel portions of thecomputation and avoids loading
the entire data set into memory.
The R packages foreach [14], parallel (distributed The above is an example of explicit iteration.
withR[13]),pbdR[11]andBatchJobs [1]provideab- Thanks to the encapsulation and abstraction af-
stractions and implementations for executing tasks fordedbyBiocParallelParam,thepileupVariants
inparallelandsupportboththesharedmemoryand function supports parallel iteration directly, so the
cluster configurations. BatchJobs and pbdR are pri- implementation becomes much simpler:
marily designed for asynchronous execution, where
jobs are submitted to a scheduling system, and the
user issues commands to query for job status and This is an example of an embarrassingly parallel so-
collectresultsuponcompletion.Theothertwo,fore- lution: each iteration is a simple counting exercise
ach and parallel, follow a synchronous model con- and is independent of the others. An example of a
ducive to interactive use. nonembarrassingly parallel algorithm is our demon-
Different use cases and hardware configurations stration of BAM filtering: each iteration has the
benefit from different parallelization strategies. An side effect of writing to the same file on disk. The
analystmightapplymultiplestrategiesinthecourse increased complexity of coordinating the I/O across
of an analysis. This has motivated the development jobsunderminesthevalueofparallelisminthatcase.
M. LAWRENCEAND M. MORGAN
4. SCALING GENOMIC GRAPHICS erage isashortcutthat avoids pointless renderingof
data that is beyond the display resolution and the
4.1 Managing Graphical Resources
perceptive abilities of the viewer:
Graphics software is special in that it performs
two roles: distilling information from the data and
visually communicating that information to the
user. The first role is similar to any data processing
pipeline; the unique aspect is the communication.
The communication bandwidth of a plot is limited A good summary will guide the user to the most
by the size and resolution of the display device and interesting parts of the data. Genomic data are typ-
ically sparsely distributed along the genome, due to
the perceptive capabilities of the user. These limita-
thenonuniformdistributionofgenesandexperimen-
tions become particularly acute in genomics, where
tal protocols that enrich for regions of interest. Cov-
itwould bevirtually impossibleto communicate the
erage is a particularly useful summary, as it helps
details of a billion alignments along a genome of 3
guide the viewer to the regions with the most data.
billion nucleotides.
Thefollowing gets theaverage coverage for 800 win-
When considering how best to manage graphi-
dows (perhaps appropriate for an 800 pixel plot).
cal resources, we recall the general technique of re-
The result is shown in the top panel of Figure 3:
striction.Restrictionhasobviousapplicability toge-
nomic graphics: we can balance the size of the view
and the level of detail. As we increase the size of the In cases where a BigWig file or other cached sum-
view, we must decrease the level of detail and vice mary is unavailable, we can rely on a heuristic that
versa. This means only so much information can be estimates the coverage from the index of a BAM
communicated in a single plot, so the user needs to or Tabix file. The index stores offsets into the BAM
view many plots in order to comprehend the data. forefficientrange-basedqueries.Insteadofaccessing
It would be infeasible to iteratively generate every the index to resolve queries, we calculate the differ-
possible plot, so we need to lazily generate plots in ence in the file offsets for each range and derive a
response to user interaction. For example, the typi- relative coverage estimate at a coarse level of res-
cal genome browser supports panning and zooming olution. In practice, this reduces the required time
about the genome, displaying data at different lev- to compute the coverage from many minutes to a
few seconds. When the plot resolution exceeds the
els of detail, depending on the size of the genomic
resolution of the index, we again rely on the index
region.
to query the BAM file for the reads that fall within
4.2 Displaying Summaries Efficiently therelativelysmallregionandcomputethecoverage
directly. A heuristic seems acceptable in this case,
When plotting data along a restricted range,
because improved accuracy is immediately accessi-
graphics software can rely on the support for range-
ble by zooming. This is in contrast to pure statis-
based queries presented previously. Controlling the
tical computations, where crude estimates are less
levelofdetailismorechallengingbecauseitrelieson
appreciated, even in the exploratory context, since
summaries. As the viewed region can be as large as
resolution is not so readily forthcoming.
the genome, generating summaries is often compu-
The estimateCoverage function from the bio-
tationally intensive and introduces undesirable la-
vizBase package[17]estimatesthecoveragefromthe
tency to plot updates. One solution to this prob-
BAMindexfile.ThebottompanelofFigure3shows
lemiscachingsummariesatdifferentlevelsofdetail.
the output of estimateCoverage for the example
Global summarieswill beregularly accessed and ex-
data set and allows for comparison with the more
pensive to compute, and thus are worth caching,
exact calculation derived from the BigWig file. The
whereas the detailed data exposed upon drill-down
two results are quite similar and both required only
can be computed lazily. This strategy is supported
a few seconds to compute on a commodity laptop.
by the BigWig format. In addition to storing a full
4.3 Generating Plots Dynamically
genomic vector, BigWig files also contain summary
vectors, computed over a range of resolutions, ac- The design of interactive graphics software typi-
cording to the following statistics: mean, min, max cally follows the model–view–controller pattern (see
and standard deviation. Plotting the aggregate cov- Figure 4). The view renders data retrieved from
SCALABLE GENOMICS
Fig. 3. The results of two coverage calculations over chr20. Top: the calculation based on cached values in the BigWig file.
Bottom: the estimated coverage from the BAM index file.
the data model, and the controller is the interface is communicated to the user through the view, and
through which the user manipulates the view and userinputisreceived throughthecontroller. Acom-
data model. The data model abstracts the underly- plex application will consist of multiple interactive
ing data source, which might be memory, disk or a views, linked through a common data model, itself
dynamiccomputation.Theabstractionsupportsthe composed of multiple modules, chained together as
implementation of complex optimizations without stages in a pipeline. The viewer, plots and pipeline
exposing any of the complexity to client code. Data stages are interlinked to form a network.
Fig.4. Anapplicationofthemodel–view–controllerpatternandpre-computed summariestogenomicvisualization.Coverage
is displayed at two levels of resolution (whole chromosome and the current zoom) after efficient extraction from the multi-
-resolution BigWig file. The BAM file holding the read alignments is abstracted by a multi-stage data model, consisting of the
BAM source, a dynamic read quality filter and two filters that effectively split the alignments according to compatibility with
the known transcript annotations. The view contains several coordinately-zoomed plots, as well as an ideogram and coverage
overview. Each plot obtains its data from one of the data model components. The controller might adjust the data model filter
settings and the current zoom in response to user commands.
M. LAWRENCEAND M. MORGAN
Fig.5. Exampleplotfordiagnosinggenotype calls,consistingofthenucleotidetallies,genotype callsandreferencesequence,
from top tobottom. The plotisdynamicallygenerated for theselected region of interest, without processing the entire genome.
The viewer might check to see if the tallies support the called genotypes. In this case, the data are consistent.
A simple data model abstracts access to the pri- sources. The ggbio package builds on biovizBase to
mary data, such as an in-memory GRanges object support genomic plot objects that are regenerated
of transcript annotations or a BAM file on disk. We as the user adjusts the viewport.
can extend the simple model to one that dynami- To diagnose the GATK genotype calls, we com-
cally computes on data as they are requested by the bine the reference sequence, nucleotide pileup and
the genotype calls. The result is shown in Figure 5.
application. This is an example of lazy computing.
The ggbio package produced the plot by relying on
Each operation is encapsulated into a data model
restricted query support in biovizBase. We have al-
that proxies an underlying model. The proxy mod-
readyintroducedtheextractionofgenomicsequence
els form a chain, leading from the raw data to the
and the calculation of nucleotide pileups. The geno-
processed data that are ready for plotting [16]. Dy-
types were drawn by the VariantAnnotation pack-
namic computation avoids unnecessarily processing
age from a Variant Call Format (VCF, [4]) file with
theentiregenomewhentheuserisonlyinterestedin
a range-based index provided by Tabix.
a few small regions, especially when the parameters
To generate the plot, we first select the region of
of the transformations frequently change during the
interest:
session. The data may be cached as they are com-
puted, and the pipeline might also anticipate future
requests; for example, it might prepare the data on
either side of the currently viewed region, in antic-
Next, we construct the plot object and render it:
ipation of scrolling. Caching and prediction are ex-
amples of complex optimizations that are hidden by
the data model. The plumbr R package [9] provides
a proxy model framework for implementing these
types of ideas behind the data frame API.
Wehavebeenexperimentingwithextendingthese
approaches to genomic data. The biovizBase pack-
age implements a graphics-friendly API for re-
stricted queries to Bioconductor-supported data
SCALABLE GENOMICS
Since the plot object is a logical representation of REFERENCES
the plot, that is, it references the original data, we
[1] Bischl, B., Lang, M., Mersmann, O., Rahnen-
can adjust various aspects of it and generate a new
fuehrer, J. and Weihs, C. (2011). Computing
rendering.Inparticular,wecanchangethecurrently
on high performance clusters with R: Packages
viewed region, and the data for the new region are
BatchJobs and BatchExperiments. Technical Re-
processed dynamically to generate the new plot. In port 1, TU Dortmund.
this example, wezoom outto a larger region around [2] Chambers, J. M. (2008). Software for Data Analysis:
the first region: Programming with R. Springer, NewYork.
[3] Cormen, T. H.,Leiserson, C. E., Rivest, R. L. and
Stein, C. (2001). Introduction to Algorithms, 2nd
Current work is focused on the MutableRanges ed. McGraw-Hill, Boston, MA. MR1848805
package, which generalizes and formalizes the de- [4] Danecek, P., Auton, A., Abecasis, G., Al-
signs in biovizBase. It defines dynamic versions of bers, C. A., Banks, E., DePristo, M. A.,
Handsaker, R. E., Lunter, G., Marth, G. T.,
the GenomicRanges data structures, for example,
Sherry, S. T., McVean, G., Durbin, R. and
there is a DynamicGRanges that implements the
1000GenomesProjectAnalysisGroup(2011).
GRanges API on top of a BAM file. Only the re-
ThevariantcallformatandVCFtools.Bioinformat-
quested regions are loaded, and they are optionally ics 27 2156–2158.
cachedforfuturequeries.AProxyGRanges performs [5] Gentleman, R. C., Carey, V. J., Bates, D. M. and
dynamic computations based on another GRanges. others(2004).Bioconductor:Opensoftwaredevel-
This will enable a new generation of interactive ge- opmentforcomputationalbiologyandbioinformat-
nomic visualization tools in R. An early adopter is ics. Genome Biol.5 R80.
[6] Kent, W. J., Sugnet, C. W., Furey, T. S., Roskin,
epivizr, the R interface to the web-based epiviz, a
K.M.,Pringle,T.H.,Zahler,A.M.andHaus-
web-based genome browser with supportfor general
sler, D. (2002). The human genome browser at
interactive graphics, including scatterplots and his- UCSC. Genome Res. 12 996–1006.
tograms. [7] Kent, W. J., Zweig, A. S., Barber, G., Hin-
richs, A. S. and Karolchik, D. (2010). BigWig
5. CONCLUSION andBigBed:Enablingbrowsingoflargedistributed
datasets. Bioinformatics26 2204–2207.
We have introduced software and techniques for
[8] Lawrence, M.,Huber,W.,Pag`es, H.,Aboyoun, P.,
analyzing and plotting big genomic data. The Bio-
Carlson, M.,Gentleman, R.,Morgan, M.and
conductorprojectdistributesthesoftwareasanum- Carey, V.(2013).Softwareforcomputingandan-
ber of different R packages, including Rsamtools, notating genomic ranges. PLoS Computational Bi-
IRanges, GenomicRanges, GenomicAlignments, ology 9 e1003118.
Biostrings, rtracklayer, biovizBase and BiocParal- [9] Lawrence, M.andWickham, H.(2012).plumbr:Mu-
lel. The software enables the analyst to conserve table and dynamic data models. R package version
0.6.6.
computational resources, iteratively generate sum-
[10] Li, H., Handsaker, B., Wysoker, A., Fennell, T.,
maries and visualize data at arbitrary levels of de-
Ruan, J.,Homer, N.,Marth, G.,Abecasis, G.,
tail. These advances have helped to ensure that R
Durbin, R. and 1000 Genome Project Data
andBioconductorremainrelevantintheageofhigh- Processing Subgroup (2009). The Sequence
throughput sequencing. We plan to continue in this Alignment/Map format and SAMtools. Bioinfor-
direction by designing and implementing abstrac- matics 25 2078–2079.
tions that enable user code to be agnostic to the [11] Ostrouchov, G.,Chen,W.-C.,Schmidt, D.andPa-
mode of data storage, whether it be memory, files tel, P. (2012). Programming with big data in R.
or databases. This will bring much needed agility to
[12] Pag`es, H., Aboyoun, P., Gentleman, R. and
resource allocation and will enable the user to be
DebRoy, S. (2013). Biostrings: Stringobjects rep-
more resourceful, without the burden of increased
resenting biological sequences, and matching algo-
complexity. rithms. R package version 2.25.6.
[13] R Development Core Team (2010). R: A Lan-
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS guage and Environment for Statistical Computing.
R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna,
SupportedinpartbytheNationalHumanGenome
Austria.
Research Institute of the National Institutes of
[14] Revolution Analytics and Weston, S. (2013). fore-
Health (U41HG004059 to M. M.) and the National ach:ForeachloopingconstructforR.Rpackagever-
Science Foundation (1247813 to M. M.). sion 1.4.1.
M. LAWRENCEAND M. MORGAN
[15] Wickham, H. (2011). The split-apply-combinestrategy plumbing of interactive graphics. Comput. Statist.
for dataanalysis. Journal of Statistical Software 40 24 207–215. MR2506079
1–29. [17] Yin, T., Lawrence, M. and Cook, D. (2013).
[16] Wickham, H., Lawrence, M., Cook, D., Buja, A., biovizBase: Basic graphic utilities for visualization
Hofmann, H. and Swayne, D. F. (2009). The of genomic data. R package version 1.9.1.