4v0940.1021:viXra
JournalofMachineLearningResearch12(2011) 2825-2830 Submitted3/11; Revised8/11;Published10/11
Scikit-learn: Machine Learning in Python
Fabian Pedregosa fabian.pedregosa@inria.fr
Ga¨el Varoquaux gael.varoquaux@normalesup.org
Alexandre Gramfort alexandre.gramfort@inria.fr
Vincent Michel vincent.michel@logilab.fr
Bertrand Thirion bertrand.thirion@inria.fr
Parietal, INRIA Saclay
Neurospin, Bˆat 145, CEA Saclay
Gif sur Yvette, France
Olivier Grisel olivier.grisel@ensta.fr
Paris, France
Mathieu Blondel mblondel@ai.cs.kobe-u.ac.jp
Kobe University
Kobe, Japan
Andreas Mu¨ller andreas.mueller@columbia.edu
Department of Computer Science & Data Science Institute
Columbia University
New York, USA
Joel Nothman joel.nothman@gmail.com
Sydney Informatics Hub
University of Sydney, NSW, Australia
Gilles Louppe g.louppe@ulg.ac.be
Dept. of EE & CS
University of Li`ege
Li`ege, Belgium
Peter Prettenhofer peter.prettenhofer@gmail.com
Bauhaus-Universit¨at Weimar
Weimar, Germany
Ron Weiss ronweiss@gmail.com
Google Inc
New York, NY, USA
Vincent Dubourg vincent.dubourg@gmail.com
Clermont Universit´e, IFMA, EA 3867, LaMI
Clermont-Ferrand, France
Jake Vanderplas vanderplas@astro.washington.edu
Astronomy Department
University of Washington, Box 351580
Seattle, WA, USA
Alexandre Passos alexandre.tp@gmail.com
UMass Amherst
Amherst, USA
(cid:13)c2011Fabian Pedregosa, Ga¨el Varoquaux, Alexandre Gramfort, Vincent Michel, Bertrand Thirion, Olivier Grisel,
MathieuBlondeletal.
Pedregosa, Varoquaux, Gramfort et al.
David Cournapeau cournape@gmail.com
Cambridge, UK
Matthieu Brucher matthieu.brucher@gmail.com
Total SA, CSTJF
Pau, France
Matthieu Perrot matthieu.perrot@cea.fr
E´douard Duchesnay edouard.duchesnay@cea.fr
Neurospin, Bˆat 145, CEA Saclay
Gif sur Yvette – France
Editor: Mikio Braun
Scikit-learn is a Pythonmodule integratinga wide rangeofstate-of-the-artmachinelearn-
ing algorithms for medium-scale supervised and unsupervised problems. This package
focuses on bringing machine learning to non-specialists using a general-purpose high-level
language. Emphasis is put on ease of use, performance, documentation, and API consis-
tency. It has minimal dependencies and is distributed under the simplified BSD license,
encouraging its use in both academic and commercial settings. Source code, binaries, and
Keywords: Python, supervised learning, unsupervised learning, model selection
1. Introduction
The Python programming language is establishing itself as one of the most popular lan-
guages forscientific computing. Thanksto its high-level interactive natureandits maturing
ecosystem of scientific libraries, it is an appealing choice for algorithmic development and
exploratory data analysis (Dubois, 2007; Milmann and Avaizis, 2011). Yet, as a general-
purpose language, it is increasingly used not only in academic settings but also in industry.
Scikit-learn harnesses this rich environment to provide state-of-the-art implementations
ofmanywellknownmachinelearningalgorithms,whilemaintaininganeasy-to-useinterface
tightly integrated with the Python language. This answers the growing need for statistical
data analysis by non-specialists in the software and web industries, as well as in fields
outside of computer-science, such as biology or physics. Scikit-learn differs from other
machine learning toolboxes in Python for various reasons: i) it is distributed under the
BSD license ii) it incorporates compiled code for efficiency, unlike MDP (Zito et al., 2008)
and pybrain (Schaul et al., 2010), iii) it depends only on numpy and scipy to facilitate easy
distribution, unlike pymvpa (Hanke et al., 2009) that has optional dependencies such as
R and shogun, and iv) it focuses on imperative programming, unlike pybrain which uses
a data-flow framework. While the package is mostly written in Python, it incorporates
Scikit-learn: Machine Learning in Python
the C++ libraries LibSVM (Chang and Lin, 2001) and LibLinear (Fan et al., 2008) that
provide reference implementations of SVMs and generalized linear models with compatible
licenses. Binarypackages areavailableonarichsetofplatformsincludingWindowsandany
POSIX platforms. Furthermore, thanks to its liberal license, it has been widely distributed
aspartofmajorfreesoftwaredistributionssuchasUbuntu,Debian,Mandriva,NetBSDand
Macports and in commercial distributions such as the “Enthought Python Distribution”.
2. Project Vision
Code quality. Rather than providing as many features as possible, the project’s goal has
beentoprovidesolidimplementations. Codequalityisensuredwithunittests—asofrelease
0.8, test coverage is 81%—and the use of static analysis tools such as pyflakes and pep8.
Finally,westrivetouseconsistentnamingforthefunctionsandparametersusedthroughout
a strict adherence to the Python coding guidelines and numpy style documentation.
BSD licensing. Most of the Python ecosystem is licensed with non-copyleft licenses. While
such policy is beneficial for adoption of these tools by commercial projects, it does impose
some restrictions: we are unable to use some existing scientific code, such as the GSL.
Bare-bone design and API.To lower thebarrier of entry, weavoid framework code andkeep
the number of different objects to a minimum, relying on numpy arrays for data containers.
Community-driven development. We base our development on collaborative tools such as
git, github and public mailing lists. External contributions are welcome and encouraged.
Documentation. Scikit-learn provides a ∼300 page user guide including narrative docu-
mentation, class references, a tutorial, installation instructions, as well as more than 60
examples, some featuring real-world applications. We try to minimize the use of machine-
learning jargon, while maintaining precision with regards to the algorithms employed.
3. Underlying Technologies
Numpy: the base data structure used for data and model parameters. Input data is pre-
sented as numpy arrays, thus integrating seamlessly with other scientific Python libraries.
Numpy’s view-based memory model limits copies, even when binding with compiled code
(Van der Walt et al., 2011). It also provides basic arithmetic operations.
Scipy: efficient algorithms for linearalgebra, sparsematrixrepresentation, specialfunctions
and basic statistical functions. Scipy has bindings for many Fortran-based standard numer-
ical packages, such as LAPACK. This is important for ease of installation and portability,
as providing libraries around Fortran code can prove challenging on various platforms.
Cython: a language for combining C in Python. Cython makes it easy to reach the perfor-
mance of compiled languages with Python-like syntax and high-level operations. It is also
used to bind compiled libraries, eliminating the boilerplate code of Python/C extensions.
4. Code Design
Objects specified by interface, not by inheritance. To facilitate the use of external objects
with scikit-learn, inheritance is not enforced; instead, code conventions provide a consistent
interface. The central object is an estimator,that implements a fit method, accepting as
Pedregosa, Varoquaux, Gramfort et al.
scikit-learn mlpy pybrain pymvpa mdp shogun
Support Vector Classification 5.2 9.47 17.5 11.52 40.48 5.63
Lasso (LARS) 1.17 105.3 - 37.35 - -
Elastic Net 0.52 73.7 - 1.44 - -
k-Nearest Neighbors 0.57 1.41 - 0.56 0.58 1.36
PCA (9 components) 0.18 - - 8.93 0.47 0.33
k-Means (9 clusters) 1.34 0.79 ⋆ - 35.75 0.68
License BSD GPL BSD BSD BSD GPL
-: Not implemented. ⋆: Does not converge within 1 hour.
Table 1: Time in seconds on the Madelon data set for various machine learn-
ing libraries exposed in Python: MLPy (Albanese et al., 2008), Py-
Brain (Schaul et al., 2010), pymvpa (Hanke et al., 2009), MDP (Zito et al.,
2008) and Shogun (Sonnenburg et al., 2010). For more benchmarks see
arguments an input data array and, optionally, an array of labels for supervised problems.
Supervised estimators, such as SVM classifiers, can implement a predict method. Some
estimators, thatwecalltransformers,forexample, PCA,implementatransformmethod,
returning modified input data. Estimators may also provide a score method, which is an
increasing evaluation of goodness of fit: a log-likelihood, or a negated loss function. The
otherimportantobjectisthecross-validation iterator, whichprovidespairsoftrainandtest
indices to split input data, for example K-fold, leave one out, or stratified cross-validation.
Model selection. Scikit-learn can evaluate an estimator’s performance or select parameters
using cross-validation, optionally distributing the computation to several cores. This is ac-
complishedbywrappinganestimator inaGridSearchCVobject, wherethe“CV”standsfor
“cross-validated”. Duringthe call to fit, it selects the parameters on a specified parameter
grid, maximizing a score (the score method of the underlying estimator). predict, score,
or transform are then delegated to the tuned estimator. This object can therefore be used
transparentlyasanyotherestimator. Crossvalidationcanbemademoreefficientforcertain
estimators by exploiting specific properties, such as warm restarts or regularization paths
(Friedman et al., 2010). This is supported through special objects, such as the LassoCV.
Finally, a Pipeline object can combine several transformers and an estimator to create
a combined estimator to, for example, apply dimension reduction before fitting. It behaves
as a standard estimator, and GridSearchCV therefore tune the parameters of all steps.
5. High-level yet Efficient: Some Trade Offs
Whilescikit-learn focuses onease ofuse, andismostly writteninahigh level language, care
has been taken to maximize computational efficiency. In Table 1, we compare computation
time for a few algorithms implemented in the major machine learning toolkits accessible
in Python. We use the Madelon data set (Guyon et al., 2004), 4400 instances and 500
attributes, The data set is quite large, but small enough for most algorithms to run.
SVM.Whileallof thepackages compared calllibsvminthebackground, theperformanceof
scikit-learn can be explained by two factors. First, our bindings avoid memory copies and
have up to 40% less overhead than the original libsvm Python bindings. Second, we patch
Scikit-learn: Machine Learning in Python
libsvm to improve efficiency on dense data, use a smaller memory footprint, and better use
memory alignment and pipelining capabilities of modern processors. This patched version
also provides unique features, such as setting weights for individual samples.
LARS. Iteratively refining the residuals instead of recomputing them gives performance
gains of 2–10 times over thereference R implementation (Hastie and Efron, 2004). Pymvpa
uses this implementation via the Rpy R bindings and pays a heavy price to memory copies.
Elastic Net. Webenchmarkedthescikit-learn coordinatedescentimplementationsofElastic
Net. It achieves the same order of performance as the highly optimized Fortran version
glmnet (Friedman et al., 2010) on medium-scale problems, but performance on very large
problems is limited since we do not use the KKT conditions to define an active set.
kNN. The k-nearest neighbors classifier implementation constructs a ball tree (Omohundro,
1989) of the samples, but uses a more efficient brute force search in large dimensions.
PCA.For mediumtolargedatasets, scikit-learn providesanimplementation ofatruncated
PCA based on random projections (Rokhlin et al., 2009).
k-means. scikit-learn’s k-means algorithm is implemented in pure Python. Its performance
is limited by the fact that numpy’s array operations take multiple passes over data.
6. Conclusion
Scikit-learn exposes a wide variety of machine learning algorithms, both supervised and
unsupervised, using a consistent, task-oriented interface, thus enabling easy comparison
of methods for a given application. Since it relies on the scientific Python ecosystem, it
can easily be integrated into applications outside the traditional range of statistical data
analysis. Importantly, the algorithms, implemented in a high-level language, can be used
as building blocks for approaches specific to a use case, for example, in medical imaging
(Michel et al., 2011). Future work includes online learning, to scale to large data sets.