]ics-lrtm.tam-dnoc[
1v0702110/tam-dnoc:viXra
SCULPTURED THIN FILMS:
ACCOMPLISHMENTS AND EMERGING USES
Akhlesh Lakhtakia1
CATMAS — Computational and Theoretical Materials Sciences Group,
Department of Engineering Science and Mechanics,
Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802–6812, USA
Sculptured thin films (STFs) are nano–engineered materials whose columnar morphology is
tailored to elicit desired optical responses upon excitation. Two canonical forms of STFs have
been identified. Linear constitutive relations for general STFs as unidirectionally nonhomoge-
neous (continuously or piecewise uniformly) andlocallybianisotropic continuums arepresented,
alongwith a4×4 matrixordinarydifferential equation forwave propagationtherein. Anominal
model for the macroscopic properties of linear STFs is devised from nanoscopic considerations.
The accomplished implementation of STFs as circular polarization filters and spectral hole fil-
ters is discussed, as also are emerging applications such as bioluminescence sensors and optical
interconnects.
Keywords: Bianisotropic materials, Biochips, Chiral optics, Local homogenization, Optical
devices, Sculptured thin films, Sensors
1. Introduction
Shortly after the conceptualization of helicoidal bianisotropic mediums (HBMs) in 1993 by
Lakhtakia and Weiglhofer [1], the basis of realizing these materials using thin–film technology
was enunciated by Lakhtakia and Messier [2]. Verification by Robbie et al. [3] soon followed,
although a few years later I came across a pioneering and essentially comprehensive but obscure
precedent reported by Young and Kowal in 1959 [4]. The general concept of sculptured thin
films (STFs) emerged naturally, and was presented in August 1995 by Lakhtakia and Messier to
agroupofthin–filmresearchers assembled atPennState[5]. Thetopichasenjoyed considerable
growth in the ensuing years, chiefly in theory initially, but now in experiments and applications
as well [6].
The nanostructure ofSTFs comprises clusters of 3–5nm diameter andarrangedto formparallel
columns that are bent in some fanciful forms with feature size 30 nm or larger. Accordingly, a
STF is a unidirectionally nonhomogeneous continuum with direction–dependent properties at
visible and infrared wavelengths. A multi–section STF can thus be conceived of as an optical
circuit that can be integrated with electronic circuitry on a chip. Being porous, a STF can
act as a sensor of fluids and can be impregnated with liquid crystals for switching applications
1Tel. +1 814 863 4319;Fax. +1 814 863 7967; E–mail: AXL4@psu.edu
too. Application as low–permittivity barrier layers in electronic chips as well as for solar cells
has also been suggested. During the last five year, several physical vapor deposition techniques
have emerged for manufacturing STFs, and the first optical applications saw the light of the
day in 1999.
The following is a brief review of (i) the electromagnetic field equations, (ii) a nominal nano-
scopic–to–continuum model, (iii) realized optical applications, and (iv) emerging applications
of STFs. A large part of the work reviewed here is due to my collaborators, my students and
me. For the essentials of the fabrication techniques, the interested reader is enjoined to read
the gem of a paper that Young & Kowal wrote [4]. For details of the modern versions of the
Young–Kowal technique, reference is made to Lakhtakia & Messier [7], Hodgkinson & Wu [8],
Messier et al. [9], and Malac & Egerton [10]. The materials that can be deposited as STFs
range from insulators to semiconductors to metals, thereby indicating the versatility of STF
technology.
2. Electromagnetic field equations
2.1 Linear constitutive equations
Let the z axis of a cartesian coordinate system be aligned parallel to the direction of nonhomo-
geneity. By definition, the morphology of a simple STF in any plane z = z can be made to
coincide with the morphology in another plane z = z with the help of a suitable rotation. In
other words, the local morphology is spatially uniform, but the global morphology is unidirec-
tionally nonhomogeneous. Naturally, this leads to the concept of local or reference constitutive
properties of the STF. The global constitutive properties of the STF can be connected to the
local ones by means of rotation operators.
The frequency–domain constitutive relations of a chosen STF are therefore defined as follows:
In these relations, ǫ = 8.854 × 10−12 F/m and µ = 4π × 10−7 H/m are the permittivity
and the permeability of vacuum, respectively, while the superscript T denotes the transpose.
Whereas the 3×3 dyadics ǫ (ω) and µ (ω) represent the reference dielectric and magnetic
properties, respectively, the 3×3 dyadics α (ω) and β (ω) delineate the reference magneto-
electric properties. The angular frequency is denoted by ω, and an exp(−iωt) time–dependence
is implicit.
Any STF for optical and/or infrared applications comprises identical columns of 20–100 nm
diameter. Nominally, all columns twist and bend identically as z changes, which feature is
captured by the rotation dyadic S(z). This 3×3 dyadic is some composition of the following
three elementary rotation 3×3 dyadics:
x x y y z z z y y z
y y x x z z z x x z
z z x x y y y x x y
The angular functions of z in these equations may be specified piecewise, if necessary; while
u , u and u are the three cartesian unit vectors.
All columns in a STF are parallel to each other in any xy plane, which characteristic is incor-
porated in ǫ (ω), µ (ω), α (ω) and β (ω). Suppose S(0) = I, the 3×3 identity dyadic,
ref ref ref ref
so that the plane z = 0 is the reference plane. Let u denote a unit vector that is tangential
at z = 0 to any column. Two other unit vectors are defined from the shape of that column
as follows: the unit normal vector u such that u •u = 0, and the unit binormal vector
u = u ×u . Both u and u are conveniently chosen to lie in the plane y = 0; hence, u is
b τ n τ n b
either parallel or anti–parallel to u . With an angle of rise χ specified, we set
u = u cos χ+u sin χ, u = −u sin χ+u cos χ, u = −u , (6)
τ x z n x z b y
these three unit vectors forming a right–handed coordinate system. Typically, the angle of rise
Extensive experimental research on the uniform columnar thin films [11] shows that the pre-
a n n b τ τ c b b
is appropriate. This ǫ (ω) is a biaxial dyadic; and the simplification ǫ (ω) = ǫ (ω) is ap-
propriate for a locally uniaxial STF in the present context. If necessary, a gyrotropic term
ǫ (ω)u ×I may be appended to the right side of (7), with u as some unit vector. The forms
of µ (ω), α (ω) and β (ω) are similar to those of ǫ (ω).
ref ref ref ref
Two canonical forms of STFs can be identified. For sculptured nematic thin films (SNTFs),
either S(z) = S (z) or S(z) = S (z). The columnar morphology is essentially 2–dimensional,
lyingineitherthexz planeortheyz plane. Ontheotherhand, thin–filmhelicoidalbianisotropic
mediums (TFHBMs) are endowed with 3–dimensional morphology, because S(z) = S (z). Al-
though TFHBMs need not be periodically nonhomogeneous along the z axis, it is easy to
fabricate them with periods chosen anywhere between 200 nm and 2000 nm. Of course, com-
binations of the two canonical forms as well as cascades of multiple sections are possible, and
add to the attraction of STFs.
2.2 Wave propagation
Electromagnetic wave propagation in a STF is best handled using 4×4 matrixes and column
4−vectors. At any given frequency, the following spatial Fourier representation of the electric
and the magnetic field phasors is useful:
inc inc inc
inc inc inc
Substitution of the foregoing representation into the source–free Maxwell curl postulates, ∇×
E(r,ω) = iωB(r,ω) and ∇ × H(r,ω) = −iωD(r,ω), followed by the use of the constitutive
relations (1) and (2) leads to four ordinary differential equations and two algebraic equations.
The components e (z,κ,ψ ,ω) and h (z,κ,ψ ,ω) are then eliminated to obtain the 4×4
z inc z inc
matrix differential equation [12]
inc inc inc
In this equation,
inc x inc y inc x inc y inc
is a column 4−vector, and [P(z,κ,ψ ,ω)] is a 4×4 matrix function of z that can be easily
obtained using symbolic manipulation programs such as Mathematica.
Analytic solution of (9) can be obtained, provided [P(z,κ,ψ ,ω)] = [P (κ,ψ ,ω)] is not a
inc con inc
function of z. This happens, of course, for columnar thin films [11], and the solution procedure
is described by Hochstadt [12]. Exact analytic solution of (9) has been obtained also for axial
propagation (i.e., κ = 0) in periodic TFHBMs [14]; and a solution in terms of a convergent
matrix polynomial series is available for oblique propagation (i.e., κ 6= 0) in periodic TFHBMs
[15].
More generally, only a numerical solution of (9) can be obtained. Suppose that [P(z,κ,ψ ,ω)]
is a periodic function of z. Then, a perturbative approach can be used to obtain simple results
for weakly periodic STFs [16, 17], while a coupled–mode approachmay come handy if otherwise
[18]. Butif[P(z,κ,ψ ,ω)]isnotperiodic, theconstitutivedyadicscanassumedtobepiecewise
homogeneous over slices of thickness ∆z, and the approximate transfer equation [12]
inc inc inc
(cid:26) (cid:27)
can be suitably manipulated with appropriately small values of ∆z.
3. From the nanoscopic to the continuum
3.1 Nominal model
Equations (1) and (2) incorporate the assumption of a STF as a unidirectionally nonhomoge-
neous continuum. This is valid in a macroscopic sense, i.e., when the length scale of the film
morphology is considerably smaller than the electromagnetic probe wavelength. This assump-
tionholdstrueinthevisible andtheinfraredfrequency regimes, because STFswith appropriate
morphological length scales can be fabricated.
Let us consider a simple nanoscopic–to–macroscopic homogenization formalism to determine
the reference constitutive dyadics ǫ (ω), etc. [19]. The chosen STF is made of a bianisotropic
material, whose bulk constitutive relations are specified as
B(r,ω) = µ
The void regions of the STF are taken to be occupied by a medium with the following bulk
properties:
B(r,ω) = µ
Both mediums are supposed to be present in the STF as ellipsoids which are entirely notional.
In every xy plane, the longest axes of all ellipsoids of both mediums should be aligned in
parallel. The shapes of the two types of ellipsoids can be different, the respective surfaces being
defined by the functions
s s r v v r
Here, u (θ,φ) is the radial unit vector in a spherical coordinate system located at the centroid
of an ellipsoid; the scalars δ are linear measures of the ellipsoidal sizes; and the shape dyadics
U are real dyadics of rank 3, with positive eigenvalues 0 < a(j) ≤ 1, (j = 1, 2, 3). Setting
a(3) ≫ a(1) and a(3) ≫ a(2) will make a particular ellipsoid almost like a needle with a slight
bulge in its middle part. The porosity of the STF is denoted by f , (0 ≤ f ≤ 1).
The use of 6×6 dyadics provides notational simplicity for treating electromagnetic fields in
bianisotropic materials. Thus, we define the 6×6 dyadics
ref,s,v ref,s,v
 ref,s,v ref,s,v 
The ω–dependences of various quantities are not explicitly mentioned in this and the following
equations for compactness.
The celebrated Bruggeman formalism is now implemented to effect local homogenization (with
reference to any xy plane) [19]. For this purpose, the 6×6 polarizability dyadics
s,v s,v ref s,v s,v ref
(cid:16) (cid:17) h (cid:16) (cid:17)i
are defined, where I is the 6×6 identity dyadic. The 6×6 depolarization dyadics D must be
computed via two–dimensional integration as follows:
D = dφ dθ sinθ s,v s,v
0 0 Zφ=0 Zθ=0 s,v r
0 r r 0 r r
s,v ref s,v s,v ref s,v
 s,v ref s,v s,v ref s,v 
Here, u = u (θ,φ) is the unit radial vector,
s,v r r r r r
s,v ref s,v s,v ref s,v
s,v ref s,v s,v ref s,v
while U† is the transpose of U−1, etc. The Bruggeman formalism then consists of the solution
of the equation [20, 21]
with 0 as the 6×6 null dyadic. This equation has to be numerically solved for C , and a
Jacobi iteration technique is recommended for that purpose [21, 22].
The solution of (19) represents the homogenization of objects of microscopic linear dimensions
to a macroscopic continuum. The quantities entering S(z) are known prior to fabrication, as
also are χ, C and C . In order to calibrate the nominal model presented, the shape dyadics
U and U can be chosen by comparison of the predicted C against measured data.
3.2 Application to dielectric TFHBMs
Sherwin and Lakhtakia [22] used the foregoing model to extensively study the planewave re-
sponses of dielectric TFHBMs, with µ = I, α = 0, β = 0, ǫ = ǫ I, and ǫ = I. With
s,v s,v s,v s v
λ denoting the wavelength in vacuum, a Lorentz resonance model was chosen for ǫ as per
with constants q , N and λ selected so tha(cid:0)t absorption is(cid:1)moderate for visible wavelengths.
The ellipsoids were chosen to be identical (i.e., U = U ), as described by
r •u 2 r • u 2
(cid:18) 2 (cid:19) (cid:18) 3 (cid:19)
where the transverse aspect ratio γ > 1 and the slenderness ratio γ ≫ 1 relate the three
principal axes.
For normally incident planewaves and with
S(z) = S (z) = u u +(u u +u u ) cos +(u u −u u ) sin , (22)
z z x x y y y x x y
the spectrums of o(cid:12)ptical rotation, transmittance ellipticity, linear dichroism, circular dichroism,
apparent linear dichroism, and apparent circular dichroism were calculated as functions of the
constitutive and the geometric parameters ǫ , γ , γ , χ, Ω, f = 1 − f , and λ . Maximum
magnitudes in the computed spectrums were determined in specific wavelength–regimes. The
variations of these maximums were then examined with respect to any one of the constitutive
and the geometric parameters, while the other parameters were held fixed. From these studies,
the following significant conclusions were reached:
(i) All observable response properties strongly depend on the transverse aspect ratio γ ,
1 ≤ γ ≪ γ . There exists a specific value of γ denoted by γo such that all optical
activity disappears. The value of γo can be parameterized in terms of other geometric
factors and ǫ .
(ii) All observable property maximums are best–fitted to fourth–order polynomials of γ .
(iii) All observable property maximums have similar dependencies on the volume fraction f;
furthermore, pmax → 0 as f → 0,1. (Here, pmax denotes the maximum magnitude of the
observable response property p over a prescribed range of λ .)
(iv) There exists an f for each value of γ such that pmax(f ) > pmax(f),f 6= f . The value
of f depends on the values of other geometric and constitutive parameters as well as on
the property p. An increase in γ results in a decrease in f .
Details of these and other results will appear in print shortly [23], and the identified functional
relationships should assist in design of STF–based devices as well as the on–line monitoring of
STF fabrication processes.
4. Optical applications
Although many applications are possible [5], the potential of STFs has been most successfully
exploited for optical filters. Chiral STFs, which are appropriately described as the periodic
dielectric TFHBMs of Section 3.2, must display the circular Bragg phenomenon in accordance
with their periodic nonhomogeneity along the z axis [6, 24], thereby ensconcing themselves
firmly in the area of chiral optics. Briefly, a structurally right– (resp. left–) handed chiral STF
only a few periods thick almost completely reflects axially incident, right (resp. left) circularly
polarized light with wavelength lying in the so–called Bragg regime; while the reflection of
axially incident, left (resp. right) circularly polarized light in the same regime is very little.
The bandwidth of the Bragg regime and the peak reflectivity therein first increase with the
thickness of the chiral STF, and then saturate. Once this saturation has occurred, further
thickening of the film has negligible effects on the reflection spectrum.
4.1 Circular polarization filters
The circular Bragg phenomenon can be employed to realize circular polarization filters. Nor-
mally incident, circularly polarized light of one handedness can be reflected almost completely,
while that of the other handedness is substantially transmitted, if absorption is small enough
and the film is sufficiently thick, in the Bragg regime. This was demonstrated by Wu et al.
[25] with chiral STFs fabricated using the serial bideposition technique. As of now, the Bragg
regime can be positioned at virtually any λ ∈ [450, 1700] nm. Polarization insensitivity can
be realized using a bilayer version, as a cascade of two otherwise identical chiral STFs but of
opposite structural handedness [26]. Chirping can be used to widen the bandwidth [27], and
tightly interlaced chiral STFs may also hold technological attraction [28].
4.2 Polarization–discriminatory handedness–inverters
A polarization–discriminatory handedness–inverter for circularly polarized light was fabricated
using STF technology. This was the first realization of a two–section STF device. It comprises
a chiral STF [24] and a half–wave plate realized as a columnar thin film [11]. Basically, it
almost completely reflects, say, left circularly polarized light; while it substantially transmits
incident right circularly polarized light after transforming it into left circularly polarized light.
Theoretical predictions [29] were borne out experimentally [30].
4.3 Spectral hole filters
InafurtherbidtoillustratethepotentialoftheSTFconcept, athree–sectionSTFwasproposed
as a spectral hole filter. Its first and third layers are identical chiral STFs, while the thin middle
layer ishomogeneous[31, 32]. Themiddlelayer issupposedtoactasaphasedefect. Thisdesign
was actually implemented to obtain a 11 nm wide spectral hole centered at λ = 580 nm [33].
The realized bandwidth filter compares very favorably with those of commercially available
holographic filters.
A better design became available shortly thereafter and was experimentally evaluated too [34].
The middle layer was eliminated, but the lower chiral STF was twisted by 90◦ with respect to
the upper chiral STF about the z axis. The twist acts as the required phase defect.
4.4 Rugate and S˘olc filters
SNTFs can also be pressed into service as optical filters — for linearly polarized plane waves.
McPhun et al. [35] fabricated rugate filters with STF technology for narrow–band reflection ap-
plications. S˘olc filters of the fan and the folded types are also possible with the same technology
[36].
4.5 Fluid sensors
TheporosityofSTFsmakesthemattractiveforfluidconcentrationsensing applications[37, 38],
because their optical response properties must change in accordance with the number density
of molecules intruding into the void regions. In particular, theoretical research has shown that
the Bragg regime of a chiral STF must shift accordingly, thereby providing a measure of the
fluid concentration [37]. Qualitative support for this finding is provided by experiments on wet
and dry chiral STFs [39].
Very recent theoretical research has indicated that STF spectral hole filters can function as
highly sensitive fluid concentration sensors; and proof–of–concept experiments with both cir-
cularly polarized and unpolarized incident light have confirmed the red–shift of spectral holes
upon exposure to moisture [40].
5. Emerging applications
From their inception [5], STFs were expected to have a wide range of applications, imple-
mentableonlyaftertheiroptical,electronic, andmagneticpropertiescametobetterunderstood.
Their optical applications came to be investigated first, as detailed in Section 4. However, their
high porosity — in combination with optical anisotropy and possible two–dimensional electron
confinement in the microstructure — makes STFs potential candidates as
(i) electroluminescent devices (emitting light of a pre–specified polarization state from circu-
lar to linear) prepared by chemical vapor deposition of nanocrystal silicon into the void
spaces of STFs formed from wide–gap transparent oxides;
(ii) high speed, high efficiency electrochromic films;
(iii) optically transparent conducting films sculptured from pure metals;
(iv) multi–state electronic switches based on filamentary conduction;
(v) optical sensors that can detect and quantify various chemical and biological fluids; and
(vi) micro–sieves for the entrapment of viruses or for growing biological tissues on surfaces of
biological or non–biological provenances.
Obviously, many other applications may turn out to be possible, but significant progress thus
far has been reported, to my knowledge, only in the following five areas:
5.1 Biochips
Endowed with porosity of engineered texture, STFs can function as microreactors and therefore
can function as biochips. As an example, let us consider the following scenario: Intercalation of
a ruthenium complex with double–stranded DNA is known to generate luminescence. Suppose
that identical single–stranded DNA molecules — with a particular genomic sequence matched
to, say, E. coli — are dispersed in a STF. A drop of contaminated water containing analyte
DNA molecules from exploded E. coli is put on the STF, followed by a drop of an appropriate
ruthenium complex. Thebioluminescence signal emerging fromtheSTFcanbeopticallysensed
by photon counters in order to measure the degree of contamination.
Bioluminescent emission is bound to be affected by the reactor characteristics. If the reactor
is a chiral STF, the possibility of exploiting the circular Bragg phenomenon exhibited by it
would be attractive. Indeed, the structural handedness as well as the periodicity of chiral STFs
havebeenshown tocritically controltheemissionspectrum andintensity, while thepolarization
state of the emitted light is strongly correlated with the structural handedness of the embedded
source filaments [41]. Bioluminescence STF sensors therefore merit closer attention.
5.2 Optical interconnects
Efficient use of optoelectronic devices requires the development of optical interconnects which,
in addition to providing effective signal transmission, must be simple to fabricate on integrated
circuitry. STF technology is compatible with the planar technology of electronic chips. Guided
wave propagation in chiral STFs turns out to yield the space–guide concept: the capacity to
simultaneously support propagation modes with different phase velocities in different directions
[42, 43]. This could result in efficient use of the available real estate in electronic chips. Further-
more, the helicoidal microstructure of chiral STFs would resist vertical cleavage and fracture,
in contrast to columnar thin films which can also function as space–guides.
Chiral STFs can be grown as a regular lattice by lithographically patterning the substrates
[10]. Whereas slow substrate–rotation rates result in the growth of arrays of microhelixes
or microsprings spaced as close as 20 nm from their nearest neighbors, faster rotation rates
yield arrays of increasingly denser pillars [9, 10]. Such STFs are essentially photonic bandgap
materials in the visible and the infrared regimes. Most recently, even line defects have been
introduced therein [44].
5.3 Interlayer dielectrics
With the microelectronics industry moving relentlessly towards decreasing feature sizes and
increasingly stringent tolerance levels, an urgent need exists for the use of low–permittivity
materials as interlevel dielectrics. Silicon dioxide, the current material of choice, has excellent
properties in all respects except one: its permittivity is too high. The porosity of STFs and
nanoporous silica makes them attractive low–permittivity materials for microelectronic and
electronic packaging applications. However, chiral STFs are likely to have significant thermal,
mechanical, aswellaselectricaladvantagesovernanoporoussilica—becauseof(i)porositywith
controllable texture and (ii) helicoidal morphology. Also, chiral STFs could be impregnated
with various kinds of polymers [45].
5.4 Electrically addressable displays
Liquid crystals (LCs) can be electronically addressed [46] and are therefore widely used these
days for displays. Although STFs are not electronically addressable, the alignment of nematic
LCs forced into the void regions of chiral STFs has been shown to respond to applied voltages
[47]. Thus, STF–LC composites may have a future as robust displays.
5.5 Optical pulse–shapers
The current explosive growth of digital optics communication has provided impetus for time–
domain research on novel materials. As chiral STFs are very attractive for optical applica-
tions, the circular Bragg phenomenon is being studied in the time domain. A pulse bleeding
phenomenon has been identified as the underlying mechanism, which can drastically affect the
shapes, amplitudes and spectral components of femtosecond pulses [48]. However, narrow–band
rectangular pulses can pass through without significant loss of information [49]. Application of
STFs to shape optical pulses appears to be waiting in the wings.
6. Concluding remarks
The foregoing section makes it evident that sculptured thin films are comparable to liquid
crystals [45, 50, 51] in many respects. Their respective roles can be competitive as well as
complementary, depending on the specific environment and application. For instance, being
soft and viscous, LCs serve as pressure/temperature sensors. But STFs are porous solids and
likely to be unaffected by small changes in the ambient pressure and temperature. However,
those qualities are likely to be useful in certain environments where mechanical integrity and
thermal stability are at a premium. Furthermore, STFs can serve as fluid sensors and mi-
croreactors, but LCs can not. Liquid crystals are widely used for electronic displays as they
are electrically addressable; STF–LC composites can also be electrically addressed. Both LCs
and STFs can be used as optical filters and polarizers, but only the latter truly make the
concept of optics–in–a–chip possible. Finally, the wide scope of STFs — accessible through tai-
lorable microstructure and anisotropy, as well as via the almost unlimited types of depositable
materials — is remarkable.
To conclude, the development ofSTF technology isnow ina post–embryonic stage. Much needs
to be done to make it robust, economical and widely used. But the future appears bright, and
the recent feat of Suzuki & Taga [52] in fabricating STFs with many sections underscores the
tremendous promise of STFs as integrated optical chips [5, 12].
Acknowledgements. I am indebted to all of my collaborators and my students for splendid support
on STF research over the last decade. This review is dedicated to the inspirational batting perfor-
mances of V.V.S. Laxman and Rahul S. Dravid and the superb bowling performance of Harbhajan
Singh during a cricket Test match between India and Australia, played March 11–15, 2001 at Eden
Gardens, Kolkata.
7. References
[1] A. Lakhtakia, W.S. Weiglhofer, Microw. Opt. Technol. Lett. 6 (1993) 804.
[2] A. Lakhtakia, R. Messier, in: F. Mariotte, J.–P. Parneix (Eds.), Proceedings of Chiral ’94
(P´erigueux, France, May 18–20, 1994), French Atomic Energy Commission, Le Barp, France,
1994, pp. 125–130.
[3] K. Robbie, M.J. Brett, A. Lakhtakia, J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A 13 (1995) 2991.
[4] N. O. Young, J. Kowal, Nature 183 (1959) 104.
[5] A. Lakhtakia, R. Messier, M.J. Brett, K. Robbie, Innov. Mater. Res. 1 (1996) 165.
[6] V.C. Venugopal, A. Lakhtakia, in: O.N. Singh, A. Lakhtakia (Eds.), Electromagnetic Fields
in Unconventional Materials and Structures, Wiley, New York, 2000, pp. 151–216.
[7] A. Lakhtakia, R.F. Messier (Eds.), Engineered Nanostructural Films and Materials, SPIE,
Bellingham, WA, USA,1999.
[8] I. Hodgkinson, Q.H. Wu, Appl. Opt. 38 (1999) 3621.
[9] R. Messier, V.C. Venugopal, P.D. Sunal, J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A 18 (2000) 1538.
[10] M. Malac, R.F. Egerton, Nanotechnology 12 (2001) 11.
[11] I.J. Hodgkinson, Q.–h. Wu, Birefringent Thin Films and Polarizing Elements, World
Scientific, Singapore, 1997.
[12] A. Lakhtakia, Optik 107 (1997) 57.
[13] H. Hochstadt, Differential Equations — A Modern Approach, Dover Press, New York,
1975, chap. 2.
[14] A. Lakhtakia, W.S. Weiglhofer, Proc. R. Soc. Lond. A 448 (1995) 419; erratums: 454
(1998) 3275.
[15] A. Lakhtakia, W.S. Weiglhofer, Proc. R. Soc. Lond. A 453 (1997) 93; erratums: 454
(1998) 3275.
[16] V.A. Yakubovich, V.M. Starzhinskii, Linear Differential Equations with Periodic Coeffi-
cients, Wiley, New York, 1975.
[17] W.S. Weiglhofer, A. Lakhtakia, Optik 102 (1996) 111.
[18] K. Rokushima, J. Yamakita, J. Opt. Soc. Am. A 4 (1987) 27.
[19] A. Lakhtakia, P.D. Sunal, V.C. Venugopal, E. Ertekin, Proc. SPIE 3790 (1999) 77.
[20] W.S. Weiglhofer, A. Lakhtakia, B. Michel, Microw. Opt. Technol. Lett. 15 (1997) 263;
erratum: 22 (1999) 221.
[21] B. Michel, in: O.N. Singh, A. Lakhtakia (Eds.), Electromagnetic Fields in Unconventional
Materials and Structures, Wiley, New York, 2000, pp. 39–82.
[22] J.A. Sherwin, A. Lakhtakia, Proc. SPIE 4097 (2000) 250.
[23] J.A. Sherwin, A. Lakhtakia, Math. Comput. Model. (accepted for publication in 2001).
[24] I. Hodgkinson, Q.h. Wu, B. Knight, A. Lakhtakia, K. Robbie, Appl. Opt. 39 (2000) 642.
[25] Q. Wu, I.J. Hodgkinson, A. Lakhtakia, Opt. Eng. 39 (2000) 1863.
[26] A. Lakhtakia, V.C. Venugopal, Microw. Opt. Technol. Lett. 17 (1998) 135.
[27] A. Lakhtakia, Microw. Opt. Technol. Lett. 28 (2001) 323.
[28] A. Lakhtakia, Optik 112 (2001) 119.
[29] A. Lakhtakia, Opt. Eng. 38 (1999) 1596.
[30] I.J. Hodgkinson, A. Lakhtakia, Q.h. Wu, Opt. Eng. 39 (2000) 2831.
[31] A. Lakhtakia, M. McCall, Opt. Commun. 168 (1999) 457.
[32] A. Lakhtakia, V.C. Venugopal, M.W. McCall, Opt. Commun. 177 (1999) 57.
[33] I.J. Hodgkinson, Q.h. Wu, A. Lakhtakia, M.W. McCall, Opt. Commun. 177 (2000) 79.
[34] I.J. Hodgkinson, Q.H. Wu, K.E. Thorn, A. Lakhtakia, M.W. McCall, Opt. Commun. 184
(2000) 57.
[35] A.H. McPhun, Q.H. Wu, I.J. Hodgkinson, Electron. Lett. 34 (1998) 360.
[36] A. Lakhtakia, Opt. Eng. 37 (1998) 1870.
[37] A. Lakhtakia, Sensors & Actuators B: Chem. 52 (1998) 243.
[38] E. Ertekin, A. Lakhtakia, Eur. Phys. J. Appl. Phys. 5 (1999) 45.
[39] I.J. Hodgkinson, Q.h. Wu, K.M. McGrath, Proc. SPIE 3790 (1999) 184.
[40] A. Lakhtakia, M.W. McCall, J.A. Sherwin, Q.h. Wu, I.J. Hodgkinson, Opt. Commun.
(accepted for publication in 2001).
[41] A. Lakhtakia, Opt. Commun. 188 (2001) 313.
[42] A. Lakhtakia, Optik 110 (1999) 289.
[43] E. Ertekin, A. Lakhtakia, Proc. R. Soc. Lond. A 457 (2001) 817.
[44] M. Malac, R.F. Egerton, J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A 19 (2000) 158.
[45] V.C. Venugopal, A. Lakhtakia, R. Messier, J.–P. Kucera, J. Vac. Sci. Technol. B 18 (2000)
32.
[46] S.D. Jacobs (Ed.), Selected Papers on Liquid Crystals for Optics, SPIE, Bellingham, WA,
USA, 1992.
[47] J.C. Sit, D.J. Broer, M.J. Brett, Liq. Cryst. 27 (2000) 387.
[48] J.B. Geddes III, A. Lakhtakia, Eur. Phys. J. Appl. Phys. 13 (2001) 3.
[49] J.B. Geddes III, A. Lakhtakia, Microw. Opt. Technol. Lett. 28 (2001) 59.
[50] S. Chandrasekhar, Liquid Crystals, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, 1992.
[51] P.G. de Gennes, J. Prost, The Physics of Liquid Crystals, Clarendon Press, Oxford, UK,
1993.
[52] M. Suzuki, Y. Taga, Jap. J. Appl. Phys. 40, part 2 (2001) L358.