1v6562.8090:viXra
Semantic Robot Vision Challenge: Current State and Future Directions
ScottHelmer, DavidMeger, Pooja Viswanathan, Sancho McCann,
Matthew Dockrey, PooyanFazli,Tristram Southey, MariusMuja,
Michael Joya,Jim Little, DavidLowe, AlanMackworth
DepartmentofComputerScience
UniversityofBritishColumbia
shelmer@cs.ubc.ca
Abstract Researchcompetitions,whilepotentiallypossessingthese
same limitations, are more desirable than standard bench-
TheSemantic RobotVision Competitionprovided marksonmanypoints. First, likestandardbenchmarksthey
an excellent opportunity for our research lab to provide a context in which participants can evaluate their
integrate our many ideas under one umbrella, in- techniques under uniform conditions and make meaningful
spiring both collaboration and new research. The comparisons. Second, their periodicnature allows the com-
task, visual search for an unknown object, is rel- petition to evolve with the state-of-the-art, and discourages
evanttoboththevisionandroboticscommunities. techniquestailoredtospecificsofaparticularbenchmark.Fi-
Moreover,sincetheinterplayofroboticsandvision nally, they provide an exciting venue that brings together a
is sometimes ignored, the competition provides a communityforcollaborationandsynthesis.However,thisas-
venuetointegratetwocommunities. Inthispaper, sumesthatthoseengagedinthestate-of-the-artresearchpar-
we outline a number of modificationsto the com- ticipate actively in such competitions, otherwise the events
petitiontobothimprovethestate-of-the-artandin- becomemerelyavenuefordisplayingknowntechniques.
creaseparticipation.
Althoughtherehavebeencompetitionsfocuseduponava-
rietyofrobotictasks,thesehavetendedtominimizethecon-
tribution of vision. Conversely, in vision, particularly ob-
1 Introduction
ject recognition, the active acquisition of images for anal-
Current technology (robotic and otherwise) falls well short ysis is generally of secondary concern. Here, benchmark
of a human’s ability to perceive the world using vision. A datasets and competitions are neither a representative sam-
nearlylimitlessrangeofapplicationswouldbefacilitatedby pleoftherealworld,norasampleofhowarobotwouldsee
successful embodied object recognition (i.e., the ability of the world. By separating robotics and vision, the majority
a mobile platform to perform human-like visual scene and ofcutting-edgeobjectrecognitionresearchhasfocusedonly
object understanding). We believe that with severalkey ad- uponappearance-basedapproaches,ignoringscenecuesthat
vancesintheabilityofacomputersystemtointerpretvisual mayprovebeneficialforbothaccuracyandefficiency.Webe-
imagery, namely robust object recognition of a large num- lievethatinordertopushstate-of-the-artmethodstowardsthe
berofobjectclassesandmorecapablesceneunderstanding, challenginggoalsoutlinedearlierinthispaper,acompetition
future robot systems will substantially enhance the lives of mustbringthesecommunitiestogetherbyevaluatingembod-
theirusers. Arobotintroducedintoahomeenvironmentwill iedobjectrecognitionsystemsinrealisticenvironments,and
quicklybeabletorespondtocommandssuchas”Robot,fetch thusreducingover-simplificationsanderroneousresearchdi-
my shoes!”, assistive mobility deviceswill be able to deter- rections.
mine whether a dangerous object is in the user’s path, and A recent competition featuring embodied object recogni-
navigationsystemswillaidtravelersbyidentifyingaccidents tion is the Semantic Robot Vision Challenge (SRVC). The
andconstructiondelays. overall task in this contest is similar to a photo-scavenger
In order to accelerate the progress of state-of-the-art re- huntinanunknownindoorenvironment,withinformationon
search,manyfieldsinscienceandengineeringhaveemployed theobjectstypicallyacquiredfromtheInternet. Thissetting
standardizedbenchmarksordatasetstoevaluatesimilartech- bringstogethernumeroussub-fieldsof AI, includingvision,
niquesandprovidea meansfortheircomparison. However, robotics,andnaturallanguageprocessing,alongwithInternet
these measures can be detrimental when they do not reflect searchtechnologies. Althoughthiscompetitiondoesinvolve
the reality or complexity of the problem in question. If the embodied vision and can help stimulate robotics and vision
benchmarkrepresentsaseveresimplificationofreality,itsuse research,ithasyettogainnotorietyintheresearchcommu-
forevaluationoftechniquesmayleadtooverconfidenceina nityandsignificantlyadvancethestate-of-the-art.
system’saccuracyandrobustness. Inaddition,theymaydis- DrawinguponourexperienceasacompetitorintheSRVC
courageresearchdirectionsthatarenotalignedwithsuccess for the past two years, we have identified issues in both
onsuchbenchmarks. roboticcompetitionsandembodiedrecognition. We provide
an outlook for the future of the SRVC that will allow it to tonomously complete a 240 kilometer on- and off-road
increase its impact on the community. Our contribution in course. ForthefirstGrandChallengein2004the bestcom-
this respect is two-fold. Firstly, we discuss the value of the petitor traveled just 11 kilometers before flipping over and
existing SRVC competition to research in embodied vision, catching on fire. In the following year, there were five ve-
and how it has pushed our own research in new directions. hicles which successfully completed the entire course. In
Secondly, we review possible modifications to improve the 2007,justthreeandahalfyearsafterthefirstcompetition,six
competitionintermsoftheresearchdirectionsitencourages teamsfinishedtheUrbanChallenge,whichmixedroboticand
andthenumberofparticipantsitattracts. non-roboticvehiclestogetherinanurbansettingandenforced
Californiatrafficlaws. TheGrandChallengeistheperfectil-
2 Robotics and Computer Vision lustrationofacompetitionwhichpushedthestate-of-the-art,
particularlyinsystemsengineering. Priortothecompetition
Competitions
itwaswidelybelievedthatcurrenttechnologywassimplynot
Competitions in robotics and computer vision that display uptothechallengeofthisdifficulttask.Thissuccesswasdue
state-of-the-arttechniquesarearelativelyrecentphenomena. in part to the fact that from the start it was well funded, at-
Thisispartiallyduetothefactthathistorically,thestate-of- tracted top-notch research institutions, received wide media
the-art in either domains were not mature enough to handle attention,andprovidedacompellingtask.
compellingtasks. However, beginningwith Robocup, com- Another successful competition has arisen in the com-
petitionshavebecomeasomewhatregularfeatureatbothaca- puter vision community, the Pascal Visual Object Classes
amomenttoconsidersomeofthemoresuccessfulcompeti- ac.uk/challenges/VOC/). This is a EU-fundedcom-
tions and the features that have made them relevant and vi- petition which began in 2005 with the goals of providing a
able. yearlycompetitionforobjectclass recognitionandlocaliza-
The premier example of a successful competition is tionandasetofstandardsandtoolsforevaluatingalgorithm
Robocup [Kitanoetal.,1997], pioneered by Alan Mack- performance.Incontrasttostandardbenchmarkdatasets,en-
worth [Mackworth,1993], where robots compete against trantsareevaluatedonanoveldataseteveryyear,whichpre-
eachotherinasoccer-likesetting. Withanover-archinggoal vents algorithms from being tailored specifically to a single
ofhavingrobotscompeteagainsthumansinthemid-21cen- data set. The key feature of this competition that led to its
tury,Robocuphasprovedtobeavaluableeducationtooland success was that it involved high profile researchers at the
testbed for many ideas in AI. One of the key features in its organizinglevel,washeldinconjunctionwithmajorconfer-
earlysuccesswasthatitofferedavarietyofleaguesforpar- ences,andwasrelativelyinexpensivetoparticipants.
ticipation. Robot and simulation leagues were offered, pro-
vidingavenueforstate-of-the-artresearchinrobotcontrolas 3 SRVC and OurExperience
wellastechniquesinplanningandmulti-agentsystems. Asa
result,thecompetitionhasattractedalargenumberofpartic- Although the previously mentioned competitions have been
ipants,raisingtheprofileofattendantresearchandproviding successful, they do not address many of the issues of em-
avaluableresearchexperience. bodied vision. The SRVC is an ideal competition to push
Morerecently,RoboCup@HomeisanewRoboCupleague the state-of-the-art in this field. This competition was held
which aims to develop service and assistive robots used in for the first time at the Association for the Advancementof
real-worldpersonaldomesticapplications. Theintentof the ArtificialIntelligence(AAAI)conferencein2007inVancou-
leagueistopromotethedevelopmentofrobotictechnologies ver, and again in conjunction with the IEEE Conference on
thatcanassisthumansineverydaylife. Thecompetitionpro- Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) 2008 in
posesa numberofbenchmarktasksina homeenvironment, Alaska. The competition is a visual search task in an un-
wheresuccessisdeterminedbythenumberoftaskswhichthe knownenvironment. Theentrantsare givena list of objects
entrant’srobotcompletes. Amongoneofthebenchmarksis to find in the environment,with the environmentcontaining
atasktofindaspecifiedobjectintheenvironment.Although only a subset of those listed objects along with additional
thiscontestdoescontainsomeaspectsofembodiedvision,it distractor objects. Using this list, the robots autonomously
doesnotofferasufficientlychallengingtasktoattractvision acquire data aboutthese objectsfrom the Internetin a fixed
researchers to a competition that is not held in conjunction amountoftime. Oncedatacollectionandlearningarecom-
withAIorvisionconferences. Itdoes,however,offeroppor- plete the robot searches the unknown environmentwith the
tunitiesforteamstoattemptawidevarietyoftasks,eachre- task of finding the objects using the data acquired from the
quiringexpertiseindifferentareasofresearch. Forexample, Internet.Attheendoftheexplorationphasetherobotreturns
while one task might require speech synthesis and aesthetic an image for each object type containing a single bounding
presentation, another might evaluate teams on safe naviga- boxaroundthetarget. Thescoringisbasedonthebounding
tion, tracking and human recognition. This setup provides boxaccuracy. In addition,thereis a softwareleague, where
teams the flexibility to attempt specific tasks that they have the entrants are not responsible for acquiring images of the
researchexpertiseinandoptoutofothers. environment. Insteadtheyaregivenasetofimagestakenof
Another wildly successful competition in AI was the theenvironmentthatincludeboththeobjectsandotherscene
DARPA Grand Challenge [Seetharamanetal.,2006], offer- elements.
ing one million dollars to the first team which could au- OurteamenteredtwoversionsofourCuriousGeorgerobot
to the 2007and 2008SRVC. We gaineda wealth of experi- were discoveredin real-timeduringthe run. Our robot’sar-
enceduringoursystemdevelopmentprocessandactualcon- chitectureinvolvedthelowpower,on-boardPCmountedin-
test participation, which will be described in the following sideourPioneerAT3robotforlow-levelcontrol,andfournet-
section. workedlaptopsystemsresponsiblefor: i) real-timeprocess-
ingofvisualimagery,visualattention,roboticplanning,gaze
3.1 InternetDataCollectionandFiltering planning,andoverallcontrol;ii) specificobjectrecognition;
iii+iv)genericcategoryrecognition.Thedistributednatureof
IntheSRVC,allofthetrainingdataisacquiredfromtheIn-
this architecture required captured imagery to be transfered
ternetatcontesttimewithnohumanintervention. Forvisual
between computersvia network connection, and the associ-
appearancemodels,thisgenerallymeanscollectingadataset
atedsoftwareforsendingandreceivingcomponents.
of images via an Internet image search engine like Google.
Our visual attention system processed imagery obtained
Given the varied nature of Internet image search results, a
from a stereo camera system in real-time in order to deter-
system was needed to filter the outputbeforetraining could
minethelocationsofinterestingobjectsandstructuresinthe
be performed. We implementedtwo phases of training data
environment.Thisrepresentedasignificantnewfunctionality
filtering. The first phase removedall cartoons, illustrations,
whencomparedwithour2007contestentrythatrequiredthe
technicalschematics,andothernon-photographicimagesus-
robotto“stopandshoot”beforeperformingvisualattention.
ingaqualityscoredevelopedin[Keetal.,2006]. Thesecond
Thereal-timefunctionalitypreventedourrobotfrom“driving
phaseprioritizedgroupsof imagesthatdisplayeda highde-
blindly” and allowed it to continuously monitor the periph-
greeofsimilarity,sincewedeterminedempiricallythatthese
eralviewuntilasufficientlyinterestinglocationwasseen,at
imagesweremorelikelytocontainthetargetobject.
whichpointfovealimagescouldbecollected.Thisbehaviour
Itisinterestingtonotethatapproachesforimagefiltering
allowedtherobottocovertheenvironmentrapidlywhileig-
andrankingsuchas[Fergusetal.,2004]aregenerallyevalu-
noring uninteresting regionsand thus capturing images of a
atedonadatasetdrawnfromasimilardistributiontothetrain-
largenumberof candidateobjects. It is unlikelythatany of
ingdata.ThisisnotthecasefortheSRVCscenariosincedata
our team members would have developed such a behaviour
collectedbyarobotisnotlikelytobefromcanonicalview-
had it not been for the SRVC, since stationary visual atten-
points in uncluttered backgrounds – two properties that are
tion is equallyeasy to demonstratein academic publication.
commoninInternetimages. Asaresult,wedidnotpre-filter
However, now that such a system has been developed, our
resultsbasedongenericobjectcategorizationtechniques.
team has the ability to evaluatethe behaviourof interactive,
Inadditiontoacquiringtrainingimages,otherrelevantdata
real-timevisualattentiononamobileplatform,andthiscon-
maybefoundontheInternet,suchascontextualcluesfrom
tinuestobeaninterestingresearchdirectionforourresearch
LabelMe[Russelletal.,2008]andsizepriorsfromtheWal-
group.
Martcatalog. Theseallrepresentimportantsourcesofinfor-
mation for recognition purposes, but this potential has been 3.3 Vision
leftunaddressedintheliterature. Althoughwewerenotable
Images collected by a robot during the embodied object
to integrate this information into our system in time for the
recognition scenario often capture objects from a non-
SRVC competitions, theyhave encouragedus to pursuethis
standardviewpoint,scale, ororientation. Inothercases, the
directionforcollectingadditionaltrainingdataasideformthe
images do not contain an object at all. In fact, during our
traditionalimagedatasets.
SRVC experience, we found that images collected by the
robotrarelycontainedanytargetobject. As a result, we de-
3.2 Robotics
signed our classification system to have a low false positive
Thenatureofaroboticscontestdemandstheconstructionof rate. We employed a two-stage object detection approach.
aphysicalsystemwithnumerousabilitiesrangingfrombasic Thefirststageusedaspecificobjectrecognitionsystembased
navigation, to the construction of a distributed computation on matching SIFT features and geometric consistency that
system, toperformanceonthetaskitself (objectrecognition generally produced few false positives but provided low re-
in ourcase). While each ofthese individualtasks areeasily callforgenericobjectclasses. Thesecondstageemployeda
achieved,theirintegrationwithina physicalsystempresents generic object classifier based on the spatial pyramidmatch
ahighlevelofcomplexityforsystemdesigners.Forexample, kernel[Lazebniketal.,2006]toproducedetectionsforthose
fromaresearchperspective,robotnavigationandmappingis objectsthatwerenotcapturedbythepreviousapproach.
largelyasolvedprobleminindoorenvironments.However,it We designed a peripheral-foveal vision system that at-
isasignificantpracticalchallengetopreparearobottonavi- temptsto improvethe qualityof robot-collectedimageryby
gateapreviouslyunseencontestenvironmentwhereitisre- locating interesting regions of the environment and imag-
quiredtovisitpotentiallyunsafelocationsthatprovidegood ing these regions in high resolution. This design choice
viewsofobjects. Similarly,distributingacomputationalpro- was inspired by the human visual system, which makes
cess acrossseveralnetworkedprocessorsis nota significant extensive use of peripheral-foveal vision. Our peripheral
challenge in many situations, but when this system must be camera was a Point Grey Research Bumblebee stereo cam-
mountedonamobilerobotandthussubjecttoconstraintson era with a relatively wide field of view. Spectral saliency
weight,powerandsize,manydifficultiespresentthemselves. [HouandZhang,2007]wasfusedwithstereodepthinforma-
For the 2008 SRVC, we developed an active exploration tion to locate regions of interest in peripheral images. The
andreal-timevisionsysteminordertoannounceobjectsthat fovealcamerawasaCanonG7point-and-shootcamera. We
employedtheG7’shighzoom,combinedwithapan-tiltunit 4.1 Training
toobtaintightlycropped,highresolutionimagesofinterest- Embodied object recognition systems require a source of
ing objects identified in the peripheral view. We found that training data from which to learn the appearance and prop-
theimagequalityobtainedbyourfovealsystemsignificantly erties of targetobjects. In the past, for the SRVC, this data
improvedobjectrecognitionperformance. Thisislikelydue has been obtained entirely using the Internet at the time of
to the fact that Internet images are also often captured by competition. However, the vast majority of images from
high-qualitydigitalcameras. the Internet are from a single canonical viewpoint, which
implies that the resulting classifier will only be successful
3.4 BenefitstoOurResearch
on that viewpoint. Given the paucity of the data, this set-
UBC’sparticipationintheSRVChasleadustodevelopCu- ting does not encourage 3D recognition, which may be re-
rious George, a powerful evaluation platform that enabled quired for successful embodied recognition. One modifica-
furtherdevelopmentofembodiedrecognitionalgorithms. In tion would be to allow competitors to know a superset of
terms of quantifiable research output, the platform devel- theclassesbeforehand,enablingtheuseofmanuallylabeled
oped directly for the SRVC contest has lead to a num- training data. This is not an unrealistic scenario since most
ber of publications [Megeretal.,2007; Megeretal.,2008] robotswilllikelybedeployedinknownenvironmentswhere
and several higher-level algorithms have since been de- the set of objects can be carefully catalogued. Also, it still
signed which leverage the platform [Forssenetal.,2008; presentsasignificantchallenge,asdemonstratedbytheVOC
Viswanathanetal.,2009]. Our resulting research directions competition where recognition is still very poor. Alterna-
can be summarized into three categories: the effect of tively, the types of environments (e.g., office, kitchen, bed-
viewpoint in object recognition, the use of existing online room, etc) could be provided. For example, knowing that
databases for semantic training information, and the use of the scene was a kitchen would allow researchers to con-
additional cues available to an embodied platform during struct priors on appearance, 3d shape and scale for all ob-
sceneunderstanding. jects that are likely to occur in a kitchen. In either case,
Ourstudyofviewpointinobjectrecognitionhasexamined Internet data acquisition would still be allowed at competi-
theimplicationsofhavingonlyasinglecanonicalviewpoint tiontimetoaugmentdataprovidedbysystemdesigners.This
inthetrainingimagedataset(asisoftenthecasewithInternet wouldallowforresearchintotheinterplaybetweenscenein-
images). We evaluatedseveralrecognitionmethods(namely formation like surface orientations and real-world scale and
featurematchingwithandwithoutageometricconstraint)in appearance, similar to works such as [Hoiemetal.,2006;
terms of their ability to recognize objects from a range of Gouldetal.,2008].
viewpoints,andreportedarangeofsuccessforthistask.
4.2 EnvironmentandContext
We showed that annotated datasets such as the LabelMe
[Russelletal.,2008]databasecanprovidesemanticinforma- TheSRVCcontestenvironmenthas,sofar,requiredtherobot
tion for tasks other than simply object recognition. Object- tonavigateinanareathatisquitesmallandtolocateobjects
place relations from LabelMe (e.g., fridges are likely to be that were placed on tables covered with white table cloths.
found in the kitchen) were learned, and used this spatial- Thisscenariopresentsamuchsimplersegmentationproblem
semanticmodeltoperformplacelabelinginsimulatedenvi- whencomparedwitharealistichomeenvironment,anddoes
ronments. Wealsodescribedtheuseofthismodeltoinform notallowforevaluationofsystemperformanceoverlongdis-
objectsearch[Viswanathanetal.,2009].Ourfutureplansare tancesandoperatingdurations.
to combinethis technologywith objectrecognition,demon- Thus, while objectrecognitionmethodsthatrelyon good
stratedintheSRVC,toconstructasuccessfulintegratedscene segmentation results might succeed in the contest, they are
understandingsystem. likelytofailinmorerealisticenvironments. Thisoutcomeis
Finally,wehaveemployedstructurefromstereotoregister misaligned with the objective of pushing research in the di-
object locationsand constructa 3D object map and demon- rectionofimprovingreal-worldperformance,andwebelieve
stratedhowthisobjectmapallowsarobottocollectmultiple thatfutureSRVCcontestsshouldincludeincreasinglyrealis-
viewpoints of target objects to improve classification accu- ticenvironmentdesigns.
racy. One of our team members is currently employing the To a na¨ıve audience, embedding the competition in a re-
raw structure information to utilize scale priors for object alistic environment might seem likely to increase difficulty,
recognition.Overall,theSRVChasstimulatedawidevariety however, it can actually lead to better performance if the
of excellent research in our group by forcingus to examine additional information available about context is leveraged
objectrecognitioninarealisticsetting. by the competition systems. Respecting relationships of
co-occuranceand co-locationof natural environmentswhen
placingobjectswouldallowonetoexploittheserelationships
4 Improving Research Outcomes
for object recognition. It would also help eliminate false
Researchcompetitionsshouldadvancethestate-of-the-artby matches by recognizing that an object does not belong in a
providingadditionaltrainingdataandcontextinformation.In particularlocation.
addition,realisticenvironmentswouldallowtheuseofmore In addition, it would be interesting to partition the envi-
advanced learning methods. This section providespotential ronment into places that appear in real environments (e.g.,
modifications to the SRVC contest that we believe will en- kitchen, bedroom, etc.) and having query objects in the lo-
couragethesedirections. cationsthattheyarenormallyfound. Thiswouldallowcom-
petitorsto exploitobject-placerelationsto identifypotential recognitiontaskfromtheroboticschallengesofactivevision
objectlocations,thusfacilitatingefficientcoverageoftheen- and navigation, however some modifications are needed in
vironment. There are obviously logistical problems in hav- ordertoimproveparticipationinthisleague.
ingamulti-roomenvironmentandallowingforanaudience. Thefirstthingtonoteisthattheimpactofthiscompetition
However, using dividers, it is possible to create room-like isdependentonthesignificanceoftheresultsinthecompe-
subdivisions without the need for entirely separate rooms. tition. In the object recognition community, techniques are
Thiswouldcreateanenvironmentsimilartomany“opencon- evaluatedonalargenumberofimages,thusensuringthatim-
cept”homes.Itisalsopossibletocreaterecognizable,logical provementsoverprevioustechniquesarestatisticallysignifi-
locationsinasingleroombyseparatingtheselocationswith cant. Thisisthecaseeveninacompetitionenvironmentlike
emptyspace,howeverthisshouldbespecifiedtocompetitors. VOC. Results from the SRVC competition, however, carry
littlestatisticalsignificanceduetothesmallsamplesize(e.g.
5 Improving Participation onemugintheenvironment). Onepossibilitytoaddressthis
is in the software league. Here, image data can be acquired
The purpose of a competitionin research is to provideboth
from real environments instead of the contest setting. This
anopportunitytoexchangeideasaswellasavenuetoevalu-
providesanopportunitytoincludemuchmorerealisticcon-
ateandencouragestate-of-the-artresearch.Aparticularchal-
text.Imagesofthesametargetobjectsdistributedinanatural
lenge in an embodied recognition competition is to encour-
environment,suchasakitchenoroffice,canbetakenahead
age participationof bothroboticsand visionresearchers. In
oftime. Inordertoincorporatethe“embodiedvision”aspect
this section, we discuss practicalsuggestionsto increase re-
of the contest, additional information such as a map of the
searcherparticipation.
environment, the location and orientation of the camera for
5.1 ChangesintheSettingandRules eachimage,andstereoimagepairscanbeprovidedwithlittle
extraeffort. Thiswouldmakethesoftwareleagueamorein-
Various methods are currently used in object class recog-
terestingresearchproblemandhelpdistinguishitfromother
nition research such as colour, contours, texture, etc.
objectrecognitioncompetitions,thusattractingmorepartici-
In addition, there is an active research community
[VogelandMurphy,2007]thatseekstoutilizescenecontext pants.Inaddition,removingthelimitationsofdatacollection
byarobotalsoallowsforthecreationofdatasetscomposed
forrecognition.Weproposevaryingthedifficultyandscoring
ofalargernumberofobjectsandenvironments,thusincreas-
ofthecompetitioninawaythatrewardsthesuccessesofspe-
ingthestatisticalsignificanceoftheresults.
cificmethodsoncertainobjecttypesthatmightbechalleng-
ingtorecognizeusingsimpleobjectrecognitiontechniques.
5.3 RobotLeague
Another interesting modification might be to provide dif-
ferent levels of information before and during the competi- Asalreadymentioned,ithasbeenasignificantchallengefor
tion. Forexample,theobjecttype“bottle”couldbeprovided teams in previous years of the SRVC contest to achieve re-
beforehand, and the robot might be required to recognize a liable navigation within the contest environment. Since the
specific object(e.g. coke bottle, milk bottle, etc) duringthe primary research problems posed by the SRVC are not in-
competition.Tomaketheproblemmorechallenging,thecon- tendedtofocusonlow-levelrobotnavigation,itmaybeuse-
test could allot points for identifying unknown objects (i.e. fultoconsiderrelievingteamsofthenavigationburdeninthe
those that do not appear on the list). In addition, including future.
relativelocationinformationforsomeobjects(e.g. thebook First, thecontestorganizerscouldprovideentrantswith a
isbesidetheTV)canprovidecontextinformationusefulfor standardized robot platform that has basic navigation abili-
recognitionofobjectsthatareparticularlychallenginggiven ties. Inthiscase,teamswouldonlyberesponsibleforhigher
thestate-of-the-art. leveltaskplanningandprocessingofthevisualimageryob-
Additionally, the contest could allow two teams to com- tained by the robot. While this solution solves many of the
petesimultaneously. Theteamwhichfindstheobjectsinthe problems posed by navigation, it also unfortunately intro-
environmentfasterwouldreceiveahigherscore. Anotherin- ducesseveralcomplications.Primarily,eachteamdependson
teresting case that can push forward the robotics aspect of aslightlydifferentsetofsensingmodalities.Duringthe2007
thecontestwouldbetoallowmultiplerobotsperteamtoex- and 2008 SRVC contests, we have seen: monocular video
ploretheenvironment. Therobotscancooperativelycapture cameras, monocular still cameras, laser rangefinders, sonar
theimagesfromdifferentviewpointsandsharetheinforma- range sensors, binocular stereo cameras, and multi-camera
tion to recognize the objects more precisely. However, this stereosystems. Anystandardizedtestplatformwouldbere-
changeismostlikelyinfeasibletoimplementinthenearfu- quired to provide teams with some subset of these sensors,
tureduetothecomplexityandcostofrobotscurrentlybeing andthissetwouldideallybesufficientlylargesothatitdoes
usedinSRVC. not discourage any teams from competing. Another signif-
icant challenge is the ability for each team to practice and
5.2 SoftwareLeague
developonthestandardplatform.Eithernumerousplatforms
Althoughacompetitionwhichrequirestheintegrationofvar- would need to be distributed, or teams would require peri-
iousresearch areasis desirable, sucha competitiondiscour- odic access to a single platform. Both of these options en-
agesparticipationfromsmallerresearchgroupsthatmaynot tail significant cost that would need to be minimized. This
havetheexpertisetoimplementeveryaspectrequiredforsuc- couldlikelybeaccomplishedbyemployingastandardrobot
com/wiki/ROS) that would allow much of the develop- Aside from attracting more participation from research
ment to occur in simulation and with surrogate robots for groups, improving the visibility of the contest can attract
hardwaretesting. sponsorship. One simple change to the 2008 competition
Asimplermethodforreducingnavigationchallengesisto that was surprisingly compelling was the addition of bonus
provideteamswitha moredetailedspecificationofthecon- pointsforteamswhomadearealtimestatusdisplayshowing
testenvironmentgeometry. Forexample,knowingtheexact matchesastheyweremade. Thismadethecontestmorein-
sizeandshapeoffurnitureallowsforpropermountingofsen- teresting for the audience to watch by providing a sense of
sorsandtuningofsensormodelsinmappingalgorithms. In what the robots were doing even when they were not mov-
this case, it might be possible for each team to still employ ing. The crowdwasaudiblyexcitedwhena newmatchwas
theirownrobot. displayed, identifyingwith the robotsand respondingto the
irregularreinforcementaspectofthedisplay. Asanelement
5.4 FacilitatingCodeRe-use of visibilityand outreachfor a roboticcompetition,thisis a
verypowerfullesson. In addition, this also pushedresearch
Re-usable code is an important output of a successful com-
towards techniques to provide real-time recognition. In fu-
petition,asitisinanycollaborativeeffort. Sincethegoalof
ture,explicitlyencouragingcompetitorstoprovidereal-time
competitionsistomovethestate-of-theartinadesireddirec-
displays of what the robot has found or is trying to do will
tion, successive solutionsto the competition’sproblemben-
drawevenmoreattentiontothecontest.
efit from having previouswork available as a starting point.
Re-usablecodealsolowersthebarriertoentryforteamsnew
6 Conclusions
to the competition, enhancing accessibility of the competi-
tion,andinturnvisibility. Properlydesignedcontestssignificantlypromotethedevelop-
Although code sharing is encouraged/requiredby SRVC, mentofthestate-of-the-art. Theycancompriserealisticand
subsequent re-use of this code appears to be non-existent. complex settings not seen in standard benchmark datasets,
Thisisaresultofthedifferencesinplatformsandapproaches providingbothastrongtestforcurrentsolutionsandrichcon-
usedbyeachoftheparticipants.Forexample,ourrobotbase, textthat can be leveragedto advanceresearch. The Seman-
sensor package, peripheral-fovealvision system, and multi- tic RobotVision Challengerepresentsonesuch competition
processordistributedrecognitionsystem was a veryspecific whichprovidesavenueforembodiedrecognition.Ithaspro-
point in the solution space. This entire setup would likely videda valuableimpetusto our own research, providingin-
have to be replicated in order to re-use our code. However, sightsandelucidatingnewdirectionsthatneedmoreresearch.
there are elements of a code base that would be generally However,tobesuccessfulinthefuture,thiscontestneedsnu-
usable (training set construction and feature extraction, for merousmodificationsinordertohavesignificantimpact.
example).