BMC Bioinformatics
This Provisional PDF corresponds to the article as it appeared upon acceptance. Fully formatted
PDF and full text (HTML) versions will be made available soon.
Semantic Inference using Chemogenomics Data for Drug Discovery
Qian Zhu (qianzhu@indiana.edu)
Yuyin Sun (yuysun@indiana.edu)
Sashikiran Challa (schalla@umail.iu.edu)
Ying Ding (dingying@indiana.edu)
Michael S Lajiness (LAJINESS_MICHAEL_S@lilly.com)
David J Wild (djwild@indiana.edu)
ISSN 1471-2105
Article type Research article
Submission date 8 March 2011
Acceptance date 23 June 2011
Publication date 23 June 2011
Like all articles in BMC journals, this peer-reviewed article was published immediately upon
acceptance. It can be downloaded, printed and distributed freely for any purposes (see copyright
notice below).
Articles in BMC journals are listed in PubMed and archived at PubMed Central.
For information about publishing your research in BMC journals or any BioMed Central journal, go to
©2011Zhu etal.;licenseeBioMedCentralLtd.
whichpermitsunrestricteduse,distribution,andreproductioninanymedium,providedtheoriginalworkisproperlycited.
Semantic Inference using Chemogenomics Data for
Drug Discovery
Qian Zhu*§1, Yuyin Sun*2, Sashikiran Challa*1, Ying Ding*2,
Michael S Lajiness*3, David J Wild*1
1 School of Informatics and Computing, Indiana University, Bloomington, IN 47408,
2 School of Library and Information Science, Indiana University, Bloomington, IN
47408, USA
3 Eli Lilly and Company, Indianapolis, IN 46225, USA
*These authors contributed equally to this work
§Corresponding author
Email addresses:
QZ: qianzhu@indiana.edu
YYS: yuysun@indiana.edu
SC: schalla@umail.iu.edu
DY: dingying@indiana.edu
MSL: LAJINESS_MICHAEL_S@lilly.com
DJW: djwild@indiana.edu
Background
Semantic Web Technology (SWT) makes it possible to integrate and search the large
volume of life science datasets in the public domain, as demonstrated by well-known
linked data projects such as LODD, Bio2RDF, and Chem2Bio2RDF. Integration of
these sets creates large networks of information. We have previously described a tool
called WENDI for aggregating information pertaining to new chemical compounds,
effectively creating evidence paths relating the compounds to genes, diseases and so
on. In this paper we examine the utility of automatically inferring new compound-
disease associations (and thus new links in the network) based on semantically
marked-up versions of these evidence paths, rule-sets and inference engines.
Through the implementation of a semantic inference algorithm, rule set, Semantic
Web methods (RDF, OWL and SPARQL) and new interfaces, we have created a new
tool called Chemogenomic Explorer that uses networks of ontologically annotated
RDF statements along with deductive reasoning tools to infer new associations
between the query structure and genes and diseases from WENDI results. The tool
then permits interactive clustering and filtering of these evidence paths.
Conclusions
We present a new aggregate approach to inferring links between chemical compounds
and diseases using semantic inference. This approach allows multiple evidence paths
between compounds and diseases to be identified using a rule-set and semantically
annotated data, and for these evidence paths to be clustered to show overall evidence
linking the compound to a disease. We believe this is a powerful approach, because it
allows compound-disease relationships to be ranked by the amount of evidence
supporting them.
Background
Recent advances in chemical & biological sciences have led to an incredible increase
in the volume of information about known chemical compounds, genes, diseases, and
assays. Statistical data from the PubChem Substance Database of chemical structures,
shows an increase from 35,379,748 structures in 2007 to 69,088,100 in 2010; the
number of PubChem Bioassays increased from around 1000 in 2008 to 434,635 in
2010[1], and there are 726,872 compound records and 2,925,588 activities in the
chemogenomic ChEMBL[2] dataset. Numerous other chemical, chemogenomic, and
biological data (including data extracted from the scholarly literature) are also
available including ChEBI[3], CTD[4], KEGG[5] and Medline[6] inter alia. Many
well-known search engines for these data resources have been developed like
PubChem, which provides chemical structure search and bioassay search. This search
engine returns an abundant supply of chemical information and bioactive information
based on PubChem Bioassay data. ChemSpider[7] links together compound
information across the Web and provides free text and structure search access to
millions of chemical structures. It offers multiple search modes to do chemical
information searching on the basis of hundreds of data vendors.
We can imagine all these information resources as buckets for pieces of a very large
jigsaw puzzle, each bucket containing only pieces of a certain color. To assemble the
full picture we need to be able to search and apply algorithms that span across
different buckets seamlessly. There are many technologies of utility for this, most
recently from the Semantic Web Technology (SWT) community, like XML (for
describing data), OWL (for describing ontologies and taxonomies), and RDF (for
describing relationships) are allowing data aggregation and the representation of
meaning and relationships in the data, and are now being quite widely applied for life
science data. LODD[8], Bio2RDF[9], Chem2Bio2RDF[10] demonstrate not only how
SWT can enable integration of multiple sources, but also complex query processing
using the SPARQL language. Our resource, Chem2Bio2RDF, integrates six
categories of data based on the kinds of biological and chemical concepts and
relationships they represent: chemical & drug, protein & gene, chemogenomics,
systems (i.e., PPI and pathway), phenotype (i.e., disease and side effect) and
literature. However, the current version of Chem2Bio2RDF lacks a formal ontology
so it is hard for users to read and understand the meaning of the metadata and harder
to do further inference. Once an integrated network of compounds, genes, diseases,
etc. is in place (with an appropriate ontology), as PharmGKB[11] establishes
knowledge about the relationships among drugs, diseases and genes, including their
variations and gene products, it becomes possible to semantically infer new links in
the network (i.e. identify new associations) via sets of rules, and inference engines
that use these rules. For example, we might have a rule that if a chemical compound A
is highly similar to a drug D that is known to be active against a protein target T, we
infer an association (and thus a network link) between A and T (possibly annotated
with a confidence value). Semantic inference has been used in various applications
including knowledge-based recommender systems[12] and human-machine
communication[13], but there have few applications in the life sciences,
Neurocommons[14] uses SWT for assembling and querying biomedical knowledge
from multiple sources and disciplines. With this system, scientists will be able to load
in lists of genes that come off the lab robots, and get back those lists of genes with
relevant information around them based on the public knowledge[15]. SciNetS
Search[16] is an inference search over integrated life science databases using SWT. It
can implement cross-domain search and use statistical scoring. All the metadata of
databases are described as a set of triples consisting of two bio-items and relationships
between these items. GoRouter[17] is building an RDF model to do semantic query
and inference, but the inference is restricted to the Gene Ontology and its related
associations.
In our previous paper [18], we introduced a novel tool, WENDI (Web Engine for
Non-Obvious Drug Information), for aggregating information related to a compound
to identify relationships. WENDI probes the potential biological properties of the
compound using predictive models, databases, and the scholarly literature, in
particular, to find non-obvious relationships between the compound and assays,
genes, and diseases, which cross over different types of data sources. The purpose of
WENDI is not just to return data about a compound (such as in a database search):
rather it allows a researcher to understand the context in which a compound operates,
and to find clues which help them understand properties of the compound that they
might not otherwise have discovered. WENDI does data integration for particular
query compounds and represents its result graph in XML. WENDI architecture is
shown in Figure 1.
Figure 1. WENDI Architecture (WENDI main web interface is show at the upper
right corner)
WENDI has good performance on data integration, but it relies on the user manually
find associations among the kinds of results presented. At this point, we thus extended
WENDI work to use semantic inference and rules to automatically infer new
associations based on the WENDI XML results. These new associations in aggregate
form clusters of association that build evidence of an association between compounds
and diseases via multiple sources or evidence paths. We have implemented this in a
tool called Chemogenomic Explorer that uses networks of ontologically-enabled RDF
statements (e.g. the query compound C is similar to compound D, drug D is active in
assay A, assay A is associated with gene G) along with deductive reasoning tools to
infer relationships between the query compound and genes and diseases, this will
allow us to cluster insights by disease, and then prioritize the output based on the
amount of evidence linking a compound to a disease.
The WENDI web service is used to create an initial set of relational paths in XML.
CE adds to the previously reported capabilities of WENDI through (i) the application
and inference engine and rule set to enable new associations to be inferred; (ii)
clustering and filtering of inferred evidence paths in a completely new interface and
(iii) the application of Semantic Web languages and methods (RDF, SPARQL, OWL)
to enable a much broader range of capabilities including creation and mining of
evidence paths, and the annotation of relationships using the ontology. These new
methods are described below.
WENDI XML includes the direct relationships between similar compounds and
bioassays, similar compounds and literature references, bioassays and genes/diseases,
and so on. The process of importing this information into CE is as follows: 1. Data
preparation as described in section 2.1; 2. Semantic representation using a CE
ontology and presentation in RDF format, described in section 2.2; 3. Rule-based
Inference described in 2.3; and 4. Path ranking based on the number of properties for
each disease described in 2.4.
Data preparation
WENDI aggregates information from diverse data sources and predictive models
including PubChem Compound, PubChem Bioassay, PubChem3D [19],
DrugBank[20], MRTD[21], CTD[4], ChEMBL[3], HuGEpedia[22], KEGG[5], and
Medline[6]. Because not all of these sources have gene/disease terms related, we first
extract the data with gene/disease information, such as PubChem Bioassay, CTD,
ChEMBL, HuGEpedia and Medline. We employed different approaches according to
the different datasets: for CTD, which already has compound-disease relation
information, we extract such relationships directly; but for other data, the links
between compounds and diseases are indirect. There are two ways to mine this
information in the data preparation section. PubChem bioassay as an example, (i)
implementing a SQL function “position” to find gene or disease terms from
Phenopred Matrix[23] occurring in the description of the bioassay, then again based
on the Phenopred Matrix to find associations between gene and disease, finally the
link between bioassay-gene-disease can be established; (ii) using the GO
ontology[24], we performed the same SQL clause to find which GO terms are noted
in the description of bioassay, identified the genes associated with the GO term on the
basis of GO annotation, then used the Phenopred matrix to find which diseases are
linked to these genes. More information about this extraction can be found in our
WENDI paper [18].
We extracted the above information from WENDI XML using XML DOM [25]. All
the information is extracted into 4 groups: Active-Bioassay, CTD, Chembl, and
Literature, which include compound, gene, disease, or bioassay and journal
information.
Data representation
In order to provide a formal description of concepts, terms, and relationships within
the WENDI knowledge domain and to make semantic inference possible, we use the
Web Ontology Language (OWL) to build the CE ontology and the Resource
Description Framework (RDF) in a variety of data interchange formats (e.g.
RDF/XML, N3, Turtle, N-Triples) to present CE data based on the CE ontology.
CE OWL ontology is constrained for using in our system: i.e., it is an ontology
specific to the datasets used in CE and is not a generalized chemogenomic ontology.
Within the ontology we use the following entity classes: Chemical Compound,
BioAssay, Journal Article, Gene, and Disease. These entities can be associated by
relational ontological terms as shown in Table 1. Also the entity and relational terms
can then be combined to express entity-relationship-entity triples, which are suitable
for representation in RDF. Some triple examples are given in Table 2.
Table 1. Examples of Object Properties and Classes for the CE Ontology
Properties Classes Explanation
Chemical Compound, Chemical Compound is similar to
isSimilarTo Chemical Compound
Chemical Compound
Chemical Compound, Chemical is tested active in the
isActiveIn bioassay
PubChem BioAssay
Chemical Compound, Chemical is contained in the article
isContainedIn
Journal Article
Bioassay/Drug/Article has found
the gene term related the
corresponding text;
hasGenes BioAssay/Drug/Journal Article,
Bioassay/Drug/Article has a
reference to the gene
Bioassay/Drug/Article has found
the disease term related the
corresponding text;
hasDisease BioAssay/Drug/Journal Article,
Bioassay/Drug/Article has a
reference to the disease
isAssociatedWith Gene, Disease Gene and disease is associated
Chemical has similarity value
hasSimilarity Chemical Compound, Similarity
based on Tanimoto coefficient.
Table 2. CE triple examples based on CE Ontology
CE Triple Examples
WO:querycmpd WO:isSimilarTo WO:cid24871487.
WO:cid24871487 rdf:type WO:ChemicalCompound;
WO:isActiveIn WO:aid1469.
WO:aid1469 rdf:type WO:BioAssay;
WO:hasGenes WO:COL4A4.
WO:COL4A4 rdf:type WO:Gene;
WO:isAssociatedWith WO:Nephritis.
Figure 2 shows the network of possible relationships representing by above triples
expressed in this system. Classes listed in Table 1 are shown in yellow ovals, like
Journal Article, Chemical Compound, Gene, Disease, Bioassay, instances are in white
ovals, black arrows show direct relationships mined from WENDI, and red arrows
show inferred relationships mined from CE, like “Methysergide-Autistic_Disorder-
HTR1B”, “Methysergide-Lymphoma-CYP1A2” that can be derived from our rule
base.
Figure 2. RDF Network for CE
Inference and the Rule Base
Inference [26], in the context of SWT, is the discovery of new relationships from the
known data modelled as a set of (named) relationships between resources and a set of
rules automatically. In a mathematical sense, querying is a form of inference (being
able to infer some search results from a mass of data, for example) [27]. We make
inference to find new inferred relationships between compound and disease.
Once the CE RDF triples are generated, they are loaded into Ont Model Class [28] in
Jena [29], a Java Semantic Web Platform. We are performing the rule-based reasoner
and forward chaining over RDF graphs. A rule for the rule-based reasoner is defined
by a Java Rule object with a list of body terms (premises), a list of head terms
(conclusions) and an optional name and optional direction. Each term or ClauseEntry
is either a triple pattern, an extended triple pattern or a call to a built-in primitive [29].
Total 8 rules have been defined in the CE system [30], 3 of them with explanations
are listed below:
[Rule 1: (?QueryCompound WO:isSimiliarTo ?CompoundID),
(?CompoundID WO:isActiveIn ?Bioassay),
(?Bioassay WO:isAssociatedWith ?Disease)
-> (?QueryCompound WO:mightHasDisease ?Disease)]
Explanation: A relationship is inferred between a compound and a disease if the query
compound is similar to another compound that is active against a PubChem Bioassay,
and that Bioassay is associated with a disease.
[Rule 2: (?CompoundID WO:isContainedIn ?Journal),
(?Journal WO:hasGene ?Gene),
(?Gene WO:isAssociatedWith ?Disease)
-> (?CompoundID WO:mightHasDisease ?Disease)]
Explanation: A new compound-disease relationship is inferred if there a similar
compound and a gene co-occur in a paper abstract, and the gene and disease co-occur
in another paper abstract.
[Rule 3: (?CompoundID WO:isActiveIn ?Bioassay),
(?Bioassay WO:hasGene ?Gene),
(?Gene WO:isAssociatedWith ?Disease)
-> (?CompoundID WO:mightHasDisease ?Disease)]
Explanation: A new compound-disease relationship is inferred if a similar compound
is active against a bioassay, the bioassay is associated with a gene, and the gene co-
occurs in a paper abstract with the disease.
We selected Methysergide [31] as an example query compound for the following
steps. Methysergide is chemically similar to LSD [32], and it antagonizes the effects
of serotonin in blood vessels and gastrointestinal smooth muscle, but has few of the
properties of other ergot alkaloids.
Table 3 shows three RDF statements of Methysergide taken from CE RDF network.
Based on that, we got inferred evidence paths by using above rules. Each statement
along with explanation can be found in this Table 3.
Table 3. CE RDF statement examples
RDF Statements Explanation
wo:ctdcid9681 rdf:type wo:ChemicalCompound. A Methysergide-
wo:querycmpd wo:isSimilarTo wo:ctdcid9681; Autistic Disorder
wo:hasSimilarity "1.000". relationship is
wo:ctdcid9681 wo:hasName "Methysergide". inferred via rule 2
wo:HTR1B rdf:type wo:Gene; (gene HTR1B).
wo:isrelatedTo wo:cid9681; The similar
wo:isInferredFrom "pubmedid8743744". compound (cid =
wo:Autistic_Disorder rdf:type wo:Disease; 9681) is
wo:isAssociatedWith wo:HTR1B; Methysergide itself
wo:isInferredFrom "pubmedid19038234". with similarity = 1,
it co-occurs with
gene HTR1B in a
same paper
(pubmed id =
8743744), and
Autistic_Disorder
are co-occurring in
another same paper
(pubmed id =
19038234). Then
we use rule 2 to
establish such
relations;
wo:ctdcid11865408 rdf:type wo:ChemicalCompound. A Methysergide-
wo:querycmpd wo:isSimilarTo wo:ctdcid11865408; Autistic Disorder
wo:hasSimilarity "0.774". relationship is also
wo:ctdcid11865408 wo:hasName "Metergoline". inferred via rule 2
wo:HTR1B rdf:type wo:Gene; (again via
wo:isrelatedTo wo:cid11865408; HTR1B). Although
wo:isInferredFrom "pubmedid1330643". this is the same
wo:Autistic_Disorder rdf:type wo:Disease; relationship, a
wo:isAssociatedWith wo:HTR1B; different evidence
wo:isInferredFrom "pubmedid19038234". path considered
(we will do path
ranking on these
evidence paths
wo:cid5486180 rdf:type wo:ChemicalCompound. A Methysergide-
wo:querycmpd wo:isSimilarTo wo:cid5486180; Lymphoma
wo:hasSimilarity "0.929". relationship is
wo:cid5486180 wo:isActiveIn wo:aid410. inferred by rule1
wo:aid410 rdf:type wo:BioAssay; (via CYP1A2).
wo:hasName "p450-cyp1a2".
wo:CYP1A2 rdf:type wo:Gene.
wo:aid410 wo:hasGene wo:CYP1A2.
wo:CYP1A2 wo:isAssociatedWith wo:Lymphoma.
wo:Lymphoma rdf:type wo:Disease.
Methysergide as the query compound, we got a total of 63 evidence paths with
different diseases, genes, and journal information. Individual evidence paths can be
examined to get to the root data or publications that constitute them. For instance, the
Autism link is demonstrated is interesting as the publications identify the link of the
compound with HTR1B and the link of HTR1B with Autism. LSD is known to affect
the outcome of Autism [33, 34] and thus Methysergide is a reasonable candidate for
investigation.
Browsing RDF is clearly difficult, we have thus built an interface that allows the
results to be examined and filtered in a user-friendly fashion, more details about the
interface shows in the next section. Specifically, evidence paths are clustered by
disease, and can be filtered via disease, compounds, assays, genes, gene families, or
journal titles. Part of the results for Methysergide are shown in Figure 3, using
“Autistic_Disorder” as the filter, two similar compounds including Methysergide
itself are related “Autistic_Disorder” with HTRB1 and a journal article. The results
with AID “410” as the filter are shown in Figure 4. Total 20 entries associating with
different similar compounds/diseases/genes/references are related the PubChem
Bioassay (AID = 410).
Figure 3. Results related to “Autistic_Disorder” for Methysergide shown in the
CE Faced Browser by using Disease filter
Figure 4. Results related to AID “410” for Methysergide shown in the CE Faced
Browser by using AID filter
Path Ranking
The above process results in often many evidence paths linking compounds and
diseases. With a large number of results, we need some way to organize and prioritize
these evidence paths. We cluster all the paths based on the different disease terms and
then rank the clusters based on the number of evidence paths linking them. Whilst
evidence paths are not necessarily fully independent, they do constitute different
collections of evidence for the same relationship, and thus strengthen the chances of
the relationship being significant.
We employ the following SPARQL query clause to implement this ranking process
based on the inferred RDF. It counts the number of properties (?pc) related to each
disease first, and then return disease terms (?dis) as descend order on the basis of
(?pc).
Select ?dis (count(?p) as ?pc)
WHERE {?dis a wo:Disease; ?p ?o}
GROUP BY ?dis ORDER BY DESC(?pc)
Results and discussion
The architecture for CE is shown in Figure 5. CE does data retrieval, data process, and
data visualization. When query compound submitted to “Data Controller”, a servlet
communicating with client and server, Data Controller sends the request to WENDI
web service, after that, WENDI XML will be passed to “RDF Model Builder”, which
handles: CE ontology generation, RDF converting, RDF inference, and path ranking.
Ranked paths will be sent back to Data Controller to convert to RDF based JSON file
for visualization by using the Faceted Browser. SPARQL query builder, is an
additional CE user platform to make customized SPARQL queries based on CE RDF
sent back from Data Controller.
Figure 5. CE Architecture and Path Ranking Flowchart
Faceted Browser for CE
CE provides a main web interface, shown in Figure 6. In the Figure, Methysergide is
drawn using the JME molecular editor, and its SMILES is transferred to the input box.
And the results will be displayed in the Faceted Browser based on an existing tool[35]
and allowing multiple filters to be applied.
Figure 6. CE main Web Interface
SPARQL Query Builder for CE
After XML to RDF conversion, CE has RDF triples based on CE ontology. We
therefore saw the utility of allowing the direct querying of this RDF data. Since
SPARQL is a complex language, we implemented a SPARQL Query Builder to semi-
automate this process. The SPARQL query builder for CE is built based on the
Sesame triple store [36]. The interface is shown in Figure 7. Starting with a class, the
user can add data and object properties associated with it through prompted drop-
down boxes. Step by step, the SPARQL query builder provides an intuitive way to
translate user question into graph pattern, and then encode it into a SPARQL query.
As an example, given the relationship of Methysergide [31] with HTR1B, LSD and
Autism discussed, so we can explore the relationship of similar compounds with the
serotonin 5-HT1B receptor (the LSD receptor) with a SPARQL query. We make the
SPARQL query in the builder with the following 2 steps to get journal papers
including information about “5-HT” receptor:
1) Find similar compounds to Methysergide from the literatures,
Subject: wo:ChemicalCompound
Predict: wo:isContainedIn
Object: wo:journalArticle
2) The titles of the papers should include “5-HT”,
Subject: wo: journalArticle
Predict: wo:hasTitle
Object: “5-HT”
The implementation of this query is shown in Figure 7, and the list of journal titles
including “5-HT” is shown in the result page of SPARQL Query Builder, in Table 4.
Figure 7. Main Web Interface of CE SPARQL Query Builder
Table 4. List of Journal Titles including “5-HT” receptor
Journal Titles
First Pharmacophoric Hypothesis for 5-HT7 Antagonism
Novel, Potent, and Selective 5-HT3 Receptor Antagonists Based on the
Arylpiperazine Skeleton: Synthesis, Structure, Biological Activity, and
Comparative Molecular Field Analysis Studies
Synthesis of 2-Piperazinylbenzothiazole and 2-Piperazinylbenzoxazole Derivatives
with 5-HT3 Antagonist and 5-HT4 Agonist Properties
Novel and Highly Potent 5-HT3 Receptor Agonists Based on a Pyrroloquinoxaline
Identification of potential gene targets and diseases for Clozapine
In order to validate CE, we tested it with well-known drugs as queries, to see how the
ordering of the clusters of evidence paths related to known uses and side-effects for
these drugs. For example Clozapine [37] has been shown to have superior efficacy
when compared to olanzapine [38] in the treatment of schizophrenia [39]. Some
known side effects of Clozapine, are cardiomyopathy (deterioration of the function of
the myocardium), and cardiac hypertrophy. For this drug, CE indeed predominately
returns compound-disease paths that relate to schizophrenia (i.e. schizophrenia has
more evidence paths than any other disease). It also identifies side effects of the drug
correctly as hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, and cardiovascular system disease, both of
which are supported by the literature [40, 41]. This is shown in Figure 8.
Figure 8. CE results for Clozapine
Exploring newly submitted compounds from PubChem
Pubchem is a popular public database of chemical compounds and their activities
against biological assays. Since CE is designed for use with “new” compounds as
queries (i.e. compounds for which there is not a lot of data available), we chose a set
of very recently-added compounds in PubChem which had no or little associated
bioactivity information recorded. This was done using a constrained search in
PubChem [42] to return compounds submitted only in 2011.
For example, as shown in Figure 9, the compound with CID 49835692 [43] has no
associated bioactivity data recorded. However, through its analysis of similar
structures, some significant potential bioactivities and disease associations are
suggested by CE.
Figure 9. More Chemogenomic information for New Compound from PubChem
We were using RDF network to make inference between compounds and diseases. As
the experiments discussed before, not only the most related diseases could be sorted
out, but also general guideline will be generated to conduct new compounds analysis.
The power of the methodology has been clearly demonstrated to retrieve pertinent
information in particular domain without any difficulties engendering by the data
tsunami. In addition, it expands the possible usages/linkages within the limited
volumes of disease information regarding to a specific compound.
Conclusions
We present a new approach to the association search of chemical compounds and
diseases using semantic inference in this work. Semantic inference produces evidence
paths relating compounds and diseases via genes, publication, bioassays and drugs.
We previously released an aggregative data-mining tool, WENDI, for drug discovery
using aggregate web services. In this paper, we have shown how the application of
Semantic Web methods (RDF, SPARQL and OWL ontologies) along with rule-based
inference, path ranking and a faceted browse, can produce a tool for exploring new
compound-disease associations based on evidence paths from WENDI.
Future work
The current version of CE explores the chemogenomic information of chemical
compounds. In the future, we will consider more efficient ways to mine compound-
gene, compound-disease links from more chemogenomic data, and plan to aggregate
additional data and inference rules, also increase collaboration with Chem2Bio2RDF
in order to enable CE to link with more diverse data. We also intend to expand
beyond Chem2Bio2RDF to chemical biology, where we can consider other relations
like chemical-gene, chemical-pathway, chemical-side effect, etc. In addition, we
would like to add the functionality to process batches of molecules. For this case, we
will consider the issues of information summarization and visualization, i.e. how to
organize more data in a readable way. Because of the increased volume of data and
results, some current algorithms will become out of date. We will also take other
ranking algorithms into account such as evidence importance.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Authors' contributions
ZQ carried out the majority of the implementation of Chemogenoic Explorer. SYY
and ZQ worked on the exploring tools. ZQ and SC worked on the semantic inference.
DJW and DY assembled this paper from a previous white paper written by ZQ. All
contributed to the intellectual evolution of this project. All authors have read and
approved the final manuscript.
Acknowledgements
This project is supported by Eli Lilly and Company. We thank Bret Davidson for
correcting English. We would like to thank the anonymous reviewers for their helpful
comments and suggestions.