1v2167.9041:viXra
Semi-supervised Classification for
Natural Language Processing
Rushdi Shams
Department of Computer Science, University of Western Ontario,
London, ON N6A 5B7, Canada.
email: rshams@csd.uwo.ca.
Abstract—Semi-supervised classification isan interestingidea machine learning methods, semi-supervised learning can be
where classification models are learned from both labeled and used to solve classification, regression, and clustering prob-
unlabeled data. It has several advantages over supervised clas- lems. The particular focus of this study, however, is on semi-
sification in natural language processing domain. For instance, supervisedclassification.Inthisstudy,popularresearchpapers
supervised classification exploits only labeled data that are ex-
and classic books are explored to outline the possibilities and
pensive,oftendifficulttoget,inadequateinquantity,andrequire
achievementsof semi-supervisedclassification fornaturallan-
human experts for annotation. On the other hand, unlabeled
guage processing.As well, thoroughinvestigationsare carried
data are inexpensive and abundant. Despite the fact that many
out, both from theoretical and empirical data, to explain the
factorslimitthewide-spreaduseofsemi-supervisedclassification,
ithasbecomepopularsinceitslevelofperformanceisempirically complexity and limitations of this method. Natural language
as good as supervised classification. This study explores the processing is one of the largest research areas of artificial
possibilities and achievements as well as complexity and limita- intelligence. The scope of this study is, however, limited to
tions of semi-supervised classification for several natural langue most popular tasks such as parsing, biomedical information
processingtaskslikeparsing,biomedicalinformationprocessing, processing, text classification, and summarization.
text classification, and summarization.
The organization of the paper is as follows. Section II
Keywords:Semi-supervisedlearning,classification,natural
presentsanoverviewofsemi-supervisedlearningthatincludes
language processing, data mining.
learning problems, and different types of semi-supervised
algorithmsand learningtechniques.Followingthat Section III
I. INTRODUCTION outlines the use of semi-supervised classification for different
natural language processing tasks. In Section IV, several
Classical supervised methods use labeled data to train
considerations and conclusions are drawn.
their classifier models. These methods are widespread and
used in many different domains including natural language
processing.Thekeymaterialusedindifferentnaturallanguage II. OVERVIEWOF SEMI-SUPERVISED LEARNING
processing tasks is text. The number of text, however, is
Unlike supervised and unsupervised learning, semi-
increasing everyday due to the pervasive use of computing.
supervised learning exploits both labeled and unlabeled data.
Thereare moreunlabeledthanlabeledtextsince data labeling
To start with, semi-supervised methods train models with a
is expensivedue to engagementofhumanfor data annotation.
very little labeled data. Surprisingly, test results show that
Theprocessalsoconsumestime.Thesedifficultieshaveserious
marginal labeled data are sufficient to train models with good
effects on supervised learning since a good fit of a classifier
fit for semi-supervisedlearning[3]. The generatedmodels are
modelrequiresasmuchlabeleddataaspossibleforitstraining
then applied on unlabeled data in an attempt to label them.
[1].
The confidence of the models in labeling them is measured
Semi-supervisedlearningcanbeagoodmeanstoovercome against a confidencethreshold set a priori by users. Note that
the aforementioned problems. The basic principle of semi-
supervised learning is simple: use both unlabeled and labeled
datatogenerateclassifiermodels.Thismakessemi-supervised
learning substantially useful for a domain like natural lan-
guage processing because of a good note, unlabeled text is
inexpensive, abundant, and more available than labeled text.
In addition, empirically, semi-supervised models have good
performance records. On many tasks, they are as good as
supervised models and in most cases, they are better than
cluster-based, unsupervised models [2]. However, many of
these results are not conclusive and proper care therefore
shouldbe taken due to some seriousconcernsrelated to semi-
supervised learning.
Fig. 1: The overview of semi-supervised learning. The figure
This study explores the use of semi-supervised learning also outlines the scope of transductive and inductive learning.
for natural language processing. Interestingly, like traditional
(a)Superviseddecision boundaries forlabeled data. (b) Supervised and semi-supervised decision boundaries for
labeled andunlabeled data.
Fig.2:Supervisedandsemi-superviseddecisionboundariesdrawnbya randomclassifier fortwolabeledand100unlabeleddata
[2]. In 2a, the supervised decision boundary is in the middle by averaging the values of the data points. In 2b, the supervised
decision boundary produces more classification errors due to the distribution of the data.
learning algorithmsoften have their own confidencemeasures distribution while the green dots near to the blue circle form
thatgenerallydependontheirworkingprinciples.Forinstance, a differentone. Interestingly,semi-supervisedlearning fails in
class probability values for each data instance are considered many intriguing cases, where the distributions of labeled and
as confidence measures for Na¨ıve Bayes models [4]. For an unlabeled data are not as distinguishable as seen in Figure 2.
unlabeled data, if the models reach the pre-set confidence
threshold,thenthenewlylabeleddataareaddedtothepoolof C. Types of Algorithms
originally labeled data. This process continues unless (i) the
There are several semi-supervised algorithms and most
models’confidencesforthelabelsstopreachingthethreshold,
of them can be categorized into two groups based on their
or (ii) the models confidently label all the unlabeled data and
properties: (i) generative algorithms and (ii) discriminative
there are no unlabeled data remaining in the dataset. The
algorithms. The models generated by these two types of
interestingcycleoflabelingandre-labelingofsemi-supervised
algorithms are therefore called generative and discriminative
learning is illustrated in Figure 1.
models, respectively. The following can explain the key dif-
ference between the two types of models. Say, we are given
A. Learning Problems
a set of speeches given by human presenters. As well, a set
Semi-supervised learning problems can be broadly cat- of languages are provided. The task is to simply classify
egorized into two groups: (i) transductive learning and (ii) everyspeechintooneof thelanguages.Thislearningproblem
inductive learning. Transductive learning is like a take-home can be solved in either of the following two ways: first, the
exam. Thisgroupof semi-supervisedlearningtriesto evaluate learner learns each language and then attempts to classify
the goodness of a model assumption on unlabeled data after the speeches according to its learning. Second, the learner
training a classifier with the available labeled data. Inductive learnsthedifferencesamongthespeechesaccordingtovarious
learning, on the contrary, is often seen as an in-class exam— attributes or features present in them and then attempts to
it evaluates the goodness of a model assumption on unseen, classify the speeches according to its learning. Note that
unlabeled test data after training a classifier with both labeled for the second case, the learner does not need to learn all
and unlabeled data. Figure 1 shows the boundaries between the languages. The prior is called a generative learner and
these two types of semi-supervised learning. While the entire the latter is known as a discriminative learner. Let us take
cycle in the figure illustrates inductive learning, steps 1—3 a look into these two types of algorithms mathematically.
describe transductive learning. Say, we are given a set of instances x and their classes y
in the form of (x,y): (1,0),(1,0),(2,0),(2,1). Generative
algorithms attempt to find out the joint probability, p(x,y)
B. Working Principle
Figure2canbereferredtounderstandhowsemi-supervised
learningworkswithaveryfewlabeledbutabundantunlabeled
data. Figure 2a shows that based on the position of a positive
(x = 1) and a negative (x = −1) labeled data, a supervised
decisionboundaryisdrawnrightatx=0basedontheaverage
ofthe datapoints.However,givenonlythese two labeleddata
and 100 unlabeled data (represented by green dots in Figure
2b), this supervised decision boundary still remains at x=0. (a) Joint probability calculated (b) Conditional probability cal-
bygenerative algorithms culated by discriminative algo-
In contrast, had a semi-supervised classifier been used, the
rithms.
boundarywouldhaveshiftedmoretotheright(saysomepoint
at x = 0.4) than the supervised decision boundary. This shift Fig.3:Probabilitydistributionofthedataasseenbygenerative
is due to the distribution of unlabeled data points considering anddiscriminativealgorithms.Generativealgorithmscalculate
the position of the positive and negative examples. In this the joint probability distribution of the data while discrimina-
particularcase, the semi-supervisedclassifier assumesthatthe tive algorithms deal with their conditional probability.
green dots near to the red cross point form one kind of data
fromthesedata(seeFigure3a)whilediscriminativealgorithms 1)Self-training: In self-training, from a set of initially
calculate their conditional probability, p(x|y) (Figure 3b). labeled data L, a classifier, C1 is generated. This classifier is
Now,forsupervisedalgorithmsadiscriminativemodelpredicts thenappliedonasetofinitiallyunlabeleddataU.Accordingto
the label y from training example x as follows: a pre-set confidence threshold, the classifications of unlabeled
data are observed. If the classifier’s confidence reaches the
f(x)=argmaxp(y|x). (1) threshold,thenewlyclassifiedinstancesareconcatenatedwith
LtoproduceasetL andremovedfromU toproduceU .
However, from the Baye’s theorem, we know that
A secondclassifier,C2 isgeneratedfromL
,andthereafter
applied on U . This cycle continues until the classifier
p(x|y)p(y) converges—whichmeans that either (a) all the unlabeled data
p(y|x)= . (2) are confidently labeled by the classifier or (b) the classifier’s
confidence stops reaching the threshold for several cycles.
Self-training is very simple and particularly useful if the
However,forEquation1,p(x)canbeignoredsinceitfinds supervised algorithm is difficult to modify. Nonetheless, self-
the function, f(x) for the maximum value of y. Therefore, trainingperformspoorlyfordatasetsthatcontainlargenumber
ignoring p(x) in Equation 2 gives us of outliers.
2)Co-training: In contrastto self-training,forco-training,
f(x)=argmaxp(x|y)p(y). (3) two partitionsL1 andL2 are createdfromthe initiallylabeled
data L. The partitions are based on two different sets of
attributes or features V1 and V2 (in semi-supervised literature,
Interestingly, Equation 3 is what supervised, generative
they are often referred to as views). Then, two classifiers
algorithms use to induce their models. In other words, for
independentlygeneratesrespectivemodelsF1 andF2 fromL1
supervised algorithms, Equation 1 is used to find out class
and L2 using V1 and V2. Following that, from the unlabeled
boundariesbased on the given training instances x and Equa-
data pool U, k most confident predictions of F1 are added to
tion 3 is used to generate x for any given y. The latter,
L2 and k most confident predictions of F2 are added to L1.
however,isnotfoundaseasilyforsemi-supervisedalgorithms
These added examples are removed from U. F1 is re-trained
as for supervised algorithms. The first and foremost reason
withL1andF2isre-trainedwithL2.Thiscyclecontinuesuntil
for this is that in semi-supervised problems, the algorithms
the classifiers converge. Finally, using a voting or averaging
cannotcompletelyignorep(x)becausemostofwhatithasare
method, test data are classified. Note that co-training can be
the distributions of training examples (i.e., p(x)). Moreover,
seen as self-training with two or more classifiers. Co-training
for semi-supervised algorithms, a very few class labels are
is very useful if the attributes or features naturally split into
provided (for training examples) and therefore from the few
two distinguishable sets. However, there are two important
given y’s, the conditional probabilities, p(x|y) are difficult to
conditions that should be met for co-training to work. Given
generate. This is a key difference between supervised and
enough labeled data,
semi-supervised algorithms. An example is provided to un-
derstandthedifferencebetter.Forsemi-supervisedalgorithms,
1) each view alone should be sufficient to make good
Equation 1 can be substituted by
classifications and
2) theco-trainedalgorithmsshouldindividuallyperform
y′ 3)Active Learning: Finally, for active learning a model is
wherey′denotestheclassesofthefewgiventrainingexamples generatedfromlabeleddataandattemptstoclassifyunlabeled
instances. The classification it makes is then provided to a
x. Equation 4 has a probability density function p(x|y) in its
humanexpertcalledtheoracleforherjudgment.Thecorrectly
numerator.Ifthedistributionofxcomesfroma Gaussianand
labeledinstancesaccordingto the oraclearethenaddedto the
it is a function of mean vector and covariance matrix of the
pool of labeled data while the instances with incorrect labels
Gaussian, then using a Maximum Likelihood Estimate, the
remainintheunlabeleddatapool.Thisprocesscontinuesuntil
mean vector and covariance matrix can be tuned to maximize
theunlabeleddatapoolbecomesempty.Activelearningisvery
the density function. Thereafter, this tuning can be optimized
useful for limited available data (both labeled and unlabeled).
using an Expectation-Maximization(EM) algorithm. Note that
Because of the presence of an oracle, this semi-supervised
according to the distribution of x, different algorithms use
learning is slow and almost always expensive.
different techniques for tuning and optimizing the density
function p(x|y) in Equation 4. Among the semi-supervised
algorithms,TransductiveSupportVectorMachine(TSVM)and
III. SEMI-SUPERVISEDCLASSIFICATION FORNATURAL
graph-based methods are generative algorithms while EM and
LANGUAGE PROCESSING
self-learning are discriminative algorithms.
In this section, different natural language processing ap-
plications of semi-supervised classification are discussed. The
D. Types of Learning
discussionismainlybasedonthefindingsfromseveralclassic
The semi-supervised learning can be broadly categorized and state-of-the-artliterature from the domain of parsing, text
into three: (i) self-training, (ii) co-training, and (iii) active classification, textsummarization,and biomedicalinformation
learning. mining.
A. Parsing semi-supervised filters work better when source of available
labeled examples differs from those to be classified. Interest-
Steedman et al. [5] found that self-training has very small
ingly, Mojdeh and Cormack [11] found completely different
effects on parser improvements. Similar results are reported
results when they re-designed the challenge with different
by Clark et al. [6] who applied self-training to part-of-speech
collections of email datasets.
(POS) tagging. The only works that reported successful ex-
ecution of self-training to improve parsers are very few [7]
[8]. This paper concentrates on the work of McClosky et al. The 2006 ECML/PKDD discovery challenge had two in-
because they do not adapt the parser in use that because teresting tasks. The first task is called the Delayed Feedback
adaptation has some drastic effects on self-training. Rather where the filters are trained with emails T1 and then they
than using an adaptive parser, the Charniak parser used in classify some test emails t1. In their second cycle of training,
their research utilized both labeled and unlabeled data that they are trained with T1 and t1 combined and the training
come from the same source domain. Using of a re-ranker continues for the entire dataset for the challenge. The best
besides the parser is also what makes their work different (1−AUC) reported in the challenge is a remarkable 0.01%.
than many contemporary work. The parser uses third order The second task for the challenge is called the Cross-user
Markov grammar and five probability distributions that are Train where the classifiers are trained on one particular set of
conditioned with more than five linguistic attributes. Firstly, emails andthen tested on a completelydifferentset of emails.
the parser produces 50-best parses for the sentences in the Thebest(1−AUC)reportedforthistaskisgreaterthanthefirst
datasets. Secondly, a maximum entropy re-ranker with over task:0.1%.Thebestperformingfiltersinthechallengewereall
a million attributes re-ranks these parses. The experiment is semi-supervised filters and based on support vector machines
extensive: datasets used in this experiment are Penn treebank SVM and TSVM [12], Dynamic Markov Compression (DMC)
section 2−21 for training (approximately 40,000 wall street [13], and Logistic regression with self-training (LR) [14]. On
journalarticles),section23fortesting,andsection24forheld- theotherhand,in2007TRECSpamTrackChallenge[15],the
outdata. 24million LA Times articleswere usedas unlabelled participating spam filters were trained with publicly available
data collected from the North American News Text Corpus emailsandtheirmodelaccuracywastestedonemailscollected
(NANC). The authors experiment with and without the re- from user inboxes (i.e., personalized emails). In an attempt
rankerastheyaddedunlabelledsentencestotheirlabeleddata to see whether semi-supervised filters perform as good as it
pool. They found that the parser performs better with the re- was reported in [10], Mojdeh and Cormack [11] reproduced
ranker system. The improvement reported is about 1.1% F- the workby replacingthe datasets of ECML/PKDD challenge
score—among which the self-trained parser contributes 0.8% with TREC challenge datasets. The delayed feedback task
and the re-ranker contributes 0.3%). The authors also did was reproduced as follows: first, 10,000 messages were used
some experiments with sentences in section 1, 22, and 24 for training and the next 60,000 messages were divided into
to see how the self-trained parser performs at sentence level. six batches each containing 10,000 messages. Second, the
Each sentence in these sections was labelled as better, no remaining 5,000 messages were kept for testing the models.
change or worse compared to the baseline F-score for the On the other hand, to reproduce the Cross-user Train task,
sentences. Interestingly, the outcomes showed that the parser 30,338 messages from particular user inboxes were used for
had improvement neither for unknown words nor for prepo- training while 45,081 messages from other users were used
sitional phrases. However, there was an explicit improvement for model evaluation.
for intermediate-length sentences but no improvement for the
extremes (Goldilocks effect). The parser performs poorly for The experimental outcomes showed that for both the
conjunctions. tasks, the semi-supervised versions of DMC, LR, and TSVM
underperformed for LREC dataset. Their respective 1−AUC
Zhu [9], however, asserted that in semi-supervised classi-
scores for the delayed feedback task were 0.090, 0.046, and
fication, unlabeled sentences for which the parser accuracy is
0.230. On the other hand, the 1−AUC of their supervised
unusuallybetterthannormalshouldberestrictedtobeincluded
versions were 0.016, 0.049, and 0.030 for the task. For the
in the pool of labeled data. McClosky et al. [7], however,
cross-user task, the 1−AUC of the semi-supervised DMC, LR,
statedthattheydidnotfollowedthisapproachparticularly.The
and TSVM filters were 9.97, 10.72, and 24.3, respectively.
speed of the semi-supervised Charniak parser is similar to its
For the same task, their supervised versions performed way
supervisedversionbutitrequiresmorememorytoexecutethe
better. The authors also reported a cross-corpus experiment
cyclesinvolvedinself-training.Also,thelabeledandunlabeled
to reproduce the results of ECML/PKDD Challenge. Here,
data were collected from two differentdatasets (althoughthey
the first 10,000 messages from the TREC 2005 dataset were
are both newspaper sources) that usually limits the success of
considered. Besides, the TREC 2007 dataset was split into
self-training.Nevertheless,theexperimentisasuccessandthis
10,000 message segments. The outcomes again showed that
question is unanswered in their paper.
self-training is harmful for the filters. Except the TSVM filter,
the rest of the two semi-supervisedfilters failed to performas
B. Text Classification good as their supervised versions.
Semi-supervised classification has been used widely in
natural language processing tasks such as spam classification, Keeping the aforementioned results in mind, we can say
which is a form of text classification. The results in 2006 that semi-supervised classification is applicable to text clas-
ECML/PKDD spam discovery challenge [10] indicated that sification but the performance depends on the labeled and
spam filters based on semi-supervised classification outper- unlabeled training data, and the source from which the data
formed supervised filters. Extensive experiments showed that are derived.
C. Extractive Text Summarization the brief descriptions of their method. The authors produced
dependency trees for each sentence from two given datasets.
Wong et al. [16] have conducted a comparative study
The paths between two protein names in the parse trees were
where they produced extractive summaries by using both
then analyzed. According to these paths, the sentences were
supervised and semi-supervised classifiers. The authors used
labeled and treated as the gold standard for the tool’s eval-
fourtraditionalgroupsofattributestotraintheirclassifiers:(1)
uation. Given the paths, two distance-based measures, cosine
surface(2)relevance(3)event,and(4)contentattributes.They
similarity and edit distance, were used by their tool to find
trieddifferentcombinationsoftheattributesandfoundthatthe
out interactions between the proteins. These measures were
classifiers had produced better summaries when the surface,
providedtobothsupervisedandsemi-supervisedalgorithmsto
relevance, and content attributes were combined. The novelty
generate models to classify the sentences in the datasets. The
of their work is that they used supervised SVM as well as labels predictedby the supervised and semi-supervisedclassi-
its semi-supervised version called probabilistic SVM or PSVM fiers werethen evaluatedagainstthe goldstandard.According
to generate classifiers and compared their performances. As
to the outcomes, the semi-supervised classifiers performed
performancemeasuretheyconsideredROUGEscoresandfound
better than their supervised versions by a wide margin. Four
that the ROUGE-I score of their SVM classifier is 0.396 while algorithms were used to generate the classifiers among which
the human ROUGE-I was 0.42 when compared to the gold
two are supervised (SVM and K-Nearest Neighbor (KNN))
standard summaries. On the other hand, the co-training with
and the rest were their respective semi-supervised versions
the PSVM and Na¨ıve Bayes classifiers produced summaries (TSVMandHarmonicFunctions).Thedistance-basedmeasures
thathave ROUGE-I of0.366.Althoughthisperformanceis not
were used to generate attributes for the classifiers and were
betterthanwhattheyfoundwiththesupervisedSVMorhuman
extracted from two datasets named AIMED and Christine-
summaries, it was better than supervised PSVM and Na¨ıve Brun (CB). The AIMED dataset contains 4,026 sentences of
Bayes classifiers. Note that as their datasets, the authors used
which951describeproteininteractionswhiletheCBdatasetis
the DUC 2001 dataset1. The dataset contains 30 clusters of composedof4,056sentencesofwhich2,202describeprotein
relevantdocuments.Eachclustercomeswithmodelsummaries
interactions. Each of the four algorithms then generated a
created by the dataset annotators. 50, 100, 200, and 400-word
classifier from the two sets of attributes found from the two
summaries are provided for each cluster. Among the clusters,
distance measures. Experimental outcomes show that for the
25are used astrainingdata while theremaining5clustersare
AIMED dataset, TSVM with editdistanceattributesperformed
used fortesting. The authorsalso concludedthatthe ROUGE-I
the best with 59.96% F-score. This F-score was significantly
scores of their classifier are better if they produce 400-word
better than the F-scoresfoundusingthe supervisedclassifiers.
summaries for the test clusters.
Comparisons showed that the F-score with TSVM was signif-
Nevertheless, the reported methodology of the paper has icantly better than those reported by two contemporary work
some serious drawbacks. Many of the methods used in this [18] [21]. On the other hand, the tool performed even better
research are not in line with what had been found by classic on theCB datasetwhereits TSVM classifier with editdistance
empirical studies. For instance, the co-training is done on the based attributes produced an F-score of 85.20%. Similar to
sameattributespacethatviolatestheprimaryhypothesisofco- the result found with the AIMED dataset, the performances
training:twoclassifiersusedinco-trainingshoulduseseparate of the supervised classifiers were notsatisfactory.The authors
views (see Section II-D2). Secondly, the authors selected the also examined the effect of the size of the labeled training
set of attributes (surface, relevance, and content attributes) by data for the classifiers. In the case of AIMED, the authors
only considering the performance of PSVM with them and found that with small labeled training data, semi-supervised
ignoring the performance of the supervised Na¨ıve Bayes with algorithms were better. In addition, SVM performed poorly
them. withlesstrainingdatabutasmoredatabecameavailableforits
training, it started to perform well. On the other hand, for the
CB dataset, KNN performed poorly with much labeled data.
D. Biomedical Information Mining
Interestingly, SVM performed competitively with the semi-
Now-a-days,thereismuchimpetusforinformationmining supervised classifiers with more labeled data.
from biomedical research papers. Researchers put significant
Note that TSVM is susceptible to the distribution of the
effort to mine secondary information such as protein in-
labeled data. However,the work did notreportanytest on the
teraction relations from biomedical research papers to help
data distribution. The AIMED dataset, in addition, has class
identify primary information like DNA replication, genotype-
imbalance problem that seriously affects the performance of
phenotype relations, and signaling pathways. The first and
TSVMclassifiers.Thiscanbeseenasthelimitationofthework
foremost task for protein interaction relation miners is to
since it did not explain why in their case the TSVM classifier
classifysentencesinresearchpapersthatdescribeoneormore
performed better than the rest.
protein interactions. These sentences are called the candidate
sentences. A number of supervised tools are developed to
IV. CONCLUSIONS
classify candidate sentences from biomedical articles (see
for example [17], [18], and [19]). However, the first semi- Thefindingsofempiricalresearchonparsing,textclassifi-
supervised approach for the task was reported by Erkan et al. cation,textsummarizationandbiomedicalinformationmining
[20]. Theirapproachidentified candidatesentencesusingsim- are investigated in this study. According to most of them,
ilaritiesofthe pathspresentbetweentwo proteinnamesfound semi-supervised classification has substantial advantages over
fromthedependencyparsesofthesentences.Whatfollowsare supervised classification when labeled data are difficult to
manage and unlabeled data are abundant. This paper also
rithms must match the problem in hand. For in-
stance, if the classes produce well-clustered data
then expectation-maximization is a good algorithm
to choose; if the attribute space can be naturally
split into two sets then co-training is preferred; if
two points with similar attribute values tend to be
in the same class then graph-based method (not
discussed in this paper) can be a reasonable choice;
if SVM performswellonlabeleddatathen TSVM isa
naturalextension;andgiventhesupervisedalgorithm
iscomplicatedanddifficulttomodify,self-trainingis
useful.
2) The distributions of both labeled and unlabeled data
need to be investigated. TSVM, for instance, per-
forms poorly with unlabeled data that have highly
overlapped positive and negative distribution since it
assumes that its decision boundary would go right
through the densest region. Therefore, in this case
a TSVM classifier usually produces a lot of false
positives and false negatives.
3) The proportion of labeled and unlabeled data is
Fig. 4: The use of labeled and unlabeled data in semi- important to notice before choosing an algorithm.
supervised classification. A dot represents a paper that uses However, there is not conclusive remark on how the
semi-supervised classification. Light gray dots mean older proportion affects the overall classification perfor-
papers while dark gray dots mean newer papers [9]. mance.
4) It has been found empirically that there is an effect
of dependency among attributes on semi-supervised
classification.Tobemorespecific,withfewerlabeled
classification. Accordingto the theories, there is no free lunch
examples, the number of dependentattributes should
forsemi-supervisedclassificationratheritssuccessdependson
be kept as low as possible.
underlying data distribution, data complexity, model assump-
5) Datanoisesshouldbeinvestigatedastheyhaveeffect
tion,choiceofproperalgorithm,probleminhand,andmostof
on classification performance. It is easier to detect
all—experience. Surprisingly, the investigation has found that
noiseinthe labeleddatathanin unlabeleddata.Note
the classic studies often do not consider the do’s and don’ts
that data noise has less effect on semi-supervised
suggested by the theories. Despite the success reported in the
classification than supervised classification.
empirical studies, it is therefore inconclusive whether semi-
6) Thelabeledandunlabeleddata,usually,arecollected
supervised classification can be really as useful as supervised
fromdifferentsourcesandthiscanaffecttheclassifi-
classification.
cationperformance.Ifthelabeledandunlabeleddata
The complexity associated with semi-supervised classifi- are collected from completely different sources and
cation limits its use. This can be seen from the illustration their properties differ, then rather than using semi-
in Figure 4. It shows the use of labeled and unlabeled data supervised classification, transfer learning and self-
in semi-supervised classification. Each dot in the illustration taught classification are encouraged to use [22].
represents a paper that uses semi-supervised classification.
While thelightgraydotsrepresentolderpapers,the darkgray
dotsrepresentrecentpapers. We can come to two conclusions