]EP.oib-q[
1v2020.7031:viXra
Sensitivity Analysis in a Dengue Epidemiological Model∗
Helena Sofia Rodrigues1,2,3 M. Teresa T. Monteiro2
sofiarodrigues@esce.ipvc.pt tm@dps.uminho.pt
Delfim F. M. Torres3
delfim@ua.pt
1School of Business, Polytechnic Institute of Viana do Castelo, Valen¸ca, Portugal
2R&D Centre Algoritmi, Department of Production and Systems,
University of Minho, Braga, Portugal
3R&D Centre CIDMA, Department of Mathematics,
University of Aveiro, Aveiro, Portugal
Epidemiological models may give some basic guidelines for public health practitioners,
allowing toanalyzeissues that can influencethestrategies to preventand fightadisease. To
beusedindecision-making, however,amathematical modelmustbecarefully parameterized
andvalidatedwithepidemiologicalandentomologicaldata. HereaSIR(Sforsusceptible,Ifor
infectious,Rforrecoveredindividuals)andASI(Afortheaquaticphaseofthemosquito,Sfor
susceptibleandIforinfectiousmosquitoes)epidemiologicalmodeldescribingadenguedisease
is presented, as well as the associated basic reproduction number. A sensitivity analysis of
the epidemiological model is performed in order to determine the relative importance of the
model parameters to the disease transmission.
Keywords: sensitivity analysis; basic reproduction number; epidemiological model;
dengue.
1 Introduction
Dengueisamajorpublichealthproblemintropicalandsub-tropicalcountries. Itisavector-borne
disease transmitted by Aedes aegypti and Aedes albopictus mosquitoes. Four different serotypes
can cause dengue fever. A human infected by one serotype, when recovers, gains total immunity
to that serotype, and only partial and transient immunity with respect to the other three.
Denguecanvaryfrommildtosevere. Themoresevereformsofdengueincludeshocksyndrome
and dengue hemorrhagic fever (DHF). Patients who develop these more serious forms of dengue
fever usually need to be hospitalized.
The full life cycle of dengue fever virus involves the role of the mosquito as a transmitter (or
vector) and humans as the main victim and source of infection. Preventing or reducing dengue
virus transmission depends entirely in the control of mosquito vectors or interruption of human-
vector contact [1].
In Section 2 an epidemiological model for dengue disease is presented. It consists of six
mutually-exclusive compartments, expressing the interaction between human and mosquito, and
designed for examining the process of the disease spread into a population.
∗Submitted 14-June-2013; accepted, after a minor revision, 30-June-2013; Conference Papers in Mathematics,
Similarly to humans, mosquitoes differ among themselves in terms of their life history traits.
Besides individual variations, the environment (temperature and humidity) also has strong effect
on the life history [2]. Another source of uncertainties, regarding appropriate parameter values,
is the scarcity of the data available for the mosquito population, and the diversity among the
international data.
Our model includes a set of parameters related to human and mosquito populations and their
interaction. Oftentheunknownparametersinvolvedinthemodelsareassumedtobeconstantover
time. However,inamorerealisticperspective ofanyphenomenon,someofthemarenotconstant
and implicitly depend on several factors. Many of such factors usually do not appear explicitly
in the mathematical models because of the need of balance between modeling and numerical
tractability and the lack of a precise knowledge of them [3].
Sensitivity analysis allows to investigate how uncertainty in the input variables affects the
modeloutputs andwhichinput variablestend to drive variationinthe outputs. Sensitivity of the
basic reproduction number for a tuberculosis model can be found in [4]. Here one of the goals
is to determine which parameters are worth pursuing in the field in order to develop a dengue
transmission model. For our specific model, a sensitivity analysis is performed in Section 4 to
determine the relative importance of the model parameters to disease transmission, taking into
account the basic reproduction number (Section 3).
Section 5 reports some numerical experiments: a set of simulations is presented to illustrate
the effect of the parameters on the number of infected individuals. Finally, some conclusions are
given in Section 6.
2 Dengue Model
Taking into account the model presented in [5, 6] and the considerations of [7, 8], a new model
more adapted to the dengue reality is proposed. The notation used in the mathematical model
includes three epidemiological states for humans:
S (t) — susceptible (individuals who can contract the disease),
I (t) — infected (individuals capable of transmitting the disease),
R (t) — resistant (individuals who have acquired immunity).
Itisassumedthatthetotalhumanpopulation, N ,isconstant: N =S (t)+I (t)+R (t)atany
time t. The population is homogeneous, which means that every individual of a compartment is
homogeneouslymixedwiththeotherindividuals. Immigrationandemigrationarenotconsidered.
Three other state variables, related to the female mosquitoes, are considered:
A (t) — aquatic phase (that includes the egg, larva and pupa stages),
S (t) — susceptible (mosquitoes that are able to contract the disease),
I (t) — infected (mosquitoes capable of transmitting the disease).
Notethatmalemosquitoesarenottakenintoaccount,becausetheyarenotcapableoftransmitting
the disease, and that there is no resistant phase, due to the short lifespan of mosquitoes.
Itisassumedhomogeneitybetweenhostandvectorpopulations,whichmeansthateachvector
has an equal probability to bite any host. Humans and mosquitoes are assumed to be born
susceptible. The dengue epidemic is modeled by the following nonlinear system of time-varying
ODEs (ordinary differential equations):
h =µ N − Bβ m +µ S ,
 dt h h (cid:18) mh N h (cid:19) h
=η h I h −µ h R h ,
Parameter Description Value
N total human population 480000
B average daily biting (per day) 0.8
β transmission probability from I (per bite) 0.375
β transmission probability from I (per bite) 0.375
µ average lifespan of humans (in days) 1/(71×365)
η mean viremic period (in days) 1/3
µ average lifespan of adult mosquitoes (in days) 1/10
ϕ number of eggs at each deposit per capita (per day) 6
µ natural mortality of larvae (per day) 1/4
η maturation rate from larvae to adult (per day) 0.08
m female mosquitoes per human 3
k number of larvae per human 3
Table 1: Parameters used in the dengue mathematical model (1)–(2).
 dt (cid:18) kN h (cid:19)
with initial condition
S m −µ m I m ,
(0)=S h0, I
(0)=I h0, R
(0)=A m0, S
(0)=S m0, I
(0)=I m0.
The meaning of the parameters of the model, together with the baseline values used in Section 4,
are given in Table 1.
3 Basic Reproduction Number
Due to biological reasons, only nonnegative solutions of the initial value problem (1)–(3) are
acceptable. More precisely, it is necessary to study the solution properties of the system (1)–(2)
subject to given initial conditions (3) in the closed set
Ω= (S ,I ,R ,A ,S ,I )∈R6 :S +I +R ≤N , A ≤kN , S +I ≤mN .
h h h m m m + h h h h m h m m h
(cid:8) (cid:9)
It can be verified that Ω is a positively invariant set with respect to (1)–(2). The proof of this
statement is similar to the one in [9].
Definition 1. A sextuple E = (S ,I ,R ,A ,S ,I ) is said to be an equilibrium point for
h h h m m m
system (1)–(2) if it satisfies the following relations:
µ N − Bβ Im +µ S =0,
m (cid:17)
0.
AnequilibriumpointE is biologicallymeaningfulifandonlyifE ∈Ω. Thebiologically meaningful
equilibrium points are said to be disease free or endemic, depending on I and I : if there is no
diseaseforbothpopulationsofhumansandmosquitoes,thatis,ifI =I =0,thentheequilibrium
point is said to be a Disease Free Equilibrium (DFE); otherwise, if I 6= 0 or I 6= 0, in other
words, if I >0 or I >0, then the equilibrium point is called endemic.
It is easily seen that system (1)–(2) admits at most two DFE points. Let
If M≤0, then there is only one biologically meaningful equilibrium point E∗:
E =(N ,0,0,0,0,0).
If M>0, then there are two biologically meaningful disease free equilibrium points: E∗ and
E = N ,0,0, , ,0 .
By algebraic manipulation, M>0 is equivalent to condition
which is related to the basic offspring number for mosquitoes: if M ≤ 0, then the mosquito
populationwilldieout;ifM>0,thenthemosquitopopulationissustainable,andtheequilibrium
E∗ is more realistic from a biological standpoint.
An importantmeasure oftransmissibility of the disease is the epidemiologicalconceptof basic
reproduction number [10]. It provides an invasion criterion for the initial spread of the virus in a
susceptible population.
Definition 2. The basic reproduction number, denoted by R 0, is defined as the average number
of secondary infections that occurs when one infective is introduced into a completely susceptible
population.
Using the next generation matrix of an ODE [11], one concludes that the basic reproduction
number R 0 associated to the differential system (1)–(2) is given, in the case M>0, by
R2 = hm mh . (4)
If R 0 < 1, then the disease cannot invade the population and the infection will die out over a
periodoftime. TheamountoftimethiswilltakegenerallydependsonhowsmallR 0 is. IfR 0 >1,
thenaninvasionispossibleandinfectioncanspreadthroughthepopulation. Generally,thelarger
the value of R 0, the more severe, and possibly widespread, the epidemic will be [12].
Indetermininghowbesttoreducehumanmortalityandmorbidityduetodengue,itisnecessary
to know the relative importance of the different factors responsible for its transmission. In the
next section the sensitivity indices of R 0, related to the parameters in the model, are calculated.
4 Sensitivity Analysis
Sensitivity analysis tell us how important each parameter is to disease transmission. Such infor-
mation is crucial not only for experimental design, but also to data assimilation and reduction of
complexnonlinearmodels[13]. Sensitivityanalysisiscommonlyusedtodetermine therobustness
of model predictions to parameter values, since there are usually errors in data collection and
presumed parametervalues. It is used to discoverparametersthat have a high impact onR 0 and
should be targeted by intervention strategies.
Parameter Sensitivity
µ -0.0000578748
η -0.499942
µ -1.03691
ϕ +0.0369128
µ -0.0279642
η +0.527964
Table 2: Sensitivity indices of R 0 evaluated at the baseline parameter values given in Table 1.
Sensitivity indices allow us to measure the relative change in a variable when a parameter
changes. The normalized forward sensitivity index of a variable with respect to a parameter is
the ratio of the relative change in the variable to the relative change in the parameter. When the
variable is a differentiable function of the parameter, the sensitivity index may be alternatively
defined using partial derivatives.
Definition3(cf. [14]). ThenormalizedforwardsensitivityindexofR 0,thatdependsdifferentiably
on a parameter p, is defined by
.
Given the explicit formula (4) for R 0, one can easily derive an analytical expression for the
sensitivity of R 0 with respect to each parameter that comprise it. The obtained values are de-
scribed in Table 2, which presents the sensitivity indices for the baseline parameter values in the
last column of Table 1. Note that the sensitivity index may be a complex expression, depending
on different parameters of the system, but can also be a constant value, not depending on any of
the parameter values. For example, Υ
≡ +0.5, meaning that increasing (or decreasing) β
by 10% increases (or decreases) always R 0 by 5%.
A highly sensitive parameter should be carefully estimated, because a small variation in that
parameter will lead to large quantitative changes. An insensitive parameter, on the other hand,
does not require as much effort to estimate, since a small variation in that parameter will not
produce large changes to the quantity of interest [15].
5 Numerical Analysis
The simulations were carried out using the following values for the initial conditions (3):
S h0 =N h −10, I h0 =10, R h0 =0,
A m0 =kN h , S m0 =mN h , I m0 =0.
Thefinaltime wast =100days. ComputationswereruninMatlabwiththe ode45routine. This
function implements a Runge–Kutta method with a variable time step for efficient computation.
Figures 1a and 1b show the solutions to (1)–(3) with the baseline parameter values given in
Table 1, for human and mosquitoes, respectively.
Figure 2 shows a set of graphics that reflects the effects on the disease through parameters
variation. Each graphic presents the number of infected humans using the baseline parameter
values (solid line) described in Table 1 and the corresponding curves with a specific parameter
increase of 10% (dashed line).
0 20 40 60 80 100
Time (days)
0 20 40 60 80 100
Time (days)
(a) Human population.
(b) Mosquito population.
Figure 1: State variablesofthe ODE system(1)–(2) with initialconditions (5) andparametersas
in Table 1.
The obtained graphics reinforce the sensitivity analysis made in Section 4. Some parameters,
µ h ,ϕandµ A ,presentresidualsensitivityindiceshavingsmallinfluenceinR 0 andthechangesare
notgraphicallyperceptible. The most positivesensitive parameteris the mosquitobiting rate, B,
=+1 (see Figure 2a). Figures 2b, 2e and 2f reflect the same behavior as the previous
one with respect to β , η and k parameters, respectively. As the sensitivity index for β is
equal to the β , and its effect in the infected humans is similar, the graphic is omitted. For all
these five parameters the positive signal in the sensitivity indices of R 0 agrees with our intuition.
The parameters η and µ have a negative sensitivity index. The most negative sensitive
parameter is the average lifespan of adult mosquitoes, µ , with ΥR0 = −1.03691. If η and µ
areincreased10%, thenthe basic reproductionnumber R 0 decreasesapproximately5% and10%,
respectively. In this situation the infected humans also decrease accordingly, as can be seen in
Figures 2c and 2d.
Figure 2g presents the comparison of the infected humans when the original parameters are
considered and all the parameters are increased 10%.
6 Conclusions
A dengue model was studied by evaluating the sensitivity indices of the basic reproduction num-
ber, R 0, in order to determine the relative importance of the model parameters in the disease
transmission. Such information allow us to identify the robustness of the model predictions with
respecttoparametervalues,theinfluenceofeachparameterinthebasicreproductionnumber,and
consequently in the disease evolution. Such analysis can provide critical information for decision
makers and public health officials, who may have to deal with the reality of an infectious disease.
We trust that the research direction here initiated can be of great benefit to citizens affected
by dengue, with an impact on both the preventionand controlof an epidemic. Such contribution
isespeciallyinterestingregardingadiseaselikedengue,whichcausesalargedisruptioninthelives
of sufferers and has enormous social and economic costs, as was well illustrated by the outbreak
of dengue that occurred in Cape Verde in 2009.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by FEDER funds through COMPETE — Operational Programme
Factors of Competitiveness (“Programa Operacional Factores de Competitividade”) — and by
0 20 40 60 80 100
Time (days)
original B increased B 9
0 20 40 60 80 100
Time (days)
(a) Effect on Ih of thevariation of B.
original β mh increased β mh
(b) Effect on Ih of thevariation of βmh.
0 20 40 60 80 100
Time (days)
original η h
increased η h 8
0 20 40 60 80 100
Time (days)
(c) Effect on Ih of the variation of ηh.
original µ m
increased µ m
(d) Effect on Ih of thevariation of µm.
0 20 40 60 80 100
Time (days)
o in r c ig re in a a s l e η d A η A 9
0 20 40 60 80 100
Time (days)
(e) Effect on Ih of thevariation of ηA.
original k increased k
(f) Effect on Ih of thevariation of k.
0 20 40 60 80 100
Time (days)
original values
increased values
(g) Effect on Ih when all parameters increase 10%.
Figure 2: Infected individuals with initial parameter values as given in Table 1 (solid line) and
with an increase of 10% of a specific (or all, in g) parameter (dashed line).
Portuguese funds through the Portuguese Foundation for Science and Technology (“FCT —
Funda¸ca˜oparaaCiˆenciaeaTecnologia”),withinprojectPEst-C/MAT/UI4106/2011withCOM-
PETE number FCOMP-01-0124-FEDER-022690. Monteiro was also supported by the R&D unit
Algoritmi and project FCOMP-01-0124-FEDER-022674, Rodrigues and Torres by the Center
for Research and Development in Mathematics and Applications (CIDMA), Torres by project
PTDC/MAT/113470/2009.