]hp-oib.scisyhp[
1v5432.7001:viXra
Sequential Sparsening by Successive
Adaptation in Neural Populations
Farzad Farkhooi1, Eilif M¨uller2 and Martin P. Nawrot1∗
1NeuroinformaticsandTheoreticalNeuroscience,InstituteofBiology,FreieUniversit¨atBerlin,
andBernsteinCenter forComputational NeuroscienceBerlin,Germany
2 LaboratoryofComputational Neuroscience, EPFL,Lausanne,Switzerland
1 Introduction
Sparsecodingofsensoryinputinneuralsystemsisdesirablebecauseitallowsfor
an efficient representationof the environmentalscene at any point in time with
onlyasmallnumberofvocabularyelements. Moreover,asparsecodeofsensory
inputmaysupporttheefficientformationandsubsequentretrievalofassociative
memories at later processingstages in the brain[6, 2]. A series of experimental
studies in a number of different model systems have provided evidence for a
sparse stimulus representation in neural spike responses at different processing
stages (for a comprehensive review see [10] and references therein).
However, despite extensive theoretical studies of the possible role and effi-
ciencyofasparsecodeinneuralinformationprocessingandassociativememory,
theunderlyingmechanismsthattranslateasensorydataintoasparserepresen-
tationareyetunknown. Amongmanypossibilities,the mutualrolesofnetwork
architecture and interaction of inhibition and excitation are possible candidate
mechanisms that can affect the sparseness of a representation [1, 3, 7].
Here, we explore the role of the neuron-intrinsic mechanism of spike fre-
quency adaptation (SFA) in producing temporally sparse responses to sensory
stimulationathigherprocessingstages. OurresultssuggestthatSFAleadstoan
increased sparseness of the neural response across successive processing stages
in the sense of a temporal sparseness where the response becomes increasingly
shortened and sharpened. This is commonly known as lifetime sparseness [13].
2.1 Iterative sparsening in a SFA neuron model
In order to investigate the effect of adaptation on the single neuron response
dynamics, we numerically simulate a five-dimensional master equation for a
conductance-based integrate-and-fire neuron with spike-frequency adaptation,
using the parametersgivenin [9]. We then take an iterativeapproachto mimic
a feed-forward network connection scheme. At the first processing stage, we
providethe model with a step-like Poissonianinput (Fig. 1A spontaneousrate:
∗Correspondenceto: MPNawrot,Neuroinformatik,Institutfu¨rBiologie,FreieUniversit¨at
Berlin,K¨onigin-LuiseStraße1-3,14195, Berlin—martin.nawrot@fu-berlin.de
2 Results 2
Fig. 1: The effect of iterative spike-frequency adaptation in a single cell. A: Spiking
activityofasingleadaptiveconductancebasedneuron[9]averagedacross100
independent trials, estimated in bins of 50ms size. The neuron is driven by
Poissoninputasdescribedinthetext. BandC:Trial-averagedactivityofthe
same neuron modelwhen it is stimulated with theoutputpopulation activity
of the previousiteration. Simulations performed with pyNEST[4].
1kHz, response rate: 300Hz, response duration: 1s) and repeat the simulation
100times. Thetrial-averagedresponseisillustratedinthe Peri-Stimulus-Time-
Histogram (PSTH) of Fig. 1A. It shows a clear phasic-tonic response with a
strong onset transient and offset inhibition. We now use the combined output
spike trains fromall 100 trials and use this as the single trial input to the same
neuron model at the next processing stage. Again we repeat this complete
scenario for 100 times and estimate the PSTH in Fig. 1B. We reiterate once
morewith100repetitionstoestimatetheresponseatthethirdprocessingstage
(Fig. 1C).
FromFig.1we caninfertwomajorresults. First,the responsetothe initial
step-like input turns into a phasic response that becomes increasingly ’sharp’
across repeated iteration. Second, the response maximum as estimated by the
binnedfiringrateincreasesfromstagetostage. Thisresponsestrengthnaturally
scales with the number of pooled repetitions used for input into the next stage
(simulations not shown). A third but less prominent effect is expressed in a
suppression of spiking during a short period following the stimulus epoch.
2.2 Response sparsening in a feed-forward network model
It hasbeen shownthat the primaryneuronsinthe insectmushroombody - the
Kenyoncells(KCs)-useasparserepresentationofolfactorystimuli[1,12]where
at each moment in time only a small fraction of neurons represent the sensory
input (spatialsparseness)and eachneuronresponds with only a shortresponse
eventolong-lastingsensorystimuli(lifetimesparseness). Inasimplifiedviewwe
may consider the insect olfactory pathwayas a feed-forwardnetworkwhere the
olfactoryreceptorneurons(ORNs) provideinput tothe firstprocessinglayerof
projection neurons (PNs; approx. 950 uniglomerular PNs in the honeybee) in
the antennal lobe. The PNs project to the layer of KCs (approx. 160.000 in
the honeybee), which in turn provide convergent input to the mushroom body
extrinsic neuron layer (ENs; approx. 400 in the honeybee).
Here, we designed a reduced feed-forward network with three layers, ar-
3 Discussion 3
Fig. 2: Simplified network of feed-forward processing in the insect olfactory system.
Average activity of simulated network for 10 independent trials in 50ms bins
without adaption for control (first row) and with SFA (second row), where
synapsesare assumed toproducean αshaped excitatory conductanceprofile.
The network simulation was conductedin pyNEST[4].
rangedin 10×100×10 lattice with full connectivity. This structure represents
the processing layers in the olfactory pathway: PN→KC→EN. All neurons are
modeled identically using the 5D model and identical parameters as described
in the previous section. As a means of control we repeated the same network
simulation but with zero adaptation. To match the spontaneous output rates
of both models we increased synaptic weights by a factor of 1.3 in the latter.
As ORN input to the PN layer we again used a step-like Poisson input,
independentforallneurons. Wethenrepeatedthesimulationfor10independent
runs and estimated the population activity for each layers by constructing the
PSTH across all neurons within this layeras shown in Fig.2. Our result clearly
showsthatthepopulationresponsebecomesincreasinglyphasicasitpropagates
throughthenetworkofSFAneurons(Fig.2,upperrow). However,inthecontrol
case where we switched off SFA in all neurons, the step-like input is conserved
acrossalllayersandthechangesinresponsestrengthreflectthe neuronnumber
in each layer.
3 Discussion
We report here that the simple neuron-intrinsic mechanism of spike-frequency
adaptation can account for the sparse spike response scheme known as lifetime
sparseness [13] in downstream neurons. SFA reflects high-pass filter properties
with respect to the temporal profile of the neuron’s input activity. This sug-
gests that a feed-forward network with SFA neurons focuses on the temporal
differencesofthesensoryinput. Inotherwords,itsuggeststhatforhigherbrain
centers it is most relevant to process dynamic changes in the sensory environ-
ment and to neglect the static part of receptor sensation.
We designed our network model in coarse analogy to the insect olfactory
3 Discussion 4
system. Our model observation match with experimental observations. At the
first processing level of projection neurons the stimulus response still shows a
strongandoutlastingtonicpart,aswase.g.observedinintracellularrecordings
from PNs in the honeybee [8]. The effect fully develops in the second layer of
KCs with a sharp transient response. This matches the repeated experimental
observations in extracellular recordings from the locust (e.g. [3]) and imaging
results in the honeybee [12]. Finally, the phasic responses in ENs match with
experimental recordings in the honeybee [11].
This manuscriptwas submitted for review to the EighteenthAnnual Computa-
tional Neuroscience Meeting CNS*2009 in Berlin and accepted for oral presen-
tation at the meeting. A short abstract version was published as [5].