Sexual videos in Internet: a test of 11 hypotheses about intimate
practices and gender interactions in Latin America
Julián Monge-Nájera and Karla Vega Corrales
Laboratorio de Ecología Urbana, Vicerrectoría de Investigación, Universidad Estatal a Distancia, 2050 San José, Costa Rica;
julianmonge@gmail.com, kantr.vega@gmail.com
Received 13-XII-2012 Corrected 12-III-2013 Accepted 2-IV-2013
ABSTRACT RESUMEN
There is a marked lack of literature on user-submitted sexual videos from Existe muy poca literatura sobre causas biológicas de expresiones cul-
Latin America. To start filling that gap, we present a formal statistical test- turales relacionadas con la sexualidad en Internet, y aun menos sobre
ing of several hypotheses about the characteristics of 214 videos from videos sexuales latinoamericanos. Aquí presentamos una evaluación
Nereliatube.com posted from the inauguration of the site until Decem- estadística de once hipótesis basada en 214 videos disponibles en 2010
ber 2010. We found that in most cases the video was made consensually en el sitio Nereliatube. En la mayoría de los videos ambas partes estaban
and the camera was operated by the man. The most frequent practice conscientes de la grabación y el hombre operaba la cámara. La práctica
shown was fellatio, followed by vaginal penetration. The great majority más frecuente fue la felación, seguida de penetración vaginal. La may-
of videos showed the sexual interactions of one woman with one man; oría presentaban una mujer y un hombre, siendo escasos los videos de
group sex was rare. Violence and manifestations of power were rare sexo en grupo. También fueron escasas la violencia y las manifestaciones
and when there was violence it was mostly simulated. Latin American de poder, pero cuando hubo violencia en general era simulada. En con-
user-submitted sexual videos in Nereliatube generally reflect a society in clusión, estos videos latinoamericanos reflejan una sociedad en la que
which women and men have a variety of sexual practices that are mostly hay variedad de prácticas sexuales de mutuo acuerdo que no difieren de
consensual and that do not differ from the biologically and anthropo- lo esperado según el modelo biológico y la antropología.
logically expected patterns.
PALABRAS CLAVE
KEY WORDS Videos caseros, videos aficionados, videos de internet, patrones sexu-
Amateur videos, sexual patterns, sex roles ales, papeles sexuales
The subject of how human sexuality is presented in In- and that has extended from the old male-centered prod-
ternet has been studied for decades, and the current body ucts to a large scope of products addressed to both men
of knowledge was recently reviewed by Nicola (2009) for and women (Vera-Gamboa, 2000).
six areas: “pornography”, shops, work, education, contacts
The lack of scientific protocols has led to the general-
and subcultures. That review states that online activities
ized labeling of graphic sexual materials as sexist and
related with sex are now routine for many in the Western
harmful, but some academic communities conceptualize
world, with a frequency that depends on age, gender and
these products in terms of a dynamic nexus of actors, dis-
sexual orientation. According to that author, many pub-
courses, media economies, technologies and consumers
lications are biased toward a non-scientific, conservative
that can only be studied within a proper cultural frame
approach, and little research has been conducted on the
(Paasonen, 2009).
potential benefits of Internet sexuality. The very use of the
term “pornography” rather than more rigorous terms for An oversimplifying polarity is frequent in the literature:
specific products shows a basic weakness of the academic “professional and amateur”, “alternative and mainstream”,
literature on this subject that represents billions of dollars “independent and commercial”. Feminist debates on
Cuadernos de Investigación UNED (ISSN: 1659-4266) Vol. 5(2), Diciembre, 2013 333
“pornography” have been interesting but they generally excluding titles about who they showed and where they
could not go beyond the affective range of disgust versus had been recorded). Instead we used the audio to identify
pleasure (Paasonen, 2007). In conclusion, a better under- nationality from the accents, an easy task for us because
standing of the subject requires less dualistic frameworks we are native speakers and have lived in, or visited, several
for conceptualizing Internet sexual materials as an element parts of Latin America. We viewed all videos posted in the
of media culture (Vera-Gamboa, 2000; Paasonen, 2010). website and extracted 214 that fit the above criteria. The
extraction was finished on December 31, 2010 and was
Social research on the consumption of graphic sexual
done from the totality of videos posted in the site (more
products has seldom considered sexual roles, but from
than a thousand).
the few studies available, it appears that such products
can generate new tastes and even subverse traditional We produced a correlation matrix for all possible vari-
gender roles (Figari, 2008). In sexual products, displays able interactions with the free online software VassarStats
translated as displays of power (Paasonen, 2006), and on variable pairs that had an statistically significant correla-
the Internet the overlap between forms of sexual power is tion of 40% or more (significance level: p<0,05).
often complex and multi-directional (Brickell, 2012).
We tested 11 hypotheses, suggested to us by our own
According to McKee (2009), social sciences insist that knowledge of human sexuality in Latin America:
all new work agrees with previous interpretations, spe-
1. Latin American society sees a wide sexual experi-
cially in relation to sexual subjects, for which the belief is
ence in men as positive and thus men are more inter-
that sexual products have negative effects. The result is an
ested than women in recording their sexual activity,
abundance of pre-Foucauldian assumptions that obscure
thus they are more likely to be the camera operators.
understanding of new media and Internet sexuality. In-
2. Women are usually afraid of social hostility if their
ternet sexual products must be understood considering
sexual videos reach the public, so in most cases the
the encoding and decoding processes and discourses of
videos will be recorded secretly by the men.
the sexuality of societies in which they occur (James & Mc-
Creadie, 2004). 3. The videos reflect the frequency of sexual practices
and thus oral sex and vaginal penetration are common.
We are aware of no studies about Latin American sexual
4. Couple sex is more common than group sex because
videos posted in Internet and this article is a first step to
the videos reflect common practice.
fill that gap in our knowledge. We analyze the results from
biological and anthropological viewpoints because we 5. Violence is rare because most videos are from cou-
believe that a more comprehensive approach benefits our ples in a romantic relationship.
understanding of a phenomenon that has both biological 6. Signs of affection are common (see Hypothesis 5).
and cultural aspects.
7. Manifestations of power are rare (see Hypothesis 5).
8. There is more violence in couple videos than in
group videos because of group pressure for a peace-
MATERIALS AND METHODS
ful behavior.
com/) was a site registered in Barcelona, Spain that pub- 10. Violence is less frequent when women dominate
lished sexual videos from Latin America, mostly from Mex- numerically because women tend to be less violent
ico, Venezuela and Argentina. Users who uploaded the than men.
videos were not paid but frequent contributors were of-
11. Power demonstrations are less frequent when wom-
fered free membership. New videos were moved from the
en dominate numerically because women use pow-
free to the paid section after a few weeks. Unfortunately,
er demonstrations less markedly than men.
the site closed down in 2012: our study rescues data from
a site that is no longer available.
For our research we excluded all commercial videos, RESULTS
videos that showed the sexual activity of a single person
and videos whose origin could not be identified with cer- In most cases the camera was operated by the man
tainty. To identify the persons as Latin Americans we did (N=80% of the 214 videos); this category was distantly
not use the video titles because they were unreliable (we followed by videos in which it was not clear who was op-
often found the same video under a variety of mutually erating the camera (14%), videos in which both partners
334 Research Journal of the Costa Rican Distance Education University (ISSN: 1659-4266) Vol. 5(2), December, 2013
operated the camera at some time (4%) and the few cases Violence was absent in the great majority of videos
in which the woman was the operator (3%). (97%). There was simulated violence, in the form of slap-
ping, spanking and pulling the woman’s hair (both part-
Sexual encounters can be recorded without the con-
ners appeared to enjoy the practice), in 7% of videos. We
sent of some participants by using hidden cameras, but
that was rare: in most videos (83%) it is clear that the cam- also found two cases of real violence. In one video, a wom-
era is in plain view of all participants, and sometimes they an hit the other woman’s face with her open hand and in-
stare at the camera or reposition it when there is a change serted a bar of soap in the victim’s vagina. In an unrelated
of scene. However, in 7% of cases the camera seemed to video, a drunk woman was dragged on the floor and water
be hidden (the man turned it on before the woman en- was poured on her face and body.
tered the scene and there was no further interaction with Unexpectedly from videos that seem to mainly show
the camera until after she had left) and in 3% cases we the sexual activity of steady couples, most did not show
could not distinguish if the camera was visible. stroking, tender kissing or other signs of affection (97%).
The videos showed a variety of normal human sexual There were no manifestations of power in most videos
practices. The most frequent was fellatio (56%), followed (97%); in the few that did (3%), these manifestations took
by vaginal penetration with the woman on top and fac- the form of men forcing women to do sexual practices
ing the man (34%), with a nearly equal number of videos that they clearly refused, or using their physical strength
of vaginal penetration with the man on top (33%) and to subdue the women.
vaginal penetration with the woman on her fours and the
There were four cases in which two video characteristic
man behind (29%). Less frequent were female masturba-
were correlated. There was less violence when there were
tion (14%), female striptease (8%), male masturbation
more people participating in the sexual activity (Spear-
(8%), vaginal penetration with the woman on top and her
man Rank Correlation -0,499). When one of the partners,
back towards the man (7%), vaginal penetration with the
normally the man, made a show of his power, it was more
woman lying on her side and the man behind her (5%),
likely that the video would also show some violence
cunnilingus (4%) and anal penetration of the woman (3%).
(Spearman Rank Correlation 0,425). Furthermore, groups
Most videos showed female-male couples; others had with more women had less violence (Spearman Rank Cor-
only one case each: two women; two women and two relation -0,425) and less power demonstrations (Spear-
men; five men and one woman; four men and two women man Rank Correlation -1,000).
and finally, seven men with one woman (Fig.1).
DISCUSSION
Earlier authors have not found a simple relationship be-
tween Internet sex videos and corresponding social struc-
tures, particularly power relations associated with gender
or social class (Orgaz & Martínez-Novillo, 2010; Paasonen,
2010). Our results agree with the hypothesis that men are
more interested than women in recording their sexual ac-
tivity, probably because Latin American societies only ac-
cept promiscuity for men.
Doorn (2010) stated that, rather than providing a space
for alternative sexual representations, amateur video
websites are sites where sex, participatory media and the
representation of reality converge to maintain a politically
conservative gender ideology. We cannot say that such
a result applies to the videos from Latin America that we
studied. We found that women in the videos generally ap-
pear as active partners that enjoy the sexual activity being
recorded, a behavior that hardly fits on the patriarchate
FIG. 1. Composition of couples and groups, and frequency vision of sex for reproduction with a passive woman and
of each in sexual videos. an active man.
Cuadernos de Investigación UNED (ISSN: 1659-4266) Vol. 5(2), Diciembre, 2013 335
The web allows the publication of sexual activities from Earlier studies, which did not include Latin America, re-
marginalized groups and thus Internet sexuality can have ported that consensual and nonconsensual violence were
more authentic representations of gender and sexuality more frequent in user posted products than in commer-
than conventional mainstream media (van Doorn, 2010). cial products (Barron M. & Kimmel, 2000; Dunbar & Bur-
The videos we analyzed reflect usual sexual practices of goon, 2005). In our results, violence was infrequent, and
current Latin American society as we know it, they do not when present, it was mostly consensual. We believe that
have the beautiful bodies and exaggerated vocal reactions these home-made videos reflect the normal behavior of
of commercial videos, and thus, if overweight partners Latin American couples and additional study is needed to
and common sex are marginalized, these videos indeed fit see if the difference with Anglo-Saxon practices reflects
the statement made by van Doorn (2010). The internet is real cultural differences or methodological differences.
an increasingly important enabler and mediator of sexual The model of parental investment and sexual selec-
relations in society, and it can transform earlier modes of tion explains why men are more dominant and violent: to
knowing, experiencing and organizing sexuality (Brickell, establish relationships with high investing females (Buss,
2012) Until now, most products follow a masculine, het- 2006). Our results agree with this model.
eronormative “script” but Internet can potentially open up
In conclusion, Latin American home-made sexual vid-
spaces for the sexual emancipation of groups that are nor-
eos posted in Nereliatube.com generally reflect a society
mally excluded from mainstream sexual products (Orgaz
in which women and men have a variety of sexual prac-
et al., undated; van Doorn, 2010).
tices that are mostly consensual and that do not differ
In their home-made sexual videos, women and men from the biologically expected patterns. Of course other
somehow negotiate their public presentations and gen- authors may disagree with our hypotheses, and may even
der performances (Berkowitz, 2006). Bell (1999) made imagine additional hypotheses, but the main contribution
an interesting comparison of weddings and graphic sex of our study is that instead of trying to prove a particular
products, and found that both are cultural performances position, we tested our hypotheses against the data and
designed to solidify the traditional social organization rejected some based on that test. We hope other research-
through the control of sex; in other words, both are used ers will do the same.
to maintain the cultural status quo. Again, we found that
the “performances” in Latin America videos appear to
represent real life sexuality, and for that reason, violence, ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
group sex and similar practices that are less acceptable so-
cially were rare in the videos. We thank several anonymous reviewers for comments
to an earlier draft.
From the videos in Nereliatube we could not reject most
of our hypotheses. The exceptions were hypotheses num-
bers 2 and 6 and these seem even more interesting be-