Shaping Pulses to Control Bistable Biological
Systems.
Aivar Sootla, Diego Oyarzu´n, David Angeli and Guy-Bart Stan
Abstract—Inthispaperwestudyhowtoshapetemporalpulses to implement with current technologies. In addition, because
to switch a bistable system between its stable steady states. Our of technical limitations and the inherent nonlinearity of bio-
motivation for pulse-based control comes from applications in
chemicalinteractions,actuatorsareseverelyconstrainedinthe
synthetic biology, where it is generally difficult to implement
type of input signals they can produce. As a consequence, the
real-time feedback control systems due to technical limitations
in sensors and actuators. We show that for monotone bistable inputsignalsgeneratedbytraditionalfeedbackcontrollers(e.g.
systems, the estimation of the set of all pulses that switch the PID or model predictive control) may be hard to implement
system reduces to the computation of one non-increasing curve. without a significant decrease in control performance.
We provide an efficient algorithm to compute this curve and
In this paper we show how to switch a bistable system
illustrate the results with a genetic bistable system commonly
without the need for output measurements. We propose an
used in synthetic biology. We also extend these results to models
with parametric uncertainty and provide a number of examples open-loop control strategy based on a temporal pulse of
andcounterexamplesthatdemonstratethepowerandlimitations suitable magnitude µ and duration τ:
of the current theory. In order to show the full potential of the
framework, we consider the problem of inducing oscillations in 1 0≤t≤τ,
amonotonebiochemicalsystemusingacombinationoftemporal u(t)=µh(t,τ), h(t,τ)= (1)
0 t>τ.
pulses and event-based control. Our results provide an insight
into the dynamics of bistable systems under external inputs and
open up numerous directions for future investigation. Our goal is to characterise the set of all pairs (µ,τ) that
can switch the system between the stable steady states and
the set of all pairs (µ,τ) that cannot. We call these sets the
I. INTRODUCTION
switchingsetsandaboundarybetweenthesesetstheswitching
In this paper we investigate how to switch a bistable separatrix. The pairs (µ,τ) close to the switching separatix
system between its two stable steady states using external are especially important in synthetic biology applications, as
input signals. Our main motivation for this problem comes a large µ or a large τ can trigger toxic effects that slow down
from synthetic biology, which aims to engineer and control cell growth or cause cell death.
biologicalfunctionsinlivingcells[3].Mostofcurrentresearch In a previous paper [1], we showed that for monotone
insyntheticbiologyfocussesonbuildingbiomolecularcircuits systems the switching separatrix is a monotone curve. This
inside cells through genetic engineering. Such circuits can result was therein extended to a class of non-monotone sys-
control cellular functions and implement new ones, including tems whose vector fields can be bounded by vector fields of
cellular logic gates, cell-to-cell communication and light- monotone systems. This idea ultimately leads to robustness
responsivebehaviours.Thesesystemshaveenormouspotential guarantees under parametric uncertainty. These results are in
in diverse applications such as metabolic engineering, biore- the spirit of [10], [11], [12], where the authors considered the
mediation, and even the energy sector [4]. problemofcomputingreachabilitysetsofamonotonesystem.
Severalrecentworks[5],[6],[7]haveshowcasedhowcells Some parallels can be also drawn with [13], [14], where
can be controlled externally via computer-based feedback and feedback controllers for monotone systems were proposed.
actuators such as chemical inducers or light stimuli [8], [9]. Contributions.Inthepresentpaperweprovidethefirstcom-
An important challenge in these approaches is the need for plete proof of our preliminary results in [1] and extend them
real-time measurements, which tend to be costly and difficult in several directions. We formulate necessary and sufficient
conditions for the existence of the monotone switching sepa-
DrSootlaiswithInstitutMontefiore,UniversityofLie`ge,B-4000,Belgium
ratrixfornon-monotonesystems.Althoughitisgenerallyhard
asootla@ulg.ac.be. Dr Oyarzu´n, Dr Angeli, Dr Stan (d.oyarzun,
d.angeli, g.stan)@imperial.ac.uk are with Departments of to use this result to establish monotonicity of the switching
Mathematics, Electrical and Electronic Engineering, and Bioengineering, separatrix, we use it to prove the converse. For example, we
respectively,ImperialCollegeLondon,SW72AZ,London,UK.DrAngeliis
showthatforabistableLorenzsystemtheswitchingseparatrix
alsowiththeDepartmentofInformationEngineering,UniversityofFlorence,
Italy. is not monotone. We then generalise the main result of [1] by
Part of this work was performed, while Dr Sootla was a post-doctoral providingconditionsfortheswitchingseparatrixtobeagraph
research associate at ICL. Dr Sootla and Dr Stan acknowledge support by
ofafunction.Wealsodiscusstherelationbetweenbifurcations
the EPSRC grants EP/J014214/1, EP/G036004/1. Dr Stan is additionally
supportedbytheEPRSCgrantEP/M002187/1.DrSootlaisnowsupportedby and the mechanism of pulse-based switching, which provides
anF.R.S.–FNRSFellowship.DrOyarzu´nissupportedbyaJuniorResearch additional insights into the switching problem. We use this
FellowshipfromICL.TheauthorswouldliketothankDrAlexandreMauroy
intuition to show and then explain the failure of pulse-based
for valuable suggestions and discussions. This technical report contains the
materialfrompublications[1]and[2]. controlonanHIVviralloadcontrolproblem[15].Weproceed
3v0516.9041:viXra
by providing a numerical algorithm to compute the switching (x ∼ y, y ∼ z implies x ∼ z), and antisymmetric (x ∼ y,
separatrices for monotone systems. The algorithm can be y ∼ x implies x = y). We define a partial order (cid:23) through
efficiently distributed among several computational units and a cone K ∈Rn as follows: x(cid:23) y if and only if x−y ∈K.
does not explicitly use the vector field of the model. We We write x (cid:54)(cid:23) y, if the relation x (cid:23) y does not hold. We
evaluate the theory and computational tools on the bistable will also write x (cid:31) y if x (cid:23) y and x (cid:54)= y, and x (cid:29) y
LacI-TetRsystem,whichiscommonlyreferredtoasagenetic if x−y ∈int(K). Similarly we can define a partial order on
toggleswitch[16].Genetictoggleswitchesarewidelyusedin the space of signals u ∈ U : u (cid:23) v if u(t)−v(t) ∈ K for
synthetic biology to trigger cellular functions in response to all t≥0. We write u(cid:31) v, if u(cid:23) v and u(t)(cid:54)=v(t) for all
extracellular signals [3], [17]. t≥0.Partialordersalsoinducesomegeometricpropertieson
We complement our theoretical findings with several ob- sets. A set M is called p-convex if for every x, y in M such
servations that illustrate limitations of the current theory thatx(cid:23) y,andeveryλ∈(0,1)wehavethatλx+(1−λ)y ∈
and highlight the need for deeper investigations of bistable M.
systems. For example, we show that for a toxin-antitoxin Definition 1: The system (3) is called monotone on D ×
system [18], the switching separatrix appears to be monotone, U with respect to the partial orders (cid:23) , (cid:23) , if for all x,y ∈
even though the system does not appear to be monotone. Fi- D and u,v ∈ U such that x (cid:23) y and u (cid:23) v, we have
nally, in order to demonstrate the full potential of pulse-based φ (t,x,u)(cid:23) φ (t,y,v)forallt≥0.Ifadditionally,x(cid:31) y,
control, we consider the problem of inducing an oscillatory oru(cid:31) v impliesthatφ (t,x,u)(cid:29) φ (t,y,v)forallt>0,
behaviour in a generalised repressilator system [19]. then the system is called strongly monotone.
Organisation. The rest of the paper is organised as follows. In general, it is hard to establish monotonicity of a system
InSectionIIwecoverthebasicsofmonotonesystemstheory, with respect to an order other than an order induced by an
formulate the problem in Subsection II-A, and provide an orthant (e.g., positive orthant Rn ). Hence throughout the
intuition into the mechanism of pulse-based switching for paper, by a monotone system we actually mean a monotone
monotone systems in Subsection II-B. We also provide some system with respect to a partial order induced by an orthant.
motivational examples for the development of our theoretical A certificate for monotonicity with respect to an orthant is
results. In Section III we formulate the theoretical results referred to as Kamke-Mu¨ller conditions [20].
and in Section IV we present the computational algorithm, Proposition 1 ([20]): Consider the system (3), where g is
which we evaluate in Section V on the LacI-TetR system. In differentiable in x and u and let the sets D , U be p-convex.
SectionVI,weprovidecounterexamplesandanapplicationof Let the partial orders (cid:23) , (cid:23) be induced by P Rn , P Rm ,
x u x ≥0 u ≥0
inducing oscillations in a generalised repressilator system. All respectively, where P
the proofs are found in the Appendix. diag((−1)δ1,...,(−1)δm) for some ε
in {0,1}. Then
Notation.Let(cid:107)·(cid:107) standfortheEuclideannorminRn,Y∗
stand for a topological dual to Y, X\Y stand for the relative (−1)εi+εj ∂g i ≥0, ∀ i(cid:54)=j, (x,u)∈cl(D )×U
complement of X in Y, int(Y) stand for the interior of the ∂x M
set Y, and cl(Y) for its closure. ∂g
II. PRELIMINARIES
if and only if the system (3) is monotone on D ×U with
Consider a single input control system M ∞
respect to (cid:23) , (cid:23)
x˙ =f(x,u), x(0)=x , (2) If we consider the orthants Rn , Rm , then the conditions
above are equivalent to checking if for all x (cid:22) y such that
where f : D × U → Rn, u : R → U, D ⊂ Rn, x
≥0 x = y for some i, and all u (cid:22) v we have g (x,u) ≤
U ⊂ R and u(·) belongs to the space U of Lebesgue i i u i
∞ g (y,v).
measurable functions with values from U. We say that the i
system is unforced, if u = 0. We define the flow map
φ : R×D ×U → Rn, where φ (t,x ,u) is a solution
f ∞ f 0 A. Problem Formulation
to the system (2) with an initial condition x and a control
signal u. We consider the control signals in the shape of a We confine the class of considered control systems by
pulse, that is signals defined in (1) with the set of admissible making the following assumptions:
µ and τ denoted as S ={µ,τ ∈R }.
≥0 A1. Let f(x,u) in (2) be continuous in (x,u) on D ×U.
Inordertoavoidconfusion,wereservethenotationf(x,u)
Moreover, for each compact sets C ⊂ D and C ⊂
for the vector field of non-monotone systems, while systems
U, let there exist a constant k such that (cid:107)f(ξ,u) −
x˙ =g(x,u), x(0)=x , (3) f(ζ,u)(cid:107) 2 ≤k(cid:107)ξ−ζ(cid:107) 2 for all ξ,ζ ∈C 1 and u∈C 2 .
A2. Lettheunforcedsystem(2)havetwostablesteadystates
0 in D , denoted as s0 and s1,
denote so-called monotone systems throughout the paper. In A3. Let D = cl(A(s0)∪A(s1)), where A(si) stands for
short, monotone systems are those which preserve a partial the domain of attraction of the steady state si for i =
orderrelationininitialconditionsandinputsignals.Arelation 0,1 of the unforced system (2),
∼ is called a partial order if it is reflexive (x∼x), transitive A4. Foranyu=µh(·,τ)withfiniteµandτ letφ (t,s0,u)
The proof of the proposition is in the Appendix. In many
applications, the functions ξ(µ), η(µ) are simply evolutions
of the steady states s0, s1 with respect to the parameter µ,
respectively.Hence,statement(1)ofProposition2showshow
thesteadystatesmovewithrespecttochangesinµ.Statement
(2) ensures that there are at least two distinct asymptotically
stable equilibria for µ<µ . Finally, statement (3) indicates
that the system undergoes a bifurcation for µ = µ . The
Fig. 1. A schematic depiction of the evolution of the stable nodes s0 g (µ), particular type of the bifurcation will depend on a specific
s1(µ) and the saddle su(µ) with respect to µ in the genetic toggle switch
g g model. Next we investigate further aspects of this result
system.Byslowmanifoldwemeanamanifoldconnectingstableequillibria
and a saddle. The arrows show the direction of the equillibria movements with some examples of monotone and non-monotone bistable
withincreasingµ.Atµmin theequilibrias0 g (µ)andsu g (µ)collideresulting systems.
inasaddle-nodebifurcationpreservingonlys1(µ).
g Example 1: LacI-TetR Switch. The genetic toggle switch is
composedoftwomutuallyrepressivegenesLacI andTetRand
wasapioneeringgeneticsystemforsyntheticbiology[16].We
belong to int(D ). Moreover, let the sets
f consider its control-affine model, which is consistent with a
S+ ={µ,τ >0 (cid:12) (cid:12)lim φ (t;s0,µh(·,τ))=s1} toggle switch actuated by light induction [9]:
f (cid:12) t→∞ f f f p
(cid:12) x˙ = 1 +p −p x +u,
(cid:12) t
x˙ = 6 +p −p x ,
be non-empty. 2 1+(x
)p8 9 10 2
Assumption A1 guarantees existence, uniqueness and con- where the parameters have the following values
tinuity of solutions to (2), while Assumptions A2–A3 define
p =40, p =1, p =4, p =0.05, p =1,
a bistable system on a set D controlled by pulses. In 1 2 3 4 5
AssumptionA4wedefinetheswitchingsets:thesetS f +,which p 6 =30, p 7 =1, p 8 =4, p 9 =0.1, p 10 =1.
containsall(µ,τ)pairsthatswitchthesystem,andthesetS f −, In the model (5), x i represents the concentration of each
which contains all pairs that do not. The boundary between protein, whose mutual repression is modelled via a rational
these sets is called the switching separatrix. In the rest of the function. The parameters p and p represent the repression
paper, we focus on the control problem of estimating the thresholds, whereas p and p model the basal synthesis rate
switching sets. ofeachprotein.Theparametersp andp arethedegradation
rateconstants,p ,p arecalledHill(orcooperativity)parame-
B. Mechanism of Pulse-Based Switching ters,andp 1 ,p 6 describethestrengthofmutualrepression.By
means of Proposition 1 we can readily check that the model
The general problem of switching a bistable system with is monotone on R2 × R for all nonnegative parameter
external inputs is amenable to an optimal control formulation. ≥0 ≥0
values.Itcanbeverifiedbydirectcomputationthatthesystem
However, in applications such as synthetic biology, optimal satisfies Assumptions A1–A4 with D = R2 . It can be
control solutions can be very hard to implement due to f ≥0
also shown that the unforced system is strongly monotone in
technical limitations in actuators and output measurements. int(R2 ) using the results in [21].
Additionally,thesolutionofthisoptimalcontrolproblemmay ≥0
With the chosen parameter values, we numerically found
be technically challenging. Hence applying open-loop pulses
a bifurcation to occur at µ ≈ 1.4077. For µ < µ the
can be a reasonable solution, if we can guarantee some form
system has two stable nodes and a saddle. We observe that
of robustness. As we shall see later, our results show that for
ξ(µ)=η(µ) for all µ>µ , and therefore we conclude that
monotone systems, pulse-based switching is computationally
the system undergoes a saddle-node bifurcation, as illustrated
tractable and robust towards parameter variations.
in Figure 1.
Before presenting our main results, we first provide an
Example 2: Lorenz system. Consider a system
intuitive link between monotonicity and the ability to switch
a system with temporal pulses. If we consider constant inputs x˙ 1 =σ(x 2 −x 1 )+u
u = µ and regard µ as a bifurcation parameter, we have the x˙ =x (ρ−x )−x +u
following result.
Proposition 2: Letthesystem(3)satisfyAssumptionsA1–
A4 and be monotone on D ×U with respect to Rn , R . with parameters σ = 10, ρ = 21, β = 8/3, which is
Letµ besuchthatallpairs(µ,τ)∈S− for0<µ<µ , non-monotone and bistable with two stable foci. Numerical
andanyfinitepositiveτ.Letalsoξ(µ)= lim φ (t,s0,µ)and computation of the sets S− and S+ in Figure 2 suggests that
η(µ)= lim φ (t,s1,µ). Then t→∞ the switching separatrix is not monotone. We will revisit this
t→∞ g g conclusion in the next section using our theoretical results.
1) If µ≤λ<µ min then ξ(µ)(cid:22) x ξ(λ), η(µ)(cid:22) x η(λ) Example 3: HIV viral load control problem. In [15] the
2) If 0<µ<µ min then ξ(µ)∈A(s0 g ) and ξ(µ)≺ x η(µ). authors considered the problem of switching from a “non-
3) The function ξ(µ) is discontinuous at µ min . healthy” (s0) to a “healthy” (s1) steady state by means of two
Pulse length τ
40 As shown next, Theorem 1 can also be used to establish non-
monotonicity of the switching separatrix.
Remark 1 (Lorenz system revisited): Consider the Lorenz
system from the previous section and three different pulses
u (t) = µ h(t,τ) with µ = 24, µ = 25, µ = 26, and
τ =1.Numericalsolutionswithincreasedaccuracyshowthat
the flows φ(t,s0,u ) and φ(t,s0,u ) converge to s0, whereas
10 φ(t,s0,u ) convergesto s1.Application ofTheorem1 proves
that the switching separatrix is not monotone.
5 10 15 20 25
ThemajorbottleneckinthedirectapplicationofTheorem1
is the verification of condition (1), which is generally compu-
Fig. 2. Switching sets for the Lorenz system. We simulated the Lorenz tationally intractable. For example, condition (1) is satisfied if
system for (µ,τ) pairs taken from a mesh grid. The green and red crosses
thepartialorderispreservedforcontrolsignals.Thatisforany
correspondtothepairsthatswitchedornotswitchedthesystem,respectively.
u (cid:22) v, it should follow that φ (t,s0,u) (cid:22) φ (t,s0,v) for
u g g x g g
allt>0.Althoughthispropertyisweakerthanmonotonicity,
controlinputs(u andu )thatmodeldifferentdrugtherapies. itisnotclearhowtoverifyit.Monotonicity,ontheotherhand,
Due to space limitations we refer the reader to [15] for a is easy to check and implies condition (1) in Theorem 1. This
description of the model. It can be shown that both steady is used in the following result.
states are stable foci and that the model is non-monotone. Theorem 2: Letthesystem(3)satisfyAssumptionsA1–A4
Although the system can be switched with non-pulse control and be monotone on D g ×U ∞ .
signals [15], using extensive simulations we were unable to 1) The set S− is simply connected. There exists a curve
find a combination of pulses in u 1 and u 2 switching the µ g (τ), which is a set of maximal elements of S g − in the
system. standardpartialorder.Moreover,thecurveµ (τ)issuch
As in the case of monotone bistable system, we found a that for any µ ∈µ (τ ) and µ ∈µ (τ ), µ ≥µ for
1 g 1 2 g 2 1 2
bifurcation with respect to constant control signals u 1 = µ 1 τ 1 <τ 2 .
and u 2 = µ 2 . More specifically, we fixed µ 2 = 0.4, and 2) The set S+ is simply connected. There exists a curve
numerically found a bifurcation at µ 1 ≈ 0.7059. The major ν g (τ), which is a set of minimal elements of S g + in the
difference between this case and the monotone system case standardpartialorder.Moreover,thecurveν (τ)issuch
(Example 1) is that the steady state s1(0.7059,0.4) lies the that for any ν ∈ ν (τ ) and ν ∈ ν (τ ), ν ≥ ν for
1 g 1 2 g 2 1 2
domain of attraction of s0(0,0). Hence if we stop applying τ <τ .
the constant control signal we regress back to the initial point 3) Let the system (3) be strongly monotone and ∂A be
s0(0,0). Furthermore, with increasing µ
the steady state theseparatrixbetweenthedomainsofattractionsA(s0)
s1(µ 1 ,0.4) is moving towards the origin, which also lies in and A(s1) of the unforced system (3). Let additionally
the domain of attraction of s0(0,0). This makes pulse-based ∂A be an unordered manifold, that is, there are no x,
switching very difficult, if not impossible. y in ∂A such that x (cid:31) y. Then ν (τ) = µ (τ) for
all τ > 0 and the curve µ (·) = ν (·) is a graph of a
monotonically decreasing function.
III. THEORETICALRESULTS
We state implicitly in Theorem 2, that if µ (·) (cid:54)= ν (·),
In [1] we showed that the switching separatrix of a mono- g g
then the flow φ (t,s0,µh(·,τ)) does not converge to s0 or
tone bistable system x˙ = g(x,u) is non-increasing. Here we g g g
s1, since it may end up on the separatrix ∂A. We note that
presentageneralisationofthisresultbyformulatingnecessary g
ourcomputationalprocedurepresentedinSectionIVdoesnot
and sufficient conditions for the switching separatrix to be
require that µ (τ) = ν (τ) or that µ (·), ν (·) are graphs of
monotone, the proof of which is found in the Appendix. g g g g
functions. Hence we treat point (3) in Theorem 2 as a strictly
Theorem 1: Letthesystem(2)satisfyAssumptionsA1–A4.
theoretical result, but remark that sufficient conditions for the
Then the following properties are equivalent:
separatrix ∂A to be unordered are provided in Theorem 2.1
1) If φ f (t,s0 f ,µh(·,τ)) belongs to A(s0 f ) for all t ≥ 0, in [22]. The most relevant condition to our case is that the
then φ f (t,s0 f ,µh(·,τ)) belongs to A(s0 f ) for all t ≥ 0, flow of the unforced system is strongly monotone, which we
and for all µ, τ such that 0<µ≤µ, 0<τ ≤τ. also assume in Theorem 2.
2) The set S− is simply connected. There exists a curve
f Besides µ g (·) (cid:54)= ν g (·), there are other pathological cases.
µ f (τ), which is a set of maximal elements of S f − in the For example, applying constant input control signals u = µ
standardpartialorder.Moreover,thecurveµ f (τ)issuch typically results in a system (2) with a different set of steady
that for any µ 1 ∈µ f (τ 1 ) and µ 2 ∈µ f (τ 2 ), µ 1 ≥µ 2 for states than s0 or s1. Moreover, the number of equilibria may
τ 1 <τ 2 . be different. Hence, with τ → ∞ the set S+ typically does
Theorem 1 shows that the computation of the set S− is not contain the limiting control signal u = µ. If the set of
reduced to the computation of a curve µ (τ). This result also pairs(µ,τ)resultinginthesepathologicalcasesisnotmeasure
provides a connection between the geometry of domains of zero, then the sets cl(S+) and cl(R2 \S−) are not equal,
attractionoftheunforcedsystemandtheswitchingseparatrix. which can complicate the computation of the switching sets.
hard to check monotonicity of the system with respect to an
arbitrary cone.
boundary of
Theorem 3 also provides a way of estimating the switching
boundary of
set under parametric uncertainty, which is stated in the next
boundary of
corollary.
Corollary 1: Consider a family of systems x˙ = f(x,u,p)
withavectorofparametersptakingvaluesfromacompactset
P.Letthesystemsx˙ =f(x,u,p)satisfyAssumptionsA1–A4
Fig.3. Aschematicdepictionoftheconditions(8)and(9).Thecondition(8) for every p in P. Assume there exist parameter values a, b in
ensures that all the steady states lie in the intersection of the corresponding
domains of attractions (violet area). The steady state s1 cannot lie in the P such that the systems x˙ =f(x,u,a) and x˙ =f(x,u,b) are
dashedblueboxduetocondition(9). monotone on D M ×U ∞ , where D M = ∪ D f(·,·,q) and
f(x,u,a)(cid:22) f(x,u,p)(cid:22) f(x,u,b), (11)
However, in many practical applications, the sets cl(S+) and
f for all (x,u,p)∈D ×U ×P. Let also
cl(R2 \S−)appeartobeequal.Thereforeinordertosimplify M
≥0 f (cid:18) (cid:19)
the presentation we study only the properties of the set S f −. s0 ∈int ∩ A(s0 ) , (12)
Ifthesystemx˙ =f(x,u)tobecontrolledisnotmonotone, f(·,·,p) q∈P f(·,·,q)
thenthecurveµ f (τ)maynotbemonotone,whichisessential s1 (cid:54)∈ (cid:110) z|s0 (cid:22) z (cid:22) s0 (cid:111) , (13)
for our computational procedure. Instead, we estimate inner f(·,·,p) f(·,·,a) x x f(·,·,b)
andouterboundsontheswitchingsetprovidedthatthevector for all p in P. Then the following relation holds:
field of the system can be bounded from above and below by S− ⊇S− ⊇S− ∀p∈P. (14)
vector fields of monotone systems. This is formally stated in f(·,·,a) f(·,·,p) f(·,·,b)
the next result, while the proof is in the Appendix. The proof follows by setting g(x,u) = f(x,u,a) and
Theorem 3: Let systems (2), (3), (4) satisfy Assump- r(x,u)=f(x,u,b)andnotingthattheconditionsin(12),(13)
tions A1–A4. Let D = D ∪ D ∪ D , the systems (3) imply the conditions in (8), (9) in the premise of Theorem 3.
and (4) be monotone on D ×U and Theorem 3 states that if the bounding systems (3), (4)
can be found, the switching sets S−, S− can be estimated,
g(x,u)(cid:22) x f(x,u)(cid:22) x r(x,u) on D M ×U. (7) thereby providing approximations o g n th r e switching set S−.
Additionally assume that the stable steady states s0, s0, s0, In what follows we provide a procedure to find monotone
s1 satisfy boundingsystemsifthesystem(2)isnear-monotone,meaning
that by removing some interactions between the states the
s0 g ,s0 f ,s0 r ∈int (cid:0) A(s0 g )∩A(s0 f )∩A(s0 r ) (cid:1) , (8) system becomes monotone (see [24] for the discussion on
s1 (cid:54)∈ (cid:8) z|s0 (cid:22) z (cid:22) s0(cid:9) . (9) near-monotone systems).
Let there exist a single interaction which is not compatible
Then the following relations hold: with monotonicity with respect to an order induced by Rn ,
S− ⊇S− ⊇S−. (10) and let this interaction be between the states x i and x j . This
happens if, for example, the (i,j)-th entry in the Jacobian
The technical conditions in (8), (9) are crucial to the proof (cid:110) ∂fi (cid:111) is smaller or equal to zero. A monotone system can
and are generally easy to satisfy. An illustration of these ∂xj i,j
beobtainedbyreplacingthevariablex withaconstantinthe
conditions is provided in Figure 3. Checking the condition j
function f (x,u), which removes the interaction between the
(9) reduces to the computation of the stable steady states, i
as does checking the condition (8). Indeed, to verify that s0 states x i and x j . If the set D is bounded then clearly we can
f find x and x such that x ≥ x ≥ x for all x ∈ D. If the
belongs to the intersection of A(s0), A(s0), A(s0), we check j j j j j
g f r set D is not bounded, then we need to estimate the bounds on
if the trajectories of the systems (3), (4) initialised at s0 with
f the intersection of A(s0) and the reachability set starting at
u = 0 converge to s0 and s0, respectively, which is done by f
g r s0 for all admissible pulses. Let g = r = f for all k (cid:54)= i,
numerical integration. The computation of stable steady states f (cid:12) k k k (cid:12)
can be done using the methods from [23].
In some applications, we need to find a subset of the pairs is straightforward to show that x˙ = g(x,u), and x˙ = r(x,u)
(µ,τ) that switch the system (2) from s0 to s1. Due to the aremonotonesystemsandtheirvectorfieldsareboundingthe
inclusion S− ⊇ S−, existence of the system (3) allows to vector field f from below and above, respectively. Note that
do that. In this case, we are only interested in finding the in order to apply Theorem 3 we still need to check if these
system (3), hence the condition (9) is not required and the bounding systems satisfy Assumptions A1–A4.
condition(8)istransformedtos0,s0 ∈int (cid:16) A(s0)∩A(s0) (cid:17) . In the case of Corollary 1, the procedure is quite similar.
g f g f If the system x˙ = f(x,u,p) is monotone for all parameter
Remark 2: The proofs of Theorems 2 and 3 are adapted
values p, then we can find a, b if there exists a partial order
in a straightforward manner to the case when systems are
in the parameter space. That is a relation (cid:22) such that for
monotonewithrespecttoanorder(cid:23) inducedbyanarbitrary p
x parameter values p and p satisfying p (cid:22) p we have that
cone K , and the order (cid:23) induced by R . In examples, 1 2 1 p 2
however, we always assume that K is an orthant, since it is f(x,u,p )(cid:22) f(x,u,p ) ∀x∈D,u∈U.
Algorithm 1 Bisection Algorithm for Computation of the Algorithm 2 Computation of Switching Separatrix Based on
Switching Separatrix Random Sampling
1: Inputs: The system x˙ = f(x,u) with initial state s0, 1: Inputs:Thesystemx˙ =f(x,u)withinitialstates0,final
final state s1, tolerance ε, simulation time t , a grid state s1, total number of samples N, simulation time t ,
T ={τ }N , an upper bound on the magnitude µup, the lowerandupperboundsonτ,τ andτ respectively,
i i=1 min max
number of used processors N . the numbers N , N , probability distribution δ
2: Outputs: finite sets Mmin and Mmax 2: Outputs: sets Mmin and Mmax
3: for i=1,...,[N/N par ] do 3: Compute µ min and µ max using bisection for values τ min
4: Set µl j =0, µu j =µup, and τ max
5: for j =1,...,N par do 4: Set N par =2(N gr +N ε )
6: while µu j −µl j >ε do 5: Set Mmax =Mmin ={(µ max ,τ min ),(µ min ,τ max )}
7: µc j =(µu j +µl j )/2 6: for i=1,...,[N/N par ] do
8: Set uc =µc j h(·,τ i(Npar−1)+j ) 7: Compute the values µ err , τ err , and the corresponding
9: if φ f (t e ;s0 f ,uc)(cid:22) x s1 f then boxes B µ , B τ .
10: µc j =µl j 8: Generate N gr samples (µ,τ) in each of the boxes B µ
11: else and B τ using a probability distribution δ
12: µc j =µu j 9: Generate randomly 2N ε samples
13: end if 10: for j =1,...,N par do
14: end while 11: Check if the samples (µ,τ) switch the system
15: end for 12: end for
16: Mmin =[Mmin,µl,...µl ] 13: Update and prune the sets Mmin, Mmax
17: Mmax =[Mmax,µ 1 u,...µ N u par ] 14: end for
18: end for
approximation as
If a partial order is found, the values a and b are computed
as minimal and maximal elements of P in the partial order rel err max min err max min
(cid:22) . This idea is equivalent to treating parameters p as inputs
p Note that, even if the green and red circles lie very close to
and showing that the system x˙ =f(x,u,p) is monotone with
each other the relative error can be substantial. In numerical
respect to inputs u and p.
simulations we use a logarithmic grid for τ, which yields
a significantly lower relative error in comparison with an
equidistant grid. This can be explained by an observation
IV. COMPUTATIONOFTHESWITCHINGSEPARATRIX
that in many numerical examples µ(τ) appears to be an
ThetheoreticalresultsinSectionIIIguaranteetheexistence exponentially decreasing curve.
oftheswitchingseparatrixformonotonesystems,butinorder There are a few drawbacks in Algorithm 1. Firstly, it
to compute µ(τ) we resort to numerical algorithms. requires a large number of samples. Secondly, the choice of
Given a pair (µ,τ) we can check if this pair is switching the grid is not automatic, which implies that for switching
the system using simulations (that is, numerically integrating separatrices with different geometry the relative error on the
thecorrespondingdifferentialequation).Ifthecurveµ(τ)isa same grid may be drastically different. Finally, the algorithm
monotonefunction,thenforeveryτ thereexistsauniquepulse
magnitude µ = µ(τ). Let T = {τ }N be such that τ =
τ ≤ τ ≤ τ ≤ τ = τ for all i. Clearly, for every τ
1 i i+1 N max i
wecancomputethecorrespondingµ usingbisection.Westart
the algorithm by computing the value µ corresponding to τ .
Due to monotonicity of the switching separatrix, the minimal
switching magnitude µ for the pulse length τ is smaller or
equaltoµ .Therefore,wecansavesomecomputationaleffort
by setting the upper bound on the computation of µ equal to
µ . The computation of the pairs (µ,τ) can be parallelised by
settingthesameupperboundonµ ,···,µ ,whereN
i i+Npar par
is the number of independent computations. The procedure
is summarised in Algorithm 1, where M and M are
the sets of pairs (µ,τ) approximating the switching separatrix
Fig. 4. Illustration of the error of computation of the switching separatrix
from below and above, respectively. betweenthevaluesτmin,τmax.Theblackcurveistheswitchingseparatrix
tobecomputed,theredandgreencirclesaretheupperandlowerbounding
In order to evaluate the error of computing the switching
points,respectively.Theswitchingseparatrixshouldliebetweenthecoloured
separatrix consider Figure 4. According to the definitions in regionsduetoitsmonotonicity.Thevaluesµerrandτerrarethelargestheight
the caption of Figure 4 we define the relative error of the andwidthofboxesinscribedbetweenthecolouredregions,respectively.
Total Number of Samples
Centralised Alg 2 TABLEI
Alg 2 SAMPLEEFFICIENCYN eff INPERCENT.INTHENOTATIONx±y,xSTANDS
FORTHEEMPERICALMEAN,ANDyFORTHEEMPERICALSTANDARD
Alg 2 DEVIATION.RECALLTHATNpar=2(Ngr+Nε)FORALGORITHM2.
Centralised Alg 1
Alg 1 Algorithm N eff
Alg.1withNpar=1 14%
Alg.1withNpar=20 13.3%
Alg.2withNgr=1,Nε=0 28.21±0.72%
Alg.2withNgr=10,Nε=0 19.90±0.45%
Alg.2withNgr=5,Nε=5 39.68±0.76%
Alg.2withNgr=0,Nε=10 49.36±0.55%
V. ILLUSTRATIONOFTHEORETICALRESULTSONTHE
Fig. 5. Average error against total number of generated samples. The
LACI-TETRSWITCH
curves corresponding to Algorithm 1 are computed by a single run of the
algorithm. The curves corresponding to Nε =0 are averages over ten runs A. Evaluation of the Computational Algorithm
of Algorithm 2, while the curves for Nε > 0 are the averages over twenty
runsofAlgorithm2.RecallthatNpar=2(Ngr+Nε)forAlgorithm2. Here we will compare Algorithm 1 and 2 with different
parameter values, as well as their distributed implementations
on the LacI-TetR switch introduced in Subsection II-B. Note
thatAlgorithm2doesnotdependexplicitlyonthedynamicsof
relies on the assumption that µ(τ) is a graph of a monotone
theunderlyingsystem,butdependsonlyonthegeneratedpairs
function, which may not be true. In order to overcome these
(µ,τ). Therefore, the convergence and sample efficiency re-
difficulties, we have derived Algorithm 2 based on random
sultspresentedherewillbevalidforabroadclassofsystems.
sampling,whichconvergesfasterthanAlgorithm1,hashigher
In Figure 5, we compare the error against the total number
sample efficiency, does not require a predefined grid and the
of generated samples. Since checking if a sample switches
graph assumption. Some of the steps in Algorithm 2 require
the system is the most expensive part of both algorithms, the
additional explanation:
totalnumberofsamplesreflectsthecomputationalcomplexity.
Step7.Findtwoboxes:theboxB µ withthemaximalheight In the case of Algorithm 2 with N ε = 0 the randomisation
(denoted as µ err ) and the box B τ with the maximal width level is not high, hence an average over ten runs is sufficient
(denoted as τ err ) that can be inscribed between the coloured to demonstrate the average behaviour of this algorithm. Note
regions as depicted in Figure 4. that both curves corresponding to Algorithm 2 with N = 0
Step 9. Generate N samples of τ using a probability outperform the curves corresponding to Algorithm 1 in terms
distribution δ between τ and τ . For every τ generate of accuracy.
a value µ using a distribution δ such that µ lies in the Some computational effort in Algorithm 2 goes into com-
area between the coloured regions. Repeat this step by first puting the error. However, this effort appears to be negligible
generating µ between µ and µ using a distribution incomparisonwithnumericallysolvingadifferentialequation
δ, and then generating τ for every generated µ in the area for a given pair (µ,τ) even for such a small system as the
between the coloured regions. toggleswitch.Werunthesimulationsonacomputerequipped
with Intel Core i7-4500U processor and 8GB of RAM. Using
Step 13. First, we update the sets Mmin, Mmax by adding
thecentralisedversionofAlgorithm2weachievedonaverage
the samples that do not switch and switch the system, respec-
arelativeerrorequalto0.0448in87.65seconds,whileittook
tively. Then if there exist two pairs (µ ,τ ) and (µ ,τ ) in
1 1 2 2 89.17 seconds to obtain a relative error equal to 0.0842 with
the set Mmin (resp., Mmax) such that µ ≤µ and τ ≤τ ,
Algorithm 1. Note that for systems with a larger number of
thendeletethepair(µ ,τ )fromthesetMmin (resp.,thepair
states the difference may be larger.
(µ ,τ ) from the set Mmax).
In Table I, we compare the sample efficiency of Algo-
Note that Step 11 is the most computationally expensive
rithms 1 and 2 with different input parameters, which we
part of the algorithm and its computation is distributed into
N par independent tasks. In our implementation, we chose δ N =|Mmin∪Mmax|/N
as a Beta distribution with parameters 1 and 3 and adjusted
the support to a specific interval. Note that the set between where N is the total number of generated samples, and
the coloured regions is getting smaller with every generated |Mmin∪Mmax| is the number of samples in the set Mmin∪
sample, hence the relative error of Algorithm 2 is a non- Mmax.ResultsinTableIindicatethatAlgorithm2hashigher
increasing function of the total number of samples. In fact, sample efficiency than Algorithm 1.
numerical experiments show that this function is on average Our results also indicate that Algorithm 2 with N = 5,
exponentially decreasing. After the sets Mmin and Mmax N = 5 has on average a higher empirical convergence rate
are generated one can employ machine learning algorithms to and a higher sample efficiency than Algorithm 2 with N =
build a closed form approximation of a switching separatrix 10, N =0. This indicates that combination of non-zero N ,
(e.g., Sparse Bayesian Learning [25]; see also [26], [27] for N improves convergence and sample efficiency, which can
efficient algorithms). be explained as follows. When the total number of generated
PARAMETERVALUESFORSYSTEMSINSUBSECTIONV-B.THE
UNSPECIFIEDPARAMETERVALUESARETHESAMEASIN(6).
Fi Fi upper lower 30
p1=40,p4=0.05 p1=20,p4=0.01,
p6=30,p9=0.1 p6=45,p9=0.3,
p1=40,p4=0.05 p1=20,p4=0.01, 20
i=2 p6=30,p9=0.1 p6=45,p9=0.3,
p2=4,p7=1 p2=1,p7=4, 10
p1=40,p4=0.05 p1=20,p4=0.01,
i=3 p6=30,p9=0.1 p6=45,p9=0.3,
p5=1,p10=2 p5=3,p10=1, 0
0 5 10 15 20
Pulse length τ
samples is low, we do not have sufficient information on the
behaviour of the switching separatrix. Therefore we need to
explorethisbehaviourbyrandomlygeneratingsamples,before
westartminimisingtherelativeerror.Thisideaissimilartothe
so-called exploration/exploitation trade-off in reinforcement
learning [28].
B. Switching in the LacI-TetR System
Robust Switching in the LacI-TetR System. In Table II, we
specify different versions of the LacI-TetR system by varying
some of the parameters in (6). After that we compute the
switchingseparatricesandplottheminFigure6.Notethatthe
separatrices for F2 , F3 intersect, which happens since
lower lower
the vector fields f and f of systems F2 and F3 , cor-
2 3 lower lower
respondingly,arenotcomparable.Thismeansthatthereexists
a set X = {(x,u) ∈ D×U} on which f (x,u) (cid:54)(cid:22) f (x,u)
and f (x,u)(cid:54)(cid:22) f (x,u).
The separatrices for F1 , F1 lie very close to each
upper lower
otherdespitethenumberofparametersvariedandthelevelof
variations. This is not true for the separatrices F2 , F2
upper lower
andF3 ,F3 .Thisindicatesthattheswitchingseparatrix
upper lower
is sensitive to variations of some parameters more than to
variations of other. In our case, this happens because the
variationsinparametersp ,p ,p ,andp affectsignificantly
thepositionsofthestablesteadystates.Therefore,pulseswith
significantly smaller magnitudes are required to switch the
systems F2 and F3 in comparison with F2 and
lower lower upper
F3 , respectively.
Switching in LacI-TetR Systems with Perturbed Dynamics.
Consider the following three-state system
F = 1000 (15) x˙ = −4x +u,
p 3x1 x + 1 1 +5x 2 −0.3x 3 .
Consider two nominal systems F1 and F2 specified in Ta-
ble III by changing parameter values for p , p , p . In
Table III, the notations Gi and Gi stand for the upper
upper lower
and lower bounding system of Fi (for i=1,2).
Consider first the system F1 and compute the bounding
systems G1 and G1 . We will follow the procedure
upper lower
described in Section III. Using Proposition 1, it is easy to
check that with a positive value for p this system is not 2
monotone with respect to any orthant. Hence, we need to
Switching separatrices
Fig. 6. Switching separatrices for the LacI-TetR system (5). The system
parametersaredefinedinTableII.
boundthetermp x byconstantsinordertoobtainmonotone
bounding systems. By simulating the system we observe that
x lies in a bounded interval between 0 and z1(1), where
z1(1) is the first component of the initial point z1. Hence,
we can build an upper G1 and a lower G1 bounding
upper lower
system for the nominal one F1. We take the system G1 upper
with the same parameter values as the nominal one except for
p ,whichisequaltozero,andp equalto0.1z1(1).Similarly, 2 1 0
we choose the system G1 with p = 0, and p = 0. The lower 2 1
results can be seen in the upper panel of Figure 7. We have
computed the approximation of the switching separatrix for
F1 by simulating the system on a mesh grid in µ and τ.
Thisrequiresaconsiderablecomputationaleffort,butprovides
a decent approximation. Note that the switching separatix
for F1 appears to be a monotone curve, even though it
cannotbeguaranteed.However,thiscanbeguaranteedforthe
separatrices of the bounding systems, which are monotone.
Now let us compute the bounds on the switching separatrix
of the nominal system F2, where the Michaelis-Menten term
(x /(x +1)) prevents the system from being monotone. In a 1 1
similar fashion as for the case of F1, we can build an upper
G2 and a lower G2 bounding systems for F2. This upper lower
resultsintheswitchingseparatricesdepictedinthelowerpanel
of Figure 7. The bounds on the switching separatrix for F2
are tighter in comparison with the bounds of the switching
separatrix for F1. Note that in the case of the system F1, we
use the following bound 0 ≤ x ≤ z1(1), while in the case 1 0
of the system F2, we use the bound 0 ≤ x1 ≤ z 0 2(1) , where z2(1) is the first component of the in x it 1 i + al 1 poin z t 0 2 o (1 f )+ th 1 e 0
system F2. At the same time the numbers z1(1), z2(1) are 0 0
PARAMETERVALUESFORSYSTEMSWITHDIFFERENTPARAMETER
VARIATIONS,WHEREz
i(1)ISTHEFIRSTCOMPONENTOFTHEINITIAL
i OFTHESYSTEMFiFORiEQUALTO1AND2.
lower upper p2=0.1 p1=0 p1=0.1z
p1=p3=0 p2=p3=0 p2=p3=0
lower upper
p3=0.1 p1=0 p1=0.1 z2 z ( 0 2 1 ( ) 1 + ) 1 0
p1=p2=0 p2=p3=0 p2=p3=0
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70
Pulse lengthτ
10 15 20 25 30
Pulse lengthτ
Switching separatrices
5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40
Pulse length τ
Switching separatrices
Fig.7. TheswitchingseparatricesforsystemsF1(theupperpanel)andF2
(thelowerpanel)withlowerandupperbounds.
of order O(103), hence clearly z 0 2(1) (cid:28)z1(1). This means z2(1)+1 0
that the bounds on the vector fiel 0 d of F2 are tighter than the
bounds on the vector field of F1. This in turn indicates that
tighter bounds on the vector field entail tighter bounds on the
separatrix.
VI. FURTHERCOUNTEREXAMPLESANDAPPLICATIONS
Toxin-Antitoxin System. Consider a model of a toxin-
antitoxin system studied in [18]
]2(cid:19)
]2(cid:19)
where A and T is the total number of toxin and antitoxin
proteins, respectively, while [A ], [T ] is the number of free
toxin and antitoxin proteins. In [18], the authors considered
the model with ε = 0. In order to simplify our analysis we
set ε=10−6. If the parameters are chosen as follows:
σ =166.28, K =1, β =β =0.16, σ =102 T 0 M c A
Γ =0.2, K =K =0.3;
the system is bistable with two stable nodes. But the system
is not monotone and we were not able to find bounding
Fig. 8. Approximation of the switching separatrix for the toxin-antitoxin
system.
systems satisfying Assumptions A1-A4. Nevertheless, we ap-
proximated the switching sets and the switching separatrix on
ameshgridinµ∈[10,30]andτ ∈[5,40].Wehad200points
inthegridforτ and80pointsinthegridforµ.InFigure8we
plot a curve which separates the pairs (µ,τ) which toggle the
systemfromthosewhichdonot.Asthereadermaynoticethe
curve appears to be monotone. We can provide some intuition
behindthisphenomenon.Withεtendingtozero,wecanapply
singular perturbation theory (cf. [29]) to eliminate the states
[A ], [T ]. Numerical computations indicate that the reduced f f
ordersystemisnotmonotoneinR2 ,however,itismonotone
around the stable equilibria, which may explain monotonicity
of the switching separatrix of the full order system.
Switching in a Mass Action Kinetics System. The following
system was considered in [30]
x˙ =f (x ,x )=2k x −k x2−k x x −k x +βu,
1 1 1 2 1 2 2 1 3 1 2 4 1
x˙ =f (x ,x )=k x2−k x . 2 2 1 2 2 1 1 2
We can assume without loss of generality that k = 1, since
we can remove one of the parameters using a simple change
of variables. In [30] it is shown that the unforced system has
three equilibria:
(cid:17)2 0 k1− L k1+ L 2k3 2k3
where L = k −4k k , s0, s1 are stable nodes, and su is 1 3 4
a saddle. Naturally the system is bistable if L > 0, globally
asymptotically stable if L < 0 and a saddle-node bifurcation
occurs if L = 0. The system is not monotone in the positive
orthant, since the derivative of f (x ,x ) with respect to x 1 1 2 2
is equal to 2k −k x and it is negative for x > 2k /k .
1 3 1 1 1 3
However, we are interested in pairs (µ,τ), which are close to
theseparatrixandaffectthesysteminthedomainofattraction
of s0. It can be verified that all equilibria s0, su and s1 lie
inside the box D = {x ,x |0 ≤ x ≤ 2k /k }, hence the
system is monotone inside D and non-monotonicity outside
of this set does affect our problem.
The derivatives of f , f with respect to k and k do not 1 2 1 2
have the same sign hence the system is not monotone with
respecttoparametersk andk .Thesetermsappearduetoso-
called mass action kinetics, which are common in biological
applications and hence this problem is met often. We have
already removed the parameter k 2 from the consideration, 1.8
which simplifies the problem. A straightforward solution is
to treat every instance of k as an independent parameter.
Hence we have a vector of parameters [k , k , k , k ],
wherek istheinstanceofk enteringthefirstequation,and
k is the instance of k entering the second equation. Let
k ∈[7.7, 8.3], k ∈[1, 1.2], k ∈[1, 1.2] and consider the
lowerboundingparametervectorp =[7.7, 1.2, 1.2, 8.3],and
the upper bounding parameter vector p = [8.3, 1, 1, 7.7].
We apply Corollary 1 only to relatively small perturbations in 2 6 10 14
Pulse length τ
parameters, since with larger variations the system becomes
mono- or unstable. There is no indication that this problem is
uniquetothissystem,anddoesnotappearinothermass-action
systems.
We conclude this example by performing a sweep for the
parameter k ∈ [6,10], while k = k = 1 (see Figure 9).
Numerical simulations suggest that for any k ∈ (6,10) the
switching separatrix appears to lie between the blue and the
red curves, which are switching separatrices for k = 6 and
k = 10, respectively. Again we can only provide some
intuitionbehindthisobservation.Itisstraightforwardtoverify
that the gradient of su with respect to k is a negative
vector, and the gradient of s1 with respect to k is a positive
vector. Hence the equilibria depend on k in the way which
is consistent with a behaviour of a monotone system. This
example indicates that the behaviour of the equilibria may
be one of the necessary conditions allowing the switching
separatrix to be a monotone curve and change monotonically
with respect to parameter variations.
Shaping Pulses to Induce Oscillations in an Eight Species
GeneralisedRepressilator.Aneightspeciesgeneralisedrepres-
silator is an academic example, where each of the species re-
presses another species in a ring topology. The corresponding
dynamic equations for a symmetric generalised repressilator
are as follows:
p x˙ = 1 +p −p x +u ,
)p3 4 5 1 1
p x˙ 2 = 1+(x 1 1 /p 2 )p3 +p 4 −p 5 x 2 +u 2 , (16)
x˙ = 1 +p −p x , ∀i=3,...8,
i 1+(x i−1 /p 2 )p3 4 5 i
where p = 40, p = 1, p = 3, p = 0.5, and p = 1. This 1 2 3 4 5
system has two stable equilibria s1 and s2 and is monotone
with the respect to P R8 ×P R2, where P = diag([1, − x u x
1, 1, −1, 1, −1, 1, −1]), P = diag([1, −1]). It can
actually be shown that the system is strongly monotone in the
interior of R8 for all positive parameter values. The control ≥0
signal u can switch the system from the state s1 to the state 1
s2, while the control signal u can switch the system from
the state s2 to the state s1. The switching separatrix for the
control signal u is depicted in the left panel of Figure 10. 1
Note that the separatrix is identical for the control signal u ,
since the repressilator is symmetric.
Numerical simulations suggest that the trajectories exhibit
an oscillatory behaviour, while switching between the stable
steady states using a pulse. This is in agreement with pre-
vious studies that showed the existence of unstable periodic
orbits[19]inageneralisedrepressilator.Switchingtrajectories
Fig.9. Switchingseparatricesforamassactionkineticssystemwithdifferent
valuesfork1.Thebluecurveistheswitchingseparatrixfork1=6,thered
curve is the switching separatrix for k1 = 10. The green curves are the
switchingseparatricesfork1=6.1,7.5,8.5,9.9.
of species x for various pairs (µ,τ) are depicted in the right
panel of Figure 10. The observations made in the caption of
Figure 10 indicate that the closer the pair (µ,τ) is to the
switching separatrix the longer oscillations will persist.
We can set up another control problem: to induce os-
cillations in the generalised repressilator. One can address
the problem by forcing the trajectories to be close to the
unstable periodic orbit of the system, which, however, is very
hard to compute. In [31], it was proposed to track other
periodic trajectories instead. However, the solution was very
computationally expensive and offering little insight into the
problem. Here we will use pulses to induce oscillations as
was proposed in [19]. In contrast to [19], we provide a way
to shape all possible pulses inducing oscillations.
Let the initial point be s1. We can shape the control signal
u to switch to the state s2. Once we have reached an ε-ball
around the state s2, we can shape the control signal u to
switch back to the state s1 and so on. During switching we
will observe oscillations depending on the position of the pair
(µ,τ) with respect to the switching separatrix. Now we need
to define an automatic way of switching between the steady
(cid:12) states. Let M be equal to {z(cid:12)s1 (cid:22) x z (cid:22) x s2}. It can be verified that the unstable equilibrium lies in M, which typi-
cally holds for monotone systems. Moreover, the trajectories
observedinFigure10lieinMduetomonotonicity.Letε>0
and M ε = {z(cid:12)s1 +εP x 1 (cid:22) x z (cid:22) x s2 −εP x 1}, where 1 is
thevectorofones.ClearlyM ⊂Mandifεissmallenough ε
then oscillating trajectories lie in M . Since the repressilator ε
is symmetric we can assume that the shape of pulses for both
u and u is the same. In this case we can formalise our 1 2
control strategy as follows. If the event x(t ) (cid:22) s1+εP 1 e x x
occurs at time t , then e
If the event x(t )(cid:23) s2−εP 1 occurs at time t , then e x x e
Note that we change the entire control signals when the event
occurs, which we assume happens at some time t . Due to
this fact, the pulse µh(·,t +τ) is of length τ. The resulting
trajectoriesforthespeciesx andx ,aswellascontrolsignals
are depicted in Figure 11. Our control algorithm falls into the
4.5 5 5.5 6 6.5
Pulse lengthτ
snoitartnecnoC
0 50 100 150
Fig. 10. Switching between steady states in a generalised repressilator system. All trajectories generated by the pairs (µ,τ) corresponding to the black
crossesintheleftpanelwillconvergetoasteadystatewiththesamerateastheblackcurveintherightpanel.Similarcorrespondenceisvalidforthered
andgreencrossesintheleftpanelandtheredandgreencurvesintherightpanel.Thisobservationindicatesthatthecloserthepair(µ,τ)istotheswitching
separatrixthelongeroscillationswillpersist.
classofevent-basedcontrol,withtheeventsoccurringifx(t )
leaves M . For any small enough ε, our control strategy will
induce oscillations.
VII. CONCLUSIONANDDISCUSSION
In this paper we have presented a framework for shaping
pulsestocontrolbistablesystems.Ourmainmotivationcomes
from control problems arising in Synthetic Biology, but the
resultsholdinotherclassesofbistablesystems.Weconsidered
the problem of switching between stable steady states using
temporal pulses. We showed that the problem is feasible,
if the flow of the controlled system can be bounded from
aboveandbelowbyflowsofmonotonesystems.Wepresented
a detailed analysis of the conditions needed for switching,
together with an algorithm to compute the pulse’s length and
duration. We illustrated the theory with a number of case
studies and counterexamples that shed light on the limitations
of the approach and highlight the need for further theoretical
tools to control bistable non-monotone systems.
Throughoutthisworkwedidnottakeintoaccountstochas-
ticity in the model dynamics, which can be particularly im-
portant in biochemical systems [32]. Noisy bistable dynamics
can be controlled, for example, using reinforcement learning
algorithms as the ones described in [31], [33]. These ap-
proaches,however,requirelargeamountsofmeasurementdata
thataretypicallyimpracticaltoacquire.Apromisingextension
to our results is the switching problem in stochastic bimodal
snoitartnecnoC
systems. This requires the use of the so-called stochastically
monotone Markov decision processes, for which a whole new
set of theoretical tools needs to be developed. Work in this
direction started in [34] and the references within, addressing
the extension of the concept of monotonicity to stochastic
systems.