siftservice.com - Turning a Computer Vision
algorithm into a World Wide Web Service
Ahmad Pahlavan Tafti1, Hamid Hassannia2, and Zeyun Yu1
1 Department of Computer Science, University of Wisconsin -Milwaukee, WI, USA
2 IEEE Member, Uppsala, Sweden
Abstract. Image features detection and description is a longstanding
topic in computer vision and pattern recognition areas. The Scale In-
variant Feature Transform (SIFT) is probably the most popular and
widely demanded feature descriptor which facilitates a variety of com-
puter vision applications such as image registration, object tracking,
image forgery detection, and 3D surface reconstruction. This work in-
troduces a Software as a Service (SaaS) based implementation of the
any academic, educational and research purposes. The service provides
application-to-applicationinteractionandaimsRapidApplicationDevel-
opment (RAD) and also fast prototyping for computer vision students
and researchers all around the world. An Internet connection is all they
need!
Keywords: Computer Vision, SIFT Algorithm, Software as a Service
(SaaS).
1 Introduction
The Scale Invariant Feature Transform (SIFT) [1] has been the topic of many
computer vision projects due to its ability to detect feature points which are
invariant to image rotation, translation, and scaling. This is obviously evident
from Figure 1 which presents the journal and conference papers related to the
SIFTalgorithmwhichhavebeenpublishedinElsevierfrom2009to2014.While
several scientists have entered the development of SIFT based algorithm [3], [4],
[5],[6],providingaservice-basedSIFTalgorithmovertheInternetprotocolshas
not yet been developed. Having a Software as a Service (SaaS) based [7], [11]
SIFT algorithm can be fulfilled the following objectives:
• To facilitate Rapid Application Development (RAD) and fast prototyping
forcomputervisionstudentsandscientistsbyatinyserviceavailableonthe
Internet.
• Toprovideapplication-to-applicationinteractionforahighlydemandedcom-
puter vision algorithm.
• To make the SIFT algorithm available through both human-oriented and
application-oriented interfaces.
1v04820.4051:viXra
Fig.1. Number of Elsevier publications over last six years. Results achieved
by submitting the query ”SIFT algorithm” from Elsevier website at
In this contribution, we novel design and develop a SaaS based architecture
to implement a platform independent and reusable software component for the
SIFT algorithm. The service makes a new way to produce and exchange of
SIFT information over the standard Internet protocols. Based on its flexibility
and availability, it brings an opportunity for computer vision researchers who
want to apply the SIFT algorithm on their own images without the need of any
programming and installing any software applications. An Internet connection
is all we need!
This work initiates a study of SaaS based architecture for an essential com-
putervisiontechnique.Weexpecttheworkcanbridgethegapbetweencomputer
vision applications and World Wide Web services, stimulating more interests
from the computer vision community to the SaaS architecture and the Internet
of Things (IoT) areas. Our contribution could be considered as a preliminary
step towards the Computer Vision as a Service.
Therestofthepaperisarrangedasfollows.Wefirstgiveabriefexplanation
of the system and service design in Section 2. The experimental results along
with an application of the SIFT algorithm and the impact of the service are
shown in Section 3. Conclusion is presented in Section 4.
2 System and Service Design
SIFTalgorithmhasbasicallyfourmainstages,namely:1)Scale-spaceconstruc-
tionusingDifference-of-Gaussian(DoG),2)Stablefeatureslocalization,3)Gra-
dient orientation computation and magnitude assignment, and 4) Feature de-
scriptors extraction [1]. The first stage is to construct a DoG image pyramid
to determine the potential feature points in an image. As it is shown in equa-
tion (1), to create Gaussian filtered image, we should convolve the input image
I(x,y) with a Gaussian kernel K(x,y;σ) (equation (2)), where σ is the scale of
the Gaussian kernel, and conv2 is 2D convolution operation. Various Gaussian
blurred images in different scales are produced and DoGs are computed from
neighbors in the scale space. Then candidate feature points would be detected
by discovering exterma in the DoG images which are locally minima or maxima
in scale and space.
The next step is to compute the image gradient magnitude and principal
orientationtoextractassociateSIFTdescriptorfortheadetectedfeaturepoint.
Gradientmagnitudeasm(x,y)andprincipalorientationasθ(x,y)arecalculated
using the following two equations:
Finally,foreachfeaturepoint,asetoforientationhistogramswillbecreated
on 4×4 pixel neighborhoods with eight bins each. The size of the descriptor
vector can be varied. The high level service architecture of the siftservice.com is
shown in Figure 2.
Theservicecompromisestwodisparatemachines:aserviceconsumer(Client)
and the service provider (Application Server) [12]. Main components of each
section are presented within the subsystem blocks (Figure 2). WSDL stands
for Web Service Description Language, and it is an XML-based language for
describing SIFT web service and how to access it over the Internet protocols.
Discovery Services permit the discovery of the SIFT service. BPELWS stands
for Business Process Execution Language for Web Service, and it aims to sup-
portthemajorbehaviorsofbothexecutableandabstractimplementationofthe
service. SOAP stands for Simple Object Access Protocol [8], [10]. SOAP is an
XML-basedInternetprotocolwhichsupportsexchangingstructuredinformation
betweencomputersandapplications.UDDIwhichstandsforUniversalDescrip-
tion,DiscoveryandIntegrationisaspecificationforadistributedregistryofthe
SIFTservice[7],[8],[10],[11].Ansnapshotofsiftservice.comisshowninFigure
3.
3 Experimental Results
Inordertoexaminethegeneralperformanceofthesystem,twoexperimentswere
carried out on real digital images. Section 3.1 shows the experimental setup. In
Section3.2,wecomparethefeaturepointsdetectionaccuracyofthesystemwith
theoriginalexecutableSIFTsoftwareimplementedbyDavidLowe[2].InSection
Fig.2. siftservice.com: The service architecture.
3.3,weanalyzeandcomparematchingaccuracybetweenSIFTkeypointsintwo
images using the SIFT as a Service and the original executable SIFT software
[2]. We then introduce an application of the SIFT algorithm in Section 3.4. The
impact of the siftservice.com is presented in Section 3.5.
3.1 Experimental Setup
Allmodules,classes,components,andcommunicationpackagesofsiftservice.com
wereimplementedbyJavaSE7.Intheserverside(ApplicationServer),weused
a 64-bit Linux CentOS operating system on a virtual server with 2v cores pro-
cessor, 100 Mbits/s bandwidth, and 2GB of RAM. In the client side (Client),
we employed 64-bit MS Windows 8 operating system with 3.00 GHz Intel Dual
core CPU, 2MB cache, and 4GB of RAM.
3.2 Accuracy in Feature Points Detection
Inthissectionwebringupavalidationsummaryontheaccuracyandreliability
oftheproposedsystemforfeaturepointsdetection.Figure4showstheaccuracy
in feature points detection. The service produces feature points which are very
similar to the original one implemented by Lowe. The error threshold of the
SIFT as a Service is less than 1% in feature points detection.
Fig.3. siftservice.com: An snapshot.
Fig.4. Accuracy in Feature Points Detection. (A) Results obtained by the original
executable SIFT software implemented by David Lowe (number of feature: 1638). (B)
ResultsobtainedbytheSIFTasaService(numberoffeature:1627).ImageSet:EMS
Building.
3.3 Accuracy in Points Matching
Figure 5 shows the points matching accuracy for images ”hall01” and ”hall02”
formthe”Hall”imagesset.Wecanseethattheerrorthresholdforpointmatch-
ing is less than 2% comparing with the David Lowe’s implementation.
Fig.5. Accuracy in points matching. (A) Results obtained by the original executable
SIFT software implemented by David Lowe (number of matches: 166). (B) Results
obtained by the SIFT as a Service (number of matches:158). Image Set: Hall.
3.4 An Application: 3D Microscopy Vision
As we mentioned in the abstract, The SIFT algorithm has made in big advance
in many areas of computer vision application. An example is 3D surface recon-
struction, and in particular 3D microscopy vision. The general pipeline of 3D
microscopy vision is presented in Figure 6. The SIFT algorithm is used in step
2 of the pipeline. For further details and information on the proposed method,
please refer to [9]. We just recall that in that work [9], we employed SURF [13]
instead of SIFT, but other parts would be same.
3.5 siftservice.com Imapct
siftservice.com has been introduced and it is going to be popular for computer
vision research community. Figure 7 present the impact of siftservice.com from
December 2014 to March 2015.
Fig.6. The SIFT algorithm: An application.
Fig.7. siftservice.com impact. Number of users from December 2014 to March 2015.
4 Conclusion
TheSIFTalgorithmhasbeenwidelyusedinmanycomputervisionapplications.
Having SIFT as a Service would provide application-to-application interaction
and makes SIFT easier for computer vision researchers and students to Rapid
Application Development (RAD), communicating each other applications by a
tinyserviceavailableintheInternet.Inthisproject,wehavedesignedandimple-
mented the entire components of the system and addressed some experimental
results which show that the service offers promising results. The present work
is expected to stimulate more interest and draw attentions from the computer
vision community to the fast-growing Software as a Service and the Internet of
Things (IoT) area. Our contribution could be considered as a preliminary step
towards the Computer Vision as a Service. The service is freely available at