]nyd-ulf.scisyhp[
1v2613060/scisyhp:viXra
Simplified Variational Principles for Barotropic
Fluid Dynamics
Asher Yahaloma,b and Donald Lynden-Bella,c
a Institute of Astronomy, University of Cambridge
Madingley Road, Cambridge CB3 0HA, United Kingdom
b College of Judea and Samaria, Ariel 44284, Israel
c Clare College, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom
e-mail: dlb@ast.cam.ac.uk; asya@yosh.ac.il;
August 21, 2018
We introduce a three independent functions variational formalism
forstationaryandnon-stationarybarotropicflows. Thisislessthanthe
fourvariableswhichappearinthestandardequationsoffluiddynamics
which are the velocity field~v and the density ρ. It will be shown how
intermsofournewvariabletheEulerandcontinuityequationscanbe
integrated in the stationary case.
Keywords: Fluid dynamics, Variational principles
PACS number(s): 47.10.+g
1 Introduction
Variational principles for non-magnetic barotropic fluid dynamics an Eu-
lerian variational principle are well known. Initial attempts to formulate
Eulerian fluid dynamics in terms of a variational principle, were described
by Herivel [1], Serrin [2], Lin [3]. However, the variational principles devel-
oped by the above authors were very cumbersome containing quite a few
”Lagrange multipliers” and ”potentials”. The range of the total number
of independent functions in the above formulations ranges from eleven to
seven which exceeds by many the four functions appearing in the Eulerian
and continuity equations of a barotropic flow. And therefore did not have
any practical use or applications. Seliger & Whitham [4] have developed a
variational formalism which can be shown to depend on only four variables
for barotropic flow. Lynden-Bell & Katz [5] have described a variational
principle in terms of two functions the load λ (to be described below) and
density ρ. However, their formalism contains an implicit definition for the
velocity ~v such that one is required to solve a partial differential equation in
order to obtain both ~v in terms of ρ and λ as well as its variations. Much
thesamecriticismholdsfortheirgeneralvariationalfornon-barotropicflows
[6]. In this paper we overcome this limitation by paying the price of adding
an additional single function. Our formalism will allow arbitrary variations
and the definition of ~v will be explicit. Furthermore, we will show that for
stationary flows usingsomewhatdifferentthreevariational variables theEu-
ler and continuity equations may be reduced to a single non-linear algebraic
equation for the density and thus can be integrated.
We anticipate applications for this study both for stability analysis of
known fluid dynamics configurations and for designing efficient numerical
schemes for integrating the equations of fluid dynamics [7, 8, 9, 10].
Theplanofthispaperisasfollows: Wewillreviewthebasicequationsof
Eulerian fluid dynamics and give a somewhat different derivation of Seliger
& Whitham’s variational principle. Thenwe willdescribethethreefunction
variational principle for non-stationary fluid dynamics. Finally we will give
a different variational principle for stationary fluid dynamics and we will
show how in terms the new variational variables the stationary equations
of fluid dynamics that is the stationary Euler and continuity equations can
be reduced to a solution of a single non-linear algebraic equation for the
density.
2 Variational principle of non-stationary fluid dy-
Barotropic Eulerian fluids can be described in terms of four functions the
velocity ~v and density ρ. Those functions need to satisfy the continuity and
Euler equations:
In which the pressure p(ρ) is assumed to be a given function of the density.
Taking the curl of equation (2) will lead to:
in which:
is the vorticity. Equation (3) describes the fact that the vorticity lines are
”frozen” within the Eulerian flow1.
A very simple variational principle for non-stationary fluid dynamics
was described by Seliger & Whitham [4] and is brought here mainly for
completeness using a slightly different derivation than the one appearing in
the original paper. This will serve as a starting point for the next section in
which we will show how the variational principle can be simplified further.
Consider the action:
in which ε(ρ) is the specific internal energy. Obviously ν,α are Lagrange
multipliers which were inserted in such a way that the variational principle
will yield the following equations:
Provided ρ is not null those are just the continuity equation (1) and the
conditionsthatβ iscomoving. Letustakeanarbitraryvariationalderivative
of the above action with respect to ~v, this will result in:
1The most general vortical flux and mass preserving flows that may be attributed to
vortex lines were found in [11]
Provided that the above boundary term vanishes, as in the case of astro-
physical flows for which ρ = 0 on the free flow boundary, or the case in
which the fluid is contained in a vessel which induces a no flux boundary
condition δ~v nˆ = 0 (nˆ is a unit vector normal to the boundary), ~v must
have the following form:
this is nothing but Clebsch representation of the flow field (see for example
[14], [15, page 248]). Let us now take the variational derivative with respect
to the density ρ, we obtain:
in which w = ∂(ρε) is the specific enthalpy. Hence provided that δρ vanishes
on the boundary of the domain and in initial and final times the following
equation must be satisfied:
Finally we have to calculate the variation with respect to β this will lead us
to the following results:
Hence choosing δβ in such a way that the temporal and spatial boundary
terms vanish in the above integral will lead to the equation:
Using the continuity equation (1) this will lead to the equation:
ρ = 0 (13)
Hence for ρ= 0 both α and β are comoving coordinates. Since the vorticity
can be easily calculated from equation (8) to be:
Calculating ∂~ω in which ω is given by equation (14) and taking into account
both equation (13) and equation (6) will yield equation (3).
2.1 Euler’s equations
We shall now show that a velocity field given by equation (8), such that the
functions α,β,ν satisfy the corresponding equations (6,10,13) must satisfy
Euler’s equations. Let us calculate the material derivative of ~v:
dt dt dt∇ dt
It can be easily shown that:
In which x is a Cartesian coordinate and a summation convention is as-
sumed. Inserting the result from equations (16) into equation (15) yields:
This proves that the Euler equations can be derived from the action given
in equation (5) and hence all the equations of fluid dynamics can be derived
from the above action without restricting the variations in any way. Taking
the curl of equation (17) will lead to equation (3).
2.2 Simplified action
The reader of this paper might argue that the authors have introduced
unnecessary complications to the theory of fluid dynamics by adding three
more functions α,β,ν to the standard set~v,ρ. In the following we will show
that this is not so and the action given in equation (5) in a form suitable
for a pedagogic presentation can indeed be simplified. It is easy to show
that the Lagrangian density appearing in equation (5) can be written in the
form:
is a shorthand notation for
(see equation (8)). Thus
has three contributions:
~v boundary
The only term containing ~v is , it can easily be seen that this term will
lead, after we nullify the variational derivative, to equation (8) but will oth-
erwise have no contribution to other variational derivatives. Notice that the
term contains only complete partial derivatives and thus can not
contribute totheequations although itcan change theboundaryconditions.
Hence we see that equations (6), equation (10) and equation (13) can be de-
rived using the Lagrangian density ˆ in which ~vˆ replaces ~v in the relevant
equations. Furthermore, after integrating the four equations (6,10,13) we
can insert the potentials α,β,ν into equation (8) to obtain the physical ve-
locity ~v. Hence, the general barotropic fluid dynamics problem is changed
such that instead of solving the four equations (1,2) we need to solve an
alternative set which can be derived from the Lagrangian density ˆ.
2.3 The inverse problem
In the previous subsection we have shown that given a set of functions
α,β,ν satisfying the set of equations described in the previous subsections,
one can insert those functions into equation (8) and equation (14) to obtain
the physical velocity ~v and vorticity ~ω. In this subsection we will address
the inverse problem that is, supposewe aregiven thequantities~v and ρhow
can one calculate the potentials α,β,ν? The treatment in this section will
follow closely (with minor changes) the discussion given by Lynden-Bell &
Katz [5] and is given here for completeness.
Consider a thin tube surrounding a vortex line as described in figure 1,
the vorticity flux contained within the tubewhich is equal to the circulation
around the tube is:
and the mass contained with the tube is:
Figure 1: A thin tube surrounding a vortex line
in which dl is a length element along the tube. Since the vortex lines move
with the flow by virtue of equation (3) both the quantities ∆Φ and ∆M are
conserved and since the tube is thin we may define the conserved load:
in which the above integral is performed along the field line. Obviously the
parts of theline which go out of the flow to regions in which ρ = 0has a null
contribution to the integral. Since λ is conserved is satisfies the equation:
By construction surfaces of constant load move with the flow and contain
vortex lines. Hence the gradient to such surfaces must be orthogonal to the
field line:
Now consider an arbitrary comoving point on the vortex line and donate
it by i, and consider an additional comoving point on the vortex line and
donate it by r. The integral:
Figure 2: Surfaces of constant load
is also a conserved quantity which we may denote following Lynden-Bell &
Katz [5] as the generalized metage. µ(i) is an arbitrary number which can
be chosen differently for each vortex line. By construction:
Also it is easy to see that by differentiating along the vortex line we obtain:
At this point we have two comoving coordinates of flow, namely λ,µ obvi-
ously in a three dimensional flow we also have a third coordinate. However,
beforedefiningthethirdcoordinatewewillfinditusefultoworknotdirectly
with λ but with a function of λ. Now consider the vortical flux Φ(λ) within
a surface of constant load as described in figure 2 (the figure was given by
Lynden-Bell & Katz [5]). The fluxis a conserved quantity and dependsonly
on the load λ of the surrounding surface. Now we define the quantity:
α = = (28)
C(λ) is the circulation along lines on this surface. Obviously α satisfies the
equations:
Let us now define an additional comoving coordinate β∗ since ~µ is not
orthogonal to the ω~ lines we can choose ~β∗ to be orthogonal to t ∇ he ~ω lines
and not be in the direction of the ~α ∇ lines, that is we choose β∗ not to
depend only on α. Since both ~β∗ ∇ and ~α are orthogonal to ω~, ~ω must
take the form:
However, using equation (4) we have:
Which implies that A is a function of α,β∗. Now we can define a new
comoving function β such that:
In terms of this function we recover the representation given in equation
(14):
Hence we have shown how α,β can be constructed for a known ~v,ρ. Notice
however, that β is defined in a non unique way since one can redefine β for
exampleby performingthefollowing transformation: β β+f(α)inwhich
f(α) is an arbitrary function. The comoving coordinates α,β serve as labels
of the vortex lines. Moreover the vortical flux can be calculated as:
Finally we can use equation (8) to derive the function ν for any point s
within the flow:
in which i is any arbitrary point within the flow, the result will not depend
on the trajectory taken in the case that ν is single valued. If ν is not single
valued on should introduce a cut, which the integration trajectory should
not cross.
2.4 Stationary fluid dynamics
Stationary flows are a unique phenomena of Eulerian fluid dynamics which
has no counter part in Lagrangian fluid dynamics. The stationary flow is
definedbythefactthatthephysicalfields~v,ρdonotdependonthetemporal
coordinate. This however does not imply that the stationary potentials
α,β,ν are all functions of spatial coordinates alone. Moreover, it can be
shown that choosing the potentials in such a way will lead to erroneous
results in the sense that the stationary equations of motion can not be
derived from the Lagrangian density ˆ given in equation (19). However,
this problem can beamended easily as follows. Let us choose α,ν to depend
on the spatial coordinates alone. Let us choose β such that:
in which β¯ is a function of the spatial coordinates. The Lagrangian density
ˆ given in equation (19) will take the form:
(cid:18) (cid:19)
Varying the Lagrangian Lˆ = ˆd3x with respect to α,β,ν,ρ leads to the
following equations:
ρ~vˆ ~α= 0
α is thus the Bernoulli constant (this was also noticed in [7]). Calcula-
tions similar to the ones done in previous subsections will show that those
equations lead to the stationary Euler equations:
3 A simpler variational principle of non-stationary
fluid dynamics
Lynden-Bell & Katz [5] have shown that an Eulerian variational principle
for non-stationary fluid dynamics can be given in terms of two functions the
density ρ and the non-magnetic load λ defined in equation (22). However,
their velocity was given an implicit definition in terms of a partial differen-
tial equation and its variations was constrained to satisfy this equation. In
this section we will propose a three function variational principle in which
the variations of the functions are not constrained in any way, part of our
derivationwilloverlaptheformalismofLynden-Bell&Katz. Thethreevari-
ables will include the density ρ, the non-magnetic load λ and an additional
function to be defined in the next subsection. This variational principle is
simpler than the Seliger & Whitham variational principle [4] which is given
in terms of four functions and is more convenient than the Lynden-Bell &
Katz [5] variational principle since the variations are not constrained.
3.1 Velocity representation
Consider equation (24), since ~ω is orthogonal to ~λ we can write:
in which K~ is some arbitrary vector field. However, since ~ ω~ = 0 it follows
for some scalar function theta. Hence we ca
write:
This will lead to:
For the time being ν is an arbitrary scalar function, the choice of nota-
tion will be justified later. Consider now equation (23), inserting into this
equation ~v given in equation (42) will result in:
This can be solved for θ, the solution obtained is:
∂λ + ~λ ~ν
− ~λ 2 !
Inserting the above expression for θ into equation (42) will yield:
in which λˆ = ∇~λ is a unit vector perpendicular to the load surfaces and
~∗ν = ~ν λˆ(λˆ ~ν) is the component of ~ν parallel to the load surfaces.
N ∇ otice t ∇ hat − the v · e ∇ ctor ~v ~ν is orthogona ∇ l to the load surfaces and that:
(~v ~ν) λˆ
Further more by construction the velocity field ~v given by equation (45)
ensures that the load surfaces are comoving. Let us calculate the circulation
along λ surfaces:
[ν] is the discontinuity of ν across a cut which is introduced on the λ
surface. Hence in order that circulation C(λ) on the load surfaces (and
hence everywhere) will not vanish ν must be multiple-valued. Following
Lamb [15, page 180, article 132, equation 1] we write ν in the form:
in terms of ν¯ the velocity is given as:
And the explicit dependence of the velocity field ~v on the circulation along
the load surfaces C(λ) is evident.
3.2 The variational principle
Consider the action:
In which~v is definedby equation (45). ν is not a simpleLagrange multiplier
since ~v is dependent on ν through equation (45). Taking the variational
derivative of with respect to ν will yield:
This can be rewritten as:
Now by virtue of equation (45):
which is parallel to the load surfaces, while from equation (42) we see that
~v ~ν is orthogonal to theload surfaces. Hence, the scalar productof those
vector must be null and we can write:
Thus the action variation can be written as:
dS~ ρν~∗δν
This will yield the continuity equation using the standard variational pro-
cedure. Notice that the surface should include also the ”cut” since the ν
functionisingeneralmultivalued. Letusnowtakethevariationalderivative
with respect to the density ρ, we obtain:
Hence provided that δρ vanishes on the boundary of the domain and in
initial and final times the following equation must be satisfied:
This is the same equation as equation (10) and justifies the use of the sym-
bol ν in equation (42). Finally we have to calculate the variation of the
Lagrangian density with respect to λ this will lead us to the following re-
sults:
in equation (46) was used. Let us calculate δ ~v, after some straightforward
manipulations one arrives at the result:
(cid:20) (cid:21)
Insertingequation(59)intoequation(58)andintegratingbypartswillyield:
(cid:20) (cid:21)
Hence the total variation of the action will become:
Z (cid:20) (cid:21)
Hence choosing δλ in such a way that the temporal and spatial boundary
terms vanish in the above integral will lead to the equation:
Using the continuity equation (1) will lead to the equation:
ρ = 0 (63)
Hence for ρ = 0 both λ and θ are comoving. Comparing equation (8) to
equation (42) we see that α is analogue to θ and β is analogue to λ and
all those variables are comoving. Furthermore, the ν function in equation
(42) satisfies the same equation as the ν appearing in equation (8) which is
equation (57). It follows immediately without the need for any additional
calculations that~v given in equation (42) satisfies Euler’s equations (2), the
proof for this is given in subsection 2.1 in which one should replace α with
θ and β with λ. Thus all the equations of fluid dynamics can be derived
from the action (50) without restricting the variations in any way. The
reader should notice an important difference between the current and pre-
vious formalism. In the current formalism θ is a dependent variable defined
by equation (44), while in the previous formalism the analogue quantity α
was an independentvariational variable. Thusequation (63) shouldbecon-
sidered as some what complicated second-order partial differential equation
(in the temporal coordinate t) for λ which should be solved simultaneously
with equation (57) and equation (1).
3.3 Simplified action
The Lagrangian density given in equation (50) can be written explicitly
in terms of the three variational variables ρ,λ,ν as follows:
Noticethattheterm containsonlycompletepartialderivativesand
thus can not contribute to the equations although it can change the bound-
ary conditions. Hence we see that equation (1), equation (57) and equation
(63) can be derived using the Lagrangian density ˆ in which ~v is given in
terms of equation (45) in the relevant equations. Furthermore, after inte-
grating those three equations we can insert the potentials λ,ν into equation
(45) to obtain the physical velocity ~v. Hence, the general barotropic fluid
dynamics problem is altered such that instead of solving the four equations
(1,2) we need to solve an alternative set of three equations which can be de-
rived from the Lagrangian density ˆ. Notice that the specific choice of the
labelling of the λ surfaces is not important in the above Lagrangian density
one can replace: λ > Λ(λ), without changing the Lagrangian functional
form. This means that only the shape of the λ surface is important not
their labelling. In group theoretic language this implies that the Lagrangian
is invariant under an infinite symmetry group and hence should posses an
infinite number of constants of motion. In terms of the Lamb type function
ν¯ defined in equation (48), the Lagrangian density given in equation (50)
can be rewritten in the form:
Which emphasize the dependence of the Lagrangian on the the circulations
along the load surfaces C(λ) which are given as initial conditions.
3.4 Stationary fluid dynamics
For stationary flows we assume that both the density ρ and the load λ are
time independent. Hence the velocity field given in equation (45) can be
written as:
∇ − ·∇ ∇ ∇
thus the stationary flow is parallel to the load surfaces. From the above
equation we see that in the stationary case ν can be written in the form:
in which f(λ,t) is an arbitrary function and ν is independent of the tem-
poral coordinate. Hence we can rewrite the velocity ~v as:
Inserting equation (67) and equation (68) into equation (57) will yield:
in which B(λ) is the Bernoulli constant. Integrating we obtain:
the arbitrary g(λ) function can be absorbed into ν and thus we rewrite
equation (67) in the form:
Further morewe can rewritetheconserved quantity θ given in equation (44)
as:
The Lagrangian density given in equation (50) can be written in the sta-
tionary case taking into account equation (68) and equation (71) as follows:
(cid:20) (cid:21)
(cid:20) (cid:21)
(cid:20) (cid:21)
TakingthevariationalderivativeoftheLagrangiandensity ˆwithrespectto
themassdensityρwillyieldtheBernoulliequation(69). Thevariationofthe
Lagrangian Lˆ = d3xˆ with respect to ν will yield the mass conservation
equation:
this form is equivalent to the standard stationary continuity equation
~ (ρ~v) = 0 since there is no mass flux orthogonal to the load surfaces.
Finally taking the variation of Lˆ with respect to λ will yield:
Which can be also obtained by inserting equation (72) into equation (63).
Hence we obtained three equations (69,74,75) for the three spatial functions
ρ,λ and ν . Admittedly those equations do not have a particularly simple
form, we will obtain a somewhat better set of equations in the next section.
4 Simplified variational principle for stationary fluid
Intheprevioussections wehave shownthatfluiddynamicscan bedescribed
in terms of four first order differential equations and in term of an action
principle from which those equations can be derived. An alternative deriva-
tion in terms of three differential equations one of which (equation (63)) is
second order has been introduced as well. Those formalisms were shown to
applytobothstationaryandnon-stationaryfluiddynamics. Inthefollowing
a different three functions formalism for stationary fluid dynamics is intro-
duced. In the suggested representation, the Euler and continuity equations
can be integrated leaving only an algebraic equation to solve.
Consider equation (13), for a stationary flow it takes the form:
Hence ~v can take the form:
However, since the velocity field must satisfy the stationary mass conserva-
tion equation equation (1):
We see that K~ must have the form K~ = ~N, where N is an arbitrary
function. Thus, ~v takes the form:
Let us now calculate ~v ω~ in which ~ω is given by equation (14), hence:
× ρ × ∇ ×∇
ρ∇ ∇ ×∇ ·∇
Now since the flow is stationary N can be at most a function of the three
comoving coordinates α,β¯,µ defined in subsections 2.2 and 2.4, hence:
Inserting equation (81) into equation (80) will yield:
Rearranging terms and using vorticity formula (14) we can simplify the
above equation and obtain:
However, using equation (27) this will simplify to the form:
Now letusconsider equation (3), forstationary flowsthis willtake theform:
Inserting equation (84) into equation (85) will lead to the equation:
However, since N is at most a function of α,β¯,µ. It follows that ∂N is some
function of α:
This can be easily integrated to yield:
Inserting this back into equation (79) will yield:
Let us now replace the set of variables α,β¯ with a new set α′,β¯′ such that:
This will not have any effect on the vorticity presentation given in equation
(14) since:
However, the velocity will have a simpler presentation and will take the
form:
in which G′ = G. At this point one should remember that µ was defined
in equation (25) up to an arbitrary constant which can very between vortex
lines. Since the lines are labelled by their α′,β¯′ values it follows that we
can add an arbitrary function of α′,β¯′ to µ without effecting its properties.
Hence we can define a new µ′ such that:
Inserting equation (93) into equation (92) will lead to a simplified equation
for ~v:
In the following the primes on α,β¯,µ will be ignored. It is obvious that ~v
satisfies the following set of equations:
to derive the right hand equation we have used both equation (27) and
equation (14). Hence µ,α are both comoving and stationary. As for β¯ it
satisfies equation (38).
By vector multiplying ~v and ω~ and using equations (94,14) we obtain:
this means that both ~v and ~ω lie on α surfaces and provide a vector basis
for this two dimensional surface.
4.1 The action principle
In the previous subsection we have shown that if the velocity field~v is given
by equation (94) than equation (1) is satisfied automatically for stationary
flows. TocompletethesetofequationswewillshowhowtheEulerequations
(2) can be derived from the Lagrangian:
In which ~v is given by equation (94) and the density ρ is given by equation
(27):
In this case the Lagrangian density of equation (97) will take the form:
L 2 ρ − !
andcanbeseenexplicitlytodependononlythreefunctions. Thevariational
derivative of L given in equation (97) is:
δL = δ d3x
Let us make arbitrary small variations δα = (δα,δβ,δµ) of the functions
α = (α,β,µ). Let us define the vector:
This will lead to the equation:
Making a variation of ρ given in equation (98) with respect to α will yield:
(for a proof see for example [12]). Calculating δ~v by varying equation (94)
will give:
Inserting equations (103,104) into equation (100) will yield:
·∇× × ∇· 2
Using the well known vector identity:
and the theorem of Gauss we can write now equation (100) in the form:
Suppose now that δL = 0 for a ξ~ such that the boundary term in the above
equationisnullbutthatξ~
isotherwisearbitrary,thenitentailstheequation:
Using the vector identity :
2∇ ·∇ × ∇×
and rearranging terms we recover the stationary Euler equations:
4.2 The integration of the stationary Euler equations
Let us now combine equation (108) with equation (96), this will yield:
which can easily be integrated to yield:
in which an arbitrary constant is absorbed into α, this is consistent with
equation (38) and implies that α is the Bernoulli constant. Let us now
insert ~v given by equation (94) into the above equation:
2 ρ !
This can be rewritten as:
By defining:
We obtain:
If one chooses an α and µ functions such that the above nonlinear equation
has a positive (or zero) solution for Π at every point in space than one
obtains a solution of both the Euler and continuity equations in which ~v is
given by equation (94) and ρ = +√Π. One should notice, however, that
α and µ are not arbitrary functions. α is a function of the load defined in
equation (22)andthusaccordingtoequation (24)mustsatisfytheequation:
that is both the velocity and vorticity fields must lie on the alpha surfaces.
While for the velocity ~v this is assured by equation (94) this is not assured
for the vorticity. Furthermore, µ is not an arbitrary function it is a metage
function an thus must satisfy equation (27). Moreover, obtaining a solution
does not imply that the obtained solution is stable. Having said that we
notice thatthetechniquerequiresonly thesolution ofthealgebraic equation
(116) and does involve solving any differential equations.
5 Conclusion
In this paper we have reviewed Eulerian variational principles for non-
stationary barotropic fluid dynamics and introduced a simpler three inde-
pendent functions variational formalisms for stationary and non-stationary
barotropic flows. This is less than the four variables which appear in the
standard equations of fluid dynamics which are the velocity field ~v and the
density ρ. We have shown how in terms of our new variables the stationary
Euler and continuity equations can be integrated, such that the station-
ary Eulerian fluid dynamics problem is reduced to a non-linear algebraic
equation for the density.
Theproblemofstabilityanalysisandthedescriptionofnumericalschemes
usingthedescribedvariational principlesexceed thescopeof thispaper. We
suspect that for achieving this we will need to add additional constants of
motion constraints to the action as was done by [16, 17] see also [18], hope-
fully this will be discussed in a future paper.