1v5402160/sc:viXra
SIMPS: Using Sociology for Personal Mobility
Vincent Borrel, Franck Legendre, Marcelo Dias de Amorim, and Serge Fdida
Abstract—Assessing mobility in a thorough fashion is a cru- specificdistributionsinordertoyieldmorerealisticresults[2],
cial step toward more efficient mobile network design. Recent [4].
research on mobility has focused on two main points: analyzing Recent mobility measurements performed both indoor and
modelsandstudyingtheirimpactondatatransport.Theseworks
outdoor [6], [7] enabled the proposal of trace-based models
investigatetheconsequencesofmobility.Inthispaper,instead,we
calibrated with empirical data [8], [9], [10]. Furthermore,
focusonthecausesofmobility.Startingfromestablishedresearch
in sociology, we propose SIMPS, a mobility model of human a number of analyses show that both contact and inter-
crowdmotion.Thismodeldefinestwocomplimentarybehaviors, contact distributions [7], [6], as well as location popularity
namely socialize and isolate, that regulate an individual with distribution [9], follow power-law distributions. They also al-
regard to her/his own sociability level. SIMPS leads to results
lowedrevisitingthe realnessof existingmodels.For example,
that agree with scaling laws observed both in small-scale and
measurements have confirmed the presumption that RWP is large-scale human motion. Although our model defines only
two simple individual behaviors, we observe many emerging unable to realistically model human mobility, since it leads
collective behaviors (group formation/splitting, path formation, to exponential distributions for both contact and inter-contact
andevolution).Toourknowledge,SIMPSisthefirstmodelinthe times. Another impact of measurement-based studies is that
networkingcommunitythattacklestherootsgoverningmobility.
it is now possible to reassess mobility model assumptions.
For example, in the valuable work done by Grossglauser
IndexTerms—Mobilitymodeling,sociology,self-organizednet- and Tse [11], the authors assumed i.i.d. random placement
works.
of nodes; this is to be compared to the location popularity
distribution found by Tuduce and Gross [9].
Despite the increasing number of works questioning the
I. INTRODUCTION
effectiveroleofmobility,twomainissuesremainunanswered:
MOBILITY modelingaims at describingin the most ac- • Lack of explanation of the process governing mobility.
curate and simplest way the motion of mobile entities. Should RWP be used to represent a worst-case scenario
Theyarefundamentaltoolsinalargevarietyofdomains,such or the uncorrelated displacement of individuals using
asphysics,biology,sociology,networking,electronicgaming, different transport facilities? In order to represent more
and many others. specific scenarios, a number of models have simply
As of now, there is a growing number of mobility models embedded realistic and higher level features and rules to
usedinthedesignandanalysisofcommunicationsystems,but RWP [2], [12]. Yet, neither advanced evidence that they
how many of them fully represent the aspects characterizing captured realistic displacements.
the mobility of human beings? This is a fundamental issue, • Retained modeling methodology. Recent proposed mod-
since in many situations the mobility of communicating and els [9], [13] have been designed to artificially match
sensing equipments is the reflex of human mobility. In this a very limited set of empirical observations. No clear
paper, we specifically address this question. methodologyisappliedtoevaluatetheproposedmobility
Mobility modeling refers in general to the Random Way- models.
point model (RWP), which is the de-facto standard for both Wearguethatafardeeperinvestigationoftherootsgovern-
theoretical analysis and simulation studies.RWP belongs to ing mobility is necessary toward realistic mobility modeling.
the same class as Brownian motion, also called random walk, Instead of simply replaying observed mobility patterns, we
and has the main advantagesof being simple and analytically propose to rely on well established theories that tackle the
tractable. Nevertheless, the simplicity provided by RWP fails natural process which govern mobility at its roots. The con-
in capturing realistic behaviors observed in human mobil- sequence is the natural emergence of mobility characteristics
ity, as shown by a number of recent studies [1], [2], [3], foundin measurements;this is contraryto currentapproaches
[4]. Fortunately, great advances have been recently achieved where these characteristics are artificially generated. To this
toward more realistic mobility models since the networking end, we revisit the way human mobility modeling is done
communityhas decidedto investigatemobilityin a finer level by tackling its causes and no more trying to match its
of details. A first set of models is based on expectations of consequences.
howmobilityisperformedinparticularsituationssuchasfirst In this paper, we propose SIMPS (Sociological Interaction
proposals of campus [2] and vehicular mobility models [3], MobilityforPopulationSimulation),amobilitymodelthatex-
[5]. Another set of proposals tweak RWP parameters with ploresrecentsociologicalfindingsdrivinghumaninteractions:
(a) each human has specific socialization needs, quantified
Theauthors are with the LIP6/CNRS Laboratory of the Universite´ Pierre by a target social interaction level, which corresponds to
et Marie Curie – Paris VI. Emails: borrel,legendre,amorim,sf @rp.lip6.fr.
This work has been partially supporte{d by the WIP European p}roject under her/his personal status (e.g., age and social class [14], [15]);
contract 27402andRNRTAirnet. (b) humans make acquaintances in order to meet their social
interaction needs [16], [17]. In this paper, we show that these Sociabilityinteriority Arrowsoncurvesgo
fromyouthtoolderage
two components can be translated into a coherent set of
Upperclasses
behaviors driving the dynamics of simulated entities.
Forthecalibrationandvalidationofthemodel,wecompare Mediumclasses
the simulation results with empirical observations obtained
from measurements referencedpreviously.To our knowledge, Popularclasses
this is the first time a mobility model exhibits such accurate Sociabilitylevel
matching with empirical observations. This is the basis for a
high confidence in the validity of the model.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In
Section II, we present some background required for the
definition of our model. In Section III, we detail the SIMPS
Sociabilityexteriority
model and its parameters. Then, in Section IV, we present
Source:M.Forse(1981)
an extensive analysis of SIMPS parameters. In Section V, we
describe the methodology used for the tests performed and Fig.1. Evolutionofthesociabilityofhumans.Ascanbeseen,thecharacter-
istics ofone’s sociability are dependent onintrinsic personal characteristics,
discussedinSectionVI.Inperspectiveofthisanalysis,further
suchassocial classandage,insteadof,e.g.,thesituation thepersonisin.
points are discussed in Section VII. Finally, in Section VIII
we conclude this work.
couldassume – asshownby Fig. 1. Thissocializationlevelis
II. RATIONALE
translatedtoaneedforsocialinteractions.Thesecondfinding,
In the following, we give the required background to interactivity, is derived from a socialization behavior defined
understand our proposal. We first start by describing the in [16], [17], that assesses that individuals’ aim to fulfill
modeling approaches we have retained. We then reconsider their sociological interaction needs. This can be expressed
the importance of collective motion in mobility. Eventually, by building new social ties until the needs are fulfilled or
we describe the sociological basis upon which our approach by satisfying these needs by encountering already known
relies upon. acquaintances.Theseacquaintancesaredefinedbyindividuals
SIMPS adopts a mobility modeling approach centered on to whom an individual is tightened in a social network.
behavioral rules. Behavioral mobility models rely on contin- Yet, social networks have already been used to design
uously interacting rules that express atomic behaviors gov- mobility models such as the ones proposed by Musolesi et
erning mobility. Such an approach finds great success in al. [10], [19]. In these authors’ proposal, individuals are
otherdomainssuchasphysicsandartificialintelligence.SIMPS gathered in clusters by a heuristic which processes a graph
defines two behavioral rules, namely socialize and isolate. representing social ties. Each cluster is then affected to a
Theserulesexpressrecentsociologicalfindingsdrivinghuman specific region in space. Mobility is generated by individuals
interactions.Ofcourse,nomodelcanrealisticallyintegrateall moving from region to region according to a preferential
potential behaviors that drive human motion. In fact, human attachment process.1 In a companion prior paper, we have
beings are driven by many interacting influences, needs and already defined a mobility model based on this process [20].
motives driven by schedules, social ties, to cite a few. Hence, Yet, as we will see in the next section, Musolesi et al.’s
ourgoalis to(i) relyonrealistic sociologicalassumptions(ii) proposal and our model do not exploit the same social basis
with a reduced set of behaviors (simple model as possible) and hence differ in their expression and results.
(iii) still exhibiting recent distributions observed empirically.
A crucial point in modeling human mobility is to char-
III. SIMPS: AN INTERACTION BASEDMOBILITY MODEL
acterize collective behaviors. The current approach to group
modelingdoesnotgofurtherthanproposingcorrelatedmotion In this section, we present SIMPS in detail.
as in RPGM [18] and leaves open the processes behind
groupcomposition(merges)andgroupsplits.SIMPSresponds
A. Overview
to these limitations by having emerging collective behaviors
results of the social interactions driven by our two rules. SIMPS is a model of the social component of human
The difficulty is now to find ‘realistic’ assumptions of social motion. At the scale of a simulation, we assume: (i) fixed
interactions. socialinteractionneedperindividualand(ii)fixedsocialgraph
We base our proposal on the following findings. The first representing social ties between individuals. Hence, the need
finding, intrinsicality, has been expressed concurrently in the of social interactions is satisfied by either encountering ac-
literaturebyseveralresearchpapers[14],[15].Itstatesthatthe quaintancesorescapingfromnon-acquaintances.Thisrequires
sociability level of a given person is intrinsic to each person, thatindividualsmeetthroughspatialdisplacements(mobility).
and strongly dependent on internal factors (e.g., social class
and age). This means that each individual has its own and 1In a graph, this process specifies that incoming nodes create links with
already present ones, with a probability proportional to the latter’s degree.
constantsociabilitylevelatagivenperiodinlifethatdoesnot
Whileextremelysimple,thisprocessgeneratesgraphswithascale-freenode-
dependonitsplaceinasocialnetwork–contrarytowhatone degreedistribution.
]Figures/ControlLoopHoriz.eps
The interactions with acquaintances and non-acquaintances
can be translated into a behavioral model. From these behav- Fig.2. Pseudo-control loopforthecomputation oftheperceived surround.
iors,definedbyrules,individualsjoinandleaveacquaintances.
In SIMPS, each individual is associated with a personal behavior
sociability level, which is the equilibrium point of the social
interaction volume she/he tries to achieve all the time. Each
individual is also associated with a context-aware indicator, isolate
namely perceived surround, which indicates the individual’s
perception of her/his current socialization volume; basically,
this value depends on the number of surroundingindividuals.
Inordertomeetthedesiredsociabilitylevel,individualscan
resorttotwocomplementarybehaviors:socialize–movements
towardacquaintances–andisolate–toescapefromundesired ui
comfortrange
presences. The acquaintances of an individual are determined
bythesocialgraphin whichacquaintancesare representedby
directed edges. The effects of socialize and isolate behaviors
are, respectively, to raise and lower one’s perceivedsurround. Fig.3. Sharphysteresis curveforbehavior decisionprocess.
Toactivateoneofthesebehaviors,afeedbackdecisionprocess
estimates, continuallyandforeveryindividual,her/hiscurrent
socialization volume, and compares it to the individual’s own individualswithini’ssocialsphereattimeτ.Theperiodofthe
needs. pseudo-control loop is called half-perception time and noted
SIMPS is composed of two parts: social motion influence τ .
andmotionexecutionunit.Thesocialmotioninfluenceupdates We can now give expressions that determine the values of
an individual’s current behavior to either socialize or isolate. thedifferentvariables.Individuali’ssurroundisupdatedevery
The motion execution unit is responsible for translating the τ seconds as follows:
behavioradoptedbyanindividualintomotion.Wedetailthese
processes in the following. U i (τ)+u i
where U (τ) is given by:
B. Social motion influence i
SIMPS simulates the dynamicpropertiesof a population
containingN individualsinatwo-dimensionalplane(althoug P h U i (τ)= P i,j , where P i,j = (cid:26) 1 0 , , i o f th | −→ e ij rw |≤ ise R . soc ,
its expressions can be easily extended to more dimensions). X
Time τ is assumed to be discrete, with steps of ∆ .
Individual i tends to socialize at her/his own volume,
plus or minus a certain variation. This defines the following
In Eq. 3, −→ij denotes the Euclidian distance between nodes i
two random variables: | |
and j.
• s i , or the sociability level of node i, is the number of The perceived surround u i serves as input to the feedback
individuals that node i aims at being surrounded by. decisionprocess,whichupdatesthebehavioroftheindividual
• t i , or the tolerance level of node i, is the fractionalvari- according to a sharp hysteresis as shown in Fig. 3. This
ation of the sociability level under which the individual hysteresis depends on both the individual’s sociability s and
still feels comfortable. tolerance level t .
Following these random variables, we can define i’s social
comfort range: C. The twin social behaviors
SIMPS also relies on social graphs from which motion
z i =[s i (1 t i ),s i (1+t i )]. (1) influencebehaviorsarederived.Socialgraphsdonotrepresent
physical proximity, but only relationships among individuals.
According to the theory of proxemics [21], the social
Nevertheless, the former influences the latter, since close
awareness of an individual is situated in a sphere around
acquaintances tend to get physically closer.
her/him, whose radius R , namely social distance, is ap-
soc In SIMPS, a social graph G=(V,E) is oriented and non-
proximately 3.5 meters, or 12 feet (cf., Section IV). In this
Eulerian. Vertices represent the nodes in the topology. Links,
sphere,the perceptionof nearbyindividualsis notimmediate,
valuated in the range [0;1], represent the acquaintances felt
i.e., individuals progressively notice the presence of others.
from its origin node toward its destination node: zero means
Such a fuzzy perception is called the perceived surround,
no acquaintance at all (i.e., the destination is stranger to the
noted u . In order to reproduce this perception, in SIMPS,
i origin)whileonemeanshighacquaintance(i.e.,thedestination
individuali’s perceptionis renderedby a pseudo-controlloop
has the maximum social proximity with the origin).2
as shown in Fig. 2. In this loop, the perceived surround u
is periodically mixed with U
(τ), which gives the number of 2Observethatthesocialgraphdoesnothavetobecomplete.
]./Figures/Tensions.eps
Fig.4. Illustration ofthetensioncalculation process whentheindividual presents either socialize orisolate behaviors.
The acquaintance felt by i toward j is expressed as: a limi,τ ∆ τ
A i→j = (cid:26) 0 f(l i→j ) i o f th l i e → rw j i ∈ se, E (4) − a − ri → ,τ ∆ τ
where f(l) is the weight of edge l i→j . − v → −→ z
Similarly,thestrangenessA feltbyitowardj isdefined h
as:
A i→j =1 A i→j . (5) v maxi i − v − i, − τ − − − ∆ → τ
We can now precisely define the twin behaviors of nodes:
Fig.5. Calculation ofalimi,τ ,inrelation toi’smaximumvelocity vmaxi.
Definition 1: (Socialize) Individuals are attracted by ac-
quaintances. The attractive tension η felt by i toward j is
a vector collinear to −→ij, whose magnitude is proportional to
the acquaintance A and inversely proportional to a power time with a neutral result. In this situation, the individual
λ of the distance −→ij :3 hesitates and does not move. This situation, which is quite
| | rare,isacaseofinstableequilibrium.Thefactthatneighboring
ˆ individuals move makes this situation very short-lived.
D. Motion execution unit
Definition 2: (Isolate) Individuals are repulsed by
Thesocialmotioninfluenceisnotthesoleparametertohave
strangers. The repulsive tension η felt by individual i
animpactonhumanmotion.Theroleofthemotionexecution
toward any other individual j is a vector collinear to −→ji,
unit is to comply with two basic parameters governing the
whose amplitude is proportionalto the strangeness A and
physical motion of individuals: velocity and acceleration. A
inversely proportionalto a power λ of the distance −→ij :
| | more complete set of parameters (e.g., collision avoidance or
ˆ terrain diversity) could be implemented; however, in order
i→j (7) to focus on the social aspect of mobility, we only consider
velocity and acceleration.
Velocitiesandaccelerationsaredistributedaccordingtotwo
The λ parameter is called distance fading exponent.
randomvariables,respectivelyV andA,whosecharacteristics
will be discussed later on. Individual i is associated with an
Social motion influence. Nodes are either in socialize or
acceleration request, a , which is proportionalto i’s social
isolatemode(asdescribedinSectionIII-B).Wheninsocialize −−ri→,τ
motion influence:
mode, we have that η = η . On the other hand, when in
isolate mode, node i applies η = η . The vectorial sum
η = η of all attractive or repulsive tensions give the −
directiPon of the willingness,
, of i’s socialmotion influence
where amaxi denotes the maximum scalar acceleration indi-
(as depicted in Fig. 4.a and 4.b):
vidual i tolerates.
ηˆe , if η =0, The acceleration request is applied with respect to i’s
− w −i→,τ = (cid:26) −→ −→ 0 i , i,τ oth | −→ er i w |6 ise, (8) maximum velocity vmaxi . Given i’s velocity vector at time
where e i,τ , called i’s excitation, is given by: τ req − ue ∆ st τ , , w − v −i e ,−τ c −− o −∆→ m τ p , u a t n e d th th e e m d a i x re im cti u o m n − a a −r c ˆ i c →, e τ le o r f at t i h o e n a a c l c im el i e ,τ rat t i h o a n t
can be applied for a duration ∆
without trespassing vmaxi .
e i,τ =max (cid:18)(cid:12) s − t (cid:12) ,1 (cid:19) . (9) Since SIMPS discretizes time τ in steps of ∆ τ , we have:
(cid:12) i i (cid:12)
(cid:12) (cid:12)
1, when i’s surround u falls outside i’s comfort range z = and the speed limit condition:
A special instance of Eq. 8 happens when the sum of
vmaxi . (12)
tensionsisanullvector.Typically,thisrefersasituationwhere
A short glance at Fig. 5 gives us:
an individual is attracted toward many directions at the same
3Inournotation, −→i ˆ j,alsoexpressedas ‚ ‚−→ij ‚ ‚,isthenormof−→ij. h=
(cid:17)(cid:12)
(cid:12) (cid:12)
(cid:12) (cid:12)
B. Social interactions characteristics
These characteristics govern the interactions between in-
l = q vmax 2 i − h2 = (14) dividuals. Random variables S i and T i , introduced in Sec-
2 tionIII-B,denote,respectively,thevolumeofsocialinteraction
= r vmax 2 i −(cid:16)| − v −i,−τ−−−∆→τ|×(cid:12) sin (cid:16) − a −ri→,τ \ , − v −i,−τ−−−∆→τ (cid:17)(cid:12)(cid:17) required by each individual (sociability) and the variation
(cid:12) (cid:12) she/he tolerates on this volume of interaction (tolerance). To
(cid:12) (cid:12)
and the projection of z on a : assess S , we look into the group size distribution found
in [22]. The results are expressed as a Poisson law (λ=2.5)
\ of discrete values. Since the sociability distribution in SIMPS
z = | − v −i,−τ−−−∆→τ|×(cid:16)− cos (cid:16) − a −ri→,τ , − v −i,−τ−−−∆→τ (cid:17)(cid:17) . (15) is a continuous function, we translate the discrete Poisson
law into a normal law N(µ = 2.5,δ2 = 1),5 for which we
We have that:
investigate in this paper the effect of variation of its first
moment. Furthermore, the tolerance on this sociability is set
=h+z. (16) to a uniform distribution in [0.1;0.7] (i.e., between 10% and
70% tolerance on the sociability).
We can then obtain: Thesocialgraphdefinesacquaintancesbetweenindividuals,
which are used to compose the twin behaviors. This graph is
parameterized by the number of nodes, N, the average node
(cid:17) d f
h .
\ scale-free graph with power-law node degree distribution).
(cid:17) (17) Average node degree for various measured social graphs
− ∆ τ vary more than one order of magnitude depending on the
subjectofthesocialgraph.Forexample,sexualcontactgraphs
Theaccelerationrequestisthensatisfiedatbestbythefinal
exhibit a low average node degree (D 2), followed by
acceleration − a i→,τ : phone calls graphs (D 3), blogs (D ≈ 14), up to actor
− a i→,τ = − a −r ˆ i→,τ min − a −ri→,τ ,alimi,τ , (18) collaboration (D ≈ 61). Since nodes in the graph represent
× mobile individuals, the size of the graph gives the population
(cid:0)(cid:12) (cid:12) (cid:1)
(cid:12) (cid:12) size to which the random variables V, A, S, and T apply.
which is used to update i’s current velocity − v −i,−τ−−−∆→τ and
position p :
C. Human perception characteristics
− v i→,τ = − v −i,−τ−−−∆→τ + − a i→,τ ∆ τ , (19) Thisparameterdefinesthewayhumanbeingsperceivetheir
(cid:26) − p i→,τ = − p −i,−τ−−−∆→τ + − v i→,τ ∆ τ . environment. They are in number of three: social distance,
half-perceptiontime,anddistancefadingexponent.Proxemics,
defined by E. T. Hall [21], stipulates that relations between
humans are dependent on the distance separating them. The
social distance is the physical distance under which social
IV. EVALUATION
transactions and interactions occur. In the United States, this
Table I summarizes the parameters that are internal to distancewas measuredto be around12ft.(or3.5m);however,
the SIMPS mobility generator. They are described in the this value was found to vary from about half to several times
following. this distance, depending on cultural variations, and also on
spatialconstraints,suchastypicallycrowdedareas.InSIMPS,
this value is directly translated into R , the distance used
A. Pedestrian motion characteristics for one’s current socialization estimation. While 3.5m is the
typicalvaluewesetforourtests,wealsoinvestigatetheimpact
Thisparameterdictatesthedistributionsoftherandomvari-
of its variations.
ables V and A, respectively the velocity and acceleration of
The half-perception time τ regulates the pseudo-control
the individuals. According to results published by Henderson
loop described in Section III-B. It describes the time an
in[22],velocityV forpedestriansissettofollowanormallaw
individual takes to perceive changes in her/his neighborhood.
N(µ=1.34,δ2 =0.26).Accelerationdistributionisharderto
Although,toourknowledge,thisparameterhasnotbeenmuch
gauge. Considering that a human can switch from immobile
investigated, some documents in the literature show that the
positionto walkingin theorderof the second,we empirically
perception time may range from hundreds of milliseconds to
set it to follow a similar normal law N(µ=1.3,δ2 =0.4).4
tensof seconds[23], [24]. SIMPS is aboutpedestrianmotion,
whichis a morerelaxedenvironment;in sucha context,users
4While we do not focus on this aspect here, some of our tests showed
thatdoublingorhalvingacceleration settings donotsignificantly changethe 5Theselawsarenotexactlyequivalent, butthisistheclosestformwecan
outcomeofthemobility. findinliterature.
PARAMETERSUSEDBYSIMPS.
Name Relates to Type Description Value Investigated
V Pedestrian motion Randomvariable Maximalspeedofindividuals N(µ=1.34,δ2=0.26) No
A Pedestrian motion Randomvariable Maximumacceleration ofindividuals N(µ=1.3,δ=0.4) No
S Sociability Randomvariable Sociability ofindividuals N(µ=2.5,δ=1) Yes
T Sociability Randomvariable Toleranceofindividuals Uniformin[0.1;0.7] No
N Socialgraph Integervariable Numberofnodes/individuals N Yes
D Socialgraph Realvariable Averagenodeoutdegree [0;N 1] Yes
Graphtype Socialgraph Enumeratedvalue Graphtype in Natural,Random,Scale-Free Yes
Rsoc Humanperception Realvariable Socialradius 3.5meters Yes
τr Humanperception Realvariable Half-perception time 4seconds Yes
λ Humanperception Realvariable Distancefading exponent [0;3] Yes
Space Space Enumeratedvalue Thespacewheremotionhappens in Infinite, PeriodicSquare Yes
L Space Realvariable Sizeofperiodic shape [0;+ [ Yes
τmax Time Realvariable Totaltimeconsidered [0;+ [ Yes
∆τ Time Realvariable Timequantization step [0;τmax[ Yes
spend more time to react, and reaction times are considered V. METHODOLOGY
in the order from around one second to tens of second.
In this section, we wish to highlight the outcome of our
One of the particularities of physical motion is that each
approach, which comforts recent observations of power-laws.
movement has a cost. In SIMPS, this is taken into account
The most common observation of power-law distributions
by the distance fading exponent λ (cf., Section III-C), which
lies in the contact/inter-contact durations. It is exhibited by
defines the cost an individual associates to the distance that
studies conducted on WiFi-enabled devices at ETH Zurich,
separates her/him from another individual. Basically, when
Dartmouth,andUCSD.Recently,aspecificsetofexperiments
λ = 1, it means that the distance has a first order impact
conductedbyCambridgeUniversity,UK,incollaborationwith
on the result (the cost of a motion is considered linear to the
Intel,tracedthecontactandinter-contactdurationdistributions
distance), while λ = 2 means that the distance has a second
between mobile users carrying iMotes Bluetooth devices [6].
order impact (the cost is considered to be in square of the
Although at a lower communication scale than previous
distance). In Section VI, we will investigate λ in detail.
studies, the three experiments conducted in [6] (all three at
differenttimesandlocations,andwithdifferentusers)showed
strikingly similar observation of the scale-free characteristics
D. Spatial characteristics
of human contacts. Contact and inter-contact durations have
This parameter describes the space in which individuals been observed to follow power laws whose exponents were
evolve.Theboundaryconditionscanbeofthreetypes:infinite, situated respectively around 1.5 and 0.6, with cut-offs
finite, and periodic. If finite, the topology can be a square, related to the durations of the − observation − s.
a hexahedron, a disc, a bitmap, or a parametric space given In order to investigate social interactions between individ-
by a twin set of polygons (presence zone polygons minus uals, we simulate human mobility with conditions similar
obstacle polygons). If periodic, the topology can be a square to [6]. In the iMotes experiments, users carried Bluetooth-
(with toroidalboundarymapping),a set of hexahedrons(with enabled devices, which periodically recorded the presence
cell-like boundary mapping), or a pair of discs (with bi- of other BlueTooth-enabled devices, such as other iMotes,
hemispheric boundary mapping). In the remainder of this PDAs,mobilephones,orlaptops.A contactsituationbetween
paper,weinvestigatethepropertiesexhibitedbySIMPSalone. individuals was asserted as soon as the presence of one node
Aiming atthe simplestscenarios, we will restrictour study to was felt by the other one, and an inter-contact asserted as
the infinite and periodic square (toroidal mapping) cases, in soon as two or more consecutive measures did not show the
which the influence of square side L will be investigated. presence of a previously seen node. The theoretical range of
BlueTooth is around 10 meters. We consider however that a
more realistic 6-meter range is a valid assertion for sensing
E. Time characteristics
range in most situations. In this way, we chose to simulate a
Time characteristics concern the total duration τmax for simplisticrange-basedcontactconditionbasedonamaximum
which motion is considered, and the time quantization step distance of 6 meters separating individuals.
∆ used for motion rendering. These two values, although
more related to implementation than to model definition, are
VI. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
of prime concern since their choice can directly influence
the outcome of the synthesized motion. It is then of major Tests on the outcome of SIMPS mobility regardingcontact
importancetodistinguishinherentcharacteristicsofourmodel and inter-contact distributions have been conducted over a
fromeventualeffectsonitsoutcomesduetotimesampling.In population of N = 100 individuals. The general parameters
the analysis below, we explore the effect of time quantization usedbySIMPSareshowninTableIIwhilethedifferentvalues
and total considered duration on the results of SIMPS. of the simulations we conducted are depicted in Table I.
SUMMARYOFTESTSETTINGS.
hSi Graph type D λ R
Socialgraphtype 1s 3600s 2.5 [Random,SF] 5 1 3.5m Periodic 200m 4s
Avg.nodedegree 1s 3600s 2.5 Scale-Free [2,5,15,50] 1 3.5m Periodic 200m 4s
Sociability 1s 3600s [1,2.5,10] Scale-Free 5 1 3.5m Periodic 200m 4s
Socialize only 1s 3600s 2.5 Scale-Free 5 1 0 Periodic 200m 4s
Isolate only 1s 3600s 0 Scale-Free 5 1 >√2 L Periodic 200m 4s
Socialdistance 1s 3600s 2.5 Scale-Free 5 1 [1,3.5,15]m Periodic 200m 4s
Reaction time 1s 3600s 2.5 Scale-Free 5 1 3.5m Periodic 200m [1,4,20]s
Distance cost 1s 3600s 2.5 Scale-Free 5 [0,1,2,3] 3.5m Periodic 200m 4s
Space: infinite 1s 3600s 2.5 Scale-Free 5 1 3.5m Infinite 4s
Space: periodic 1s 3600s 2.5 Scale-Free 5 1 3.5m Periodic [20,200,2000]m 4s
Totalduration 1s [600s,1h,10h] 2.5 Scale-Free 5 1 3.5m Periodic 200m 4s
Timequantization [0.1,1,10]s 3600s 2.5 Scale-Free 5 1 3.5m Periodic 200m 4s
1 10 100 1000 10000
)noitaruD(fdc-1
Inter-contact: Random graph
Inter-contact: SF graph
Contact: Random graph
Contact: SF graph 0.0001
Pareto (1.9,-0.51)
Pareto (2.5,-0.43)
Pareto (4.5,-1.15)
Pareto (5.3,-1.22)
1 10 100 1000 10000
Duration (in seconds)
Fig.6. EffectoftheunderlyinggraphontheoutcomeoftheSIMPSmobility.
Contactandinter-contactdurationdistributionstakenwithtwoinputs:Albert-
Baraba´siscale-freegraphwithpowerlawnodedegreedistributionandErdo¨s-
Re´nyirandomgraphwithexponential nodedegree distribution.
A. Influence of social graph
The first aspect to gauge is the behavior of the model
in the general case, and its dependence with the underlying
graph structures. To this effect, the distributions of contact
andinter-contactdurationsofBluetooth-carryingnodessubject
to SIMPS mobility are plotted, for both random and scale-
free graphs, in Fig. 6. As we can observe, the contact and
inter-contact duration distributions follow power-laws in both
cases,andwithverycloseexponents.Thedistributionofinter-
contact is a bit below the one of the scale-free graph, while
contact duration distributions are very close for both graph
structures. All these distributions experiment an exponential
cut-off around 500 seconds. As will be seen later on, these
cut-offs are due to the duration of the simulation.
The similarity of the mobility patterns obtained with scale-
freeandexponentialgraphsisnoticeable,andbothcorrespond
to the same power law of exponent α = 1.2. Inter-contact
distributions are also very similar for both graph types, with
a slightly sharper cut-off for the scale-free social graph. We
concludefromthisthatthegraphstructurehasminorinfluence
relatively to the emergence of the power-law contact and
inter-contact distributions. This result is very important and
)noitaruD(fdc-1
Inter-contact, D = 2
Inter-contact, D = 5
Inter-contact, D = 15
Inter-contact, D = 50
Contact, D = 2
Contact, D = 5
Contact, D = 15
Contact, D = 50
Pareto (3.7,-0.5)
Pareto (7.4,-1.4)
Duration (in seconds)
Fig.7. EffectofthevariationofaveragenodedegreeDontheoutcomeof
SIMPS.
surprising: although social graph are notable for their scale-
free degree distribution, scale-free contact and inter-contact
distributionsare notdueto thisfeature, andemergesfrom the
social motion.
The average node-degree D of the social graph can vary
significantly depending on the scenario. We verify then how
SIMPS behaves under different average node degrees. Tests
have been run for four different values of D: 2, 5, 15, and
50. These valuesspan a broad range of situations encompass-
ing most social graphs studied in literature. The results are
plotted in Fig. 7. We observe that contact and inter-contact
distributions remain quite stable in their power-law nature,
despite the important changes in the underlying social graph.
The exponents in both distributions tend to increase slightly
in function of D.6
The two previous observations give us high confidence in
the robustness of SIMPS, and its reasonable independence
relativelytothesocialgraphused.Forthisreason,wedecideto
use Albert-Baraba´siscale-freesocialgraphsforthe remainder
of this paper. These are considered to be closer to real social
6Notice the extreme case where D = 50 and a node is, in average, an
acquaintance of half the whole population. In this case, the inter-contact
distribution tends to a Weibull form. This tendency can also be found in
UCSD[8]andDartmouth[7]studies.
1 10 100 1000 10000
)noitaruD(fdc-1
Inter-contact avg. sociability 1
Inter-contact avg. sociability 2.5 0.0001
Inter-contact avg. sociability 10
Contact avg. sociability 1
Contact avg. sociability 2.5
Contact a P v a g re . t s o o c (2 ia .7 b , i - li 0 ty .4 1 5 0 ) 1e-05
Pareto (3.7,-0.75)
Pareto (14,-1.4)
Pareto (25,-1.7)
1 10 100 1000 10000
Duration (in seconds)
Fig. 8. Effect of the average sociability on the outcome of the SIMPS
mobility, forcontact andinter-contact durationdistributions ofmobilenodes
carrying Bluetooth-like devices.
graphsthan Erdo¨s-Re´nyirandomgraphs.The defaultD value
used, unless needed otherwise, will be 5.
B. Influence of sociability
The next parameter we must verify for a social model is
the variation of the social influence. We performed tests for
three different values of S , the first moment of random
variable S, for which the distributions are shown in Fig. 8.
We can see from the graph that although the slope of both
distributions change with the settings, their nature remains
as a power-law with cut-off. For larger values of S , in
h i which humans have higher needs for socialization, the inter-
contact distribution changes the most. This is an important
phenomenon that we will explore hereafter: the power-law
natureofbothdistributionsoutputtedbySIMPSseemsstrictly
dependent on the balanced presence of both socialize and
isolate behaviors.
C. Separate effects of socialize and isolate behaviors
We evaluatenowthe contributionofeachofthetwinsocial
behaviors on mobility. To this end, we set the model for
three runs. The first considers only the socialize behavior,
the second considers only the isolate behavior, and the third
considersboth behaviorstogether.Setting a single behavioris
accomplishedbychangingR ,thesocialdistance(definedin
SectionIII-B).SettingR =0meansthatindividualsalways
want to socialize. Setting R > √2 L and distributing S
and T so as no individual tolerates a surround of more than
N 1 individuals imposes that all individuals will feel over-
socialized and want to isolate. The corresponding results are
shown in Fig. 9.
We can observe from the graph the clear influence of the
isolate behavior on the power-law distribution. Both contact
and inter-contact duration distributions exhibit neat scaling
laws.Itishowevernotsufficienttoexplainthestrongexponent
difference between these two distributions, characteristic of
all observations. The outcome of the socialize behavior is
)noitaruD(fdc-1
Inter-contact: Socialize
Inter-contact: Isolate
Contact: Socialize
Contact: Isolate Pareto (0.37,-1.4)
Pareto (1.73,-0.7)
Pareto (1.35,-0.2)
Pareto (1.22,-1)
Duration (in seconds)
Fig.9. SeparateeffectofsocializeandisolatebehaviorsonSIMPSresults.
1e-06 1 10 100 1000 10000
)noitaruD(fdc-1
Inter-contact social radius 1m
Inter-contact social radius 3.5m
Inter-contact social radius 15m
Contact social radius 1m Contact social radius 3.5m Contact social radius 15m
Pareto (2.6,-0.45)
Pareto (6.7,-1.6)
Duration (in seconds)
Fig.10. Effectofthesocialdistance onSIMPSoutcome.
by far the more interesting – inter-contact distribution is far
belowcontactdistribution,andfollowstwopowerlawsections
separated by a sudden decrease. Such a staircase-like feature
couldexplainthepresenceoftwosmallerbumpsbarelyvisible
as an outcome of SIMPS, and also presentin variousreal-life
measures, such as in [6]. In order to ensure that these bumps
were not the result of the periodic space used, an additional
runhasbeenperformedinaninfinitespace.Theresultsexhibit
thesamecharacteristic.Anotherinterestingemergentbehavior
is that, although individuals are most of the time in socialize
mode, the global outcome of SIMPS tends more toward the
characteristics exhibited by the isolate behavior. This seems
to indicate thatthe mixtureof bothbehaviorsis verydifferent
fromtheiraverage,hencepointingtheemergenceofadifferent
mechanism from their interplay.
D. Influence of human perception
1) Socialdistance: Humanperceptionalsohasdirectinflu-
enceonmobility.Asdiscussedearlierinthispaper,thetypical
social distance R between human beings was found to be
around 3.5 meters for U.S. citizens [21], subject to variations
1 10 100 1000 10000
)noitaruD(fdc-1
Inter-contact half-reaction 1s
Inter-contact half-reaction 4s
Inter-contact half-reaction 20s
Contact half-reaction 1s 0.0001
Contact half-reaction 4s
Contact half-reaction 20s
Pareto (2.6,-0.45)
Pareto (6.7,-1.6)
1 10 100 1000 10000
Duration (in seconds)
Fig.11. Effectofthehalf-perception timeonSIMPSoutcome.
depending on sociocultural background (e.g. smaller in Latin
countries, bigger for rural areas) and context (e.g. reduced in
crowded areas, sport events). In order to assess the effect of
perception on mobility, a test has been run with 3 different
values of R : 1 m, 3.5 m, and 15 m. The results are shown soc
in Fig. 10.
AsseenwiththecasewhereR isreducedto1m,contact
and inter-contactdurationdistributionsstill show a power-law
featurewithcut-off,butwithahigherexponent.WhenR is
raised to 15 m, both distributionsexperiencea slightdecrease
in its exponent; however, the cut-off arrives much sooner in
the contact distribution. This might be due to border effects,
when the size of the social sphere approaches the total space
consideredformobility(aswewillseeinSectionVI-E).While
interesting for our study, it is unlikely that this extreme case
happens in reality, since proxemics states that the variation
of social distance is related to the context an individual is
immersed into; for instance, social distance is reduced in
crowded areas.
2) Half-perceptiontime: We now investigatethe impact of
how quick human beingsperceivechangesin their immediate
surroundings.We performedtests with threepossible valueof
the half-perceptiontime,τ : 1s, 4 s, and20s. Theresultsare
shown in Fig. 11.
Although all values of τ lead to close results, we note
two tendencies. On the one hand, when perception time is
minimal, the inter-contact distribution exhibits lower values,
but more frequently. This is in part due to the fact that
individuals rapidly try to escape from crowds and come back
tomeetacquaintances.Asimilarobservationcanbedrawnfor
the contact distribution, but with lower impact. On the other
hand, when perception time is at the longest bound, inter-
contact distribution does not change that much, while contact
distributionshowsa neatdecreasein the proportionof shorter
contacts.
Itfinallyappearsthatthehalf-perceptiontimeof4s(chosen
for the rest of our simulations) does not lead to any of
the border effects observed above. It results in strict power-
laws and clear distinction between contact and inter-contact
)noitaruD(fdc-1
Inter-contact, λ = 0
Inter-contact, λ = 1
Inter-contact, λ = 2
Inter-contact, λ = 3
Contact, λ = 0
Contact, λ = 1
Contact, λ = 2
Contact, λ = 3
Duration (in seconds)
Fig.12. Effectofthedistance-associatedcostestimationonSIMPSoutcome.
distributions, which are closer to the results obtained by
Chaintreau et al. [6].
3) Distancefadingexponentλ: Oneoftheparticularitiesof
physicalmotion is that each movementhas a cost. In SIMPS,
this is taken into account by the distance fading exponent,
λ, which is used by each individual to weight the interest of
meeting/avoiding another individual relatively to the distance
separating them.
We rantests withfourdifferentvaluesofλ:0 (distancehas
no influence on attraction between individuals), 1 (distance
plays linearly),2 (distance plays as a square), and 3 (distance
playsas a cube).7 The results are shown in Fig. 12. The main
outcome of these tests is that when distance is not taken into
account(λ=0),mobilityismainlycharacterizedbyaWeibull
distribution,insteadofa power-lay.While still showingscale-
invariancein time,Weibull distributionsareless characteristic
of empirical traces, which tend more to a power-law.
Furthermore, the order at which distance is used in cost
estimation does not fundamentally change the outcomes of
SIMPS. The results indicate that distance plays a direct role
in human displacement decisions, confirming results shown
in [20].
E. Influence of the simulation space
Individuals present different mobility characteristics de-
pending on the space they evolve in. We explore here two
parametersdefiningmotionspace.Thefirstone,namelyspace
type, defines if individual evolve in free, limited, or periodic
space. In the case of limited space, two options can be
considered to manage the situation where individuals attain a
border: (a) nodes stop when they face a border (obstruction);
(b)nodes’directionsaresymmetricallyreflectedagainstlimits
(reflection).Inperiodicspaces,theselatterareconsideredasa
torus–nodesescapingoneborderarereplacedintheopposite
border of the space. This model has the advantage of leading
to regular average spatial density.
7Notethatλcanalsotakerealvalues inSIMPSexpression.
1 10 100 1000 10000
)noitaruD(fdc-1
Inter-contact, infinite space
Inter-contact, periodic L=2000m
Inter-contact, periodic L=200m
Inter-contact, periodic L=20m 0.0001 Contact, infinite space
Contact, periodic L=2000m
Contact, periodic L=200m
Contact, periodic L=20m
0.1 1 10 100 1000 10000
Duration (in seconds)
Fig.13. Effectoftheconsidered spaceonSIMPSresults.
Contrary to the experiments described earlier in this paper,
whichranoverperiodicspaces,weconsidernowmorerealistic
free spaces. The goal is to investigate if our observations still
hold. In addition, in the case of a non-infinite space, we also
consider the impact of the density on the results, since it
directly influences the equilibrium between the quantities of
socializingandisolatingindividuals.We varydensitywiththe
inverse square of side L. The first run is performed in free-
space, with users initially uniformly disposed in a square of
200 m on side, while the other simulations are performed in
a periodic square space with sides varying between 20 m and
2,000 m. The results are shown in Fig. 13.
The first observation is that in the free-space case contact
and inter-contact distributions exhibit very close power-laws.
This is a reminiscent characteristic of the isolate behavior –
individuals can take the entire place they want. Looking at
the runswith periodicspace, theevolutionof the distributions
suggests a specific value of density that corresponds to the
point of equilibrium between socialize and isolate behaviors.
Abovethispoint,theresultstendtoanexponentiallaw,which
is an inheritance of the RWP model. This is probably due to
thefactthatindividualsmovequicklyfroma pointtoanother,
andalltheconditionschangedramaticallyfromonesimulation
step to another, rendering senseless the decisions of social
adaptation.Belowthepointofequilibrium,theresultsobtained
with a periodicspace tendto approachthe onesof free space.
F. Influence of considered time
The influence of time on SIMPS outcomes appears in
two ways: time quantization step and total simulation time.
The first aspect is related to the very common problem of
sampling on measurements. It can be summarized in one
simple question: “Is the considered time step fine enough for
a realistic view of the system?” To explore this issue, we ran
three tests, with times quantization steps of 0.1 s, 1 s, and
10 s, respectively. The results are shown in Fig. 14.
It is straightforward to observe that the results with ∆ =
0.1 s and ∆ = 1 s are very close one to the other, while
∆ = 10 s completely changed the results. We can consider
)noitaruD(fdc-1
Inter-contact step 0.1s
Inter-contact step 1s
Inter-contact step 10s
Contact step 0.1s Contact step 1s
Contact step 10s
Pareto (2.6,-0.45)
Pareto (6.7,-1.6)
Duration (in seconds)
Fig.14. Effectofthetimequantization steponSIMPSresults.
1 10 100 1000 10000 100000
)noitaruD(fdc-1
Inter-contact over 600s
Inter-contact over 3600s
Inter-contact over 36000s
Contact over 600s Contact over 3600s
Contact over 36000s
Pareto (1.8,-0.3)
Pareto (15,-1.6)
Duration (in seconds)
Fig.15. Effectofthetotalduration considered onSIMPSresults.
then with confidence that a time discretization step of 1 s is
fine enough for the results we wish to observe. Such a time
granularity is in accordance with the half-perception time of
τ =4s we identified in our earlier experiments,and with the r
preceptthat a human goes from steady-state to full motion or
inversely in around 1 s (recall that this value was used for
acceleration distribution).
The second important aspect related to the influence of
time is the total duration of the simulation, since it directly
influences the cut-off in the tail of the distributions. The
fundamental question here is: “Do these observations extend
with time considered, or are they limited in scale?” Again,
three tests were conducted, with total durations of τmax =
600 s, τmax = 3,600 s, and τmax = 36,000 s. The results
are shown in Fig. 15. As expected, the cut-offs are shifted
rightor leftdependingon the durationof the simulation.This
comforts theoretical results that mobility contact and inter-
contact distributions are purely power-law in essence.
VII. FURTHER DISCUSSION duration distributions, we draw the following surprising con-
clusions from our study:
A. About complex systems modeling
The main discussion relative the modeling of complex • Although entirely synthetic, SIMPS’s traces show strong
similarities with various heavy-tailed distributions ob-
systems lies in the differences between two approaches:
served in real-life situations.
• Simple models with mathematically tractable parameters
• Such heavy-tailed features are emergent. While SIMPS
shouldbepreferredwheneverpossible,sincetheiruseal-
uses a social graph for estimating motion, we show
lowsobtainingstrictresultsanddeterministicpredictions.
that the graph structure has negligible influence on the
• More complex models, on the other side, often tend to
results. Decomposingthe influenceof the graphinto two
be non-deterministic and only render empiric results, on
complementary behaviors, namely socialize and isolate,
smaller parameter ranges, with stochastic conditions.
we show the crucial role of their interplay in the final
The advantagesin termsof “realism” ofthe latter approach
mobility pattern.
is often considered dubious, when simpler models might
• The investigation of some input parameters seems to
render similar predictions. Indeed, a complex model is only
bring clues on the occasional tendency of contact and
interesting when it explores situations to which deterministic
inter-contact distributions to show Weibull distribution
models cannot apply. With these considerations in mind,
characteristics.
we aimed at making SIMPS as simple as possible, though
exhibitingcomplexemergingfeatures.AlthoughSIMPScould
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
be made more complex and specialized in many manners
(for example, by introducing a third behavior stating that We would like to thank Mostafa Ammar for his valuable
an individual just pauses at some location), we believe that comments that helped improve this work.
such additions would restrict the scope of our results. Such
adaptations,however,arewelcomeinmorespecificsituations. REFERENCES
WealsobelievethatSIMPSbringsnoveltyintwoways:(a)
[1] J.-Y. LeBoudec and M. Vojnovic, “Perfect simulation and stationarity
it adapts outer knowledge from sociology that has not been of a class of mobility models,” in IEEE INFOCOM, Miami, FL, Mar.
used before and (b)it generatesmobility patternsthat spansa 2005.
[2] A. Jardosh, E. Belding-Royer, K. Almeroth, and S. Suri, “Real world
wide range of empirical observations in an extremely robust
environment models for mobile ad hoc networks,” IEEE Journal on
fashion. Selected AreasinCommunications, vol.23,no.3,Mar.2005.
[3] A. K. Saha and D. Johnson, “Modeling mobility for vehicular ad hoc
networks,”inACMWorkshoponVehicularAdHocNetworks(VANET),
B. About complex behavior emergence Philadelphia, PA,July2004.
[4] C. Bettstetter, “Smooth is better than sharp: a random mobility model
The combination of very simple interacting rules leads
forsimulationofwirelessnetworks,”inACMMSWiM,Rome,Italy,July
sometimes to very complex outputs. Such an emergence phe- 2001.
nomenon can be observed for instance via the SIMPS front- [5] D. Choffnes and F. Bustamante, “An integrated mobility and traffic
modelforvehicularwirelessnetworks,”inACMWorkshoponVehicular
endinterface(areal-timegraphicalinterfaceofthesimulator).
AdHocNetworks (VANET),Cologne, Germany,Sept.2005.
We can observeforexamplesituationsreferredto as bugger’s [6] A. Chaintreau, P. Hui, J. Crowcroft, C. Diot, R. Gass, and J. Scott,
case: an isolating nodeclosely pursuedby a socializing node. “Impact of human mobility on the design of opportunistic forwarding
algorithms,” inIEEEInfocom,Barcelona, Spain, Apr.2006.
This appears as pairs of nodes having a highly asymmetric
[7] D.KotzandK.Essien,“Analysisofacampus-widewireless network,”
social relation.8 Further observations showed that such situa- inACMMobicom, Atlanta, GA,Sept.2002.
tionsresolvethemselvessincetheyarepartofamorecomplex [8] M. McNett and G. Voelker, “Access and mobility of wireless PDA
users,” Mobile Computing and Communications Review, vol. 9, no. 2,
collective mechanism.
pp.40–55,Apr.2005.
[9] C.TuduceandT.Gross,“AmobilitymodelbasedonWLANtracesand
VIII. CONCLUSION itsvalidation,” inIEEEInfocom,Miami,FL,Mar.2005.
[10] M. Musolesi, S. Hailes, and C. Mascolo, “An ad hoc mobility model
In this paper, we proposed SIMPS, a new mobility model foundedonsocialnetworktheory,”inACMMSWim,Venice,Italy,Oct.
that addresses the roots of mobility. SIMPS deals with soci- 2004.
[11] M.GrossglauserandD.Tse,“Mobilityincreasesthecapacityofadhoc
ological influences in human crowd motion found in typical
wireless networks,” IEEE/ACM Trans. on Networking, vol. 10, no. 4,
situations like malls, fairs, cafeterias, clubs, beaches, or fora. pp.477–486, Aug.2002.
SIMPS’smodularconceptionseparatesmotioninfluencesfrom [12] B. Zhou, K. Xu, and M. Gerla, “Group and swarm mobility models
for ad hoc network scenarios using virtual tracks,” in IEEE Milcom,
motion generation, which allows associating additional mo-
Monterey, CA,Oct.2004.
bility influences with little effort. Based on a human feature [13] W. Hsu, K. Merchant, H. Shu, C. Hsu, and A. Helmy, “Weighted
thoroughly studied in sociology, namely sociability, SIMPS waypoint mobility model and its impact on ad hoc networks,” ACM
Mobile Computer Communications Review (MC2R), vol. 9, no. 1, pp.
defines two behaviors that regulate each individual’s social
59–63,Jan.2005.
interaction level. [14] M. Forse´, “Les re´seaux de sociabilite´ dans un village,” Population
WeevaluatedSIMPSusingasimplein-rangecontactmodel. (FrenchEdition), vol.36,no.6,pp.1141–1162, Nov.1981.
[15] R.Laporte,“Pratiques sportives etsociabilite´,” JournalofMathematics
Underthelightofrecentmeasuresofcontactandinter-contact
andSocialSciences, vol.43,no.170,pp.74–94,Nov.2005.
[16] T. Snijders, “The statistical evaluation of social network dynamics,”
8Such examples can be further observed in recorded videos and Sociological Methodology, 2001.
traces of SIMPS motion, freely available on the SIMPS webpage at [17] ——,ModelsforLongitudinalNetworkData. New-York:P.Carrington,
[18] X.Hong,M.Gerla,G.Pei,andC.Chiang,“Agroupmobilitymodelfor
ad hoc wireless networks,” in ACM/IEEE MSWiM, Seattle, WA, Aug.
1999.
[19] M.MusolesiandC.Mascolo,“Acommunitybasedmobilitymodelfor
adhocnetworkresearch,”inACM/SIGMOBILEInternationalWorkshop
on Multi-hop Ad Hoc Networks: from theory to reality (REALMAN),
Florence, Italy, May2006.
[20] V.Borrel,M.D.deAmorim,andS.Fdida,“Apreferrential attachment
gatheringmobilitymodel,”IEEECommunicationsLetters,vol.9,no.10,
pp.900–902, Oct.2005.
[21] E.Hall,TheHiddenDimension. GardenCity,N.Y.:Doubleday,1966.
[22] L. Henderson, “The statistics of crowd fluids,” Nature, no. 229, pp.
381–383,Feb.1971.
[23] A. Welford, Reaction Times. New-York: Academic Press, New York,
1980.
[24] T. Triggs and W. Harris, “Reaction time of drivers to road stimuli,”
MonashUniversityHumanFactorsGroup-ReportHFR-12,Tech.Rep.,
1982.