]hp-oeg.scisyhp[
1v6884.3001:viXra
Small-World Networks in Geophysics
Xin-She Yang
Department of Applied Mathematics,
Universityof Leeds, LEEDS LS2 9JT, UK
Many geophysical processes can be modelled by using interconnected networks. The small-
world network model has recently attracted much attention in physicsand applied sciences. In
thispaper,wetrytouseandmodifythesmall-worldtheorytomodelgeophysicalprocessessuch
asdiffusionandtransportindisorderedporousrocks. Wedevelopananalyticalapproachaswell
as numericalsimulations to try tocharacterize thepollutant transport and percolation proper-
ties of small-world networks. The analytical expression of system saturation time and fractal
dimension of small-world networks are given and thuscompared with numerical simulations.
Keywords: Small-world, fractal, percolation, permeability, network.
Citation Detail: X. S. Yang, Small-world networks in geophysics, Geophysical Research Let-
ters, 28 (13), 2549-2552 (2001).
Introduction
Many geophysical processes such as flow in disordered porous media, magma transport and
saltwater intrusion [Holzbercher,1998] can be modelled as percolation and diffusion in inter-
connected networks that can generally be represented as connected graphs. The properties of
complicated networksare mainly determined by theway of connections between occupied sites
or vertices. Two commonly used quantities, which characterise a graph, are the degree of local
clustering and the average distance between vertices. The generic structure and the degree of
the randomness of networks have strong influence on the overal properties. Obviously, regular
network is the one limiting case with a high degree of local clustering and a very large average
distance,whiletheotherlimitingcaseistherandom networkwhichshowsnegligible local clus-
tering and the average distance is relative small. In reality, most networks are neither exactly
regular nor completely random, realistic networksare something between these two extremes.
Small-world network is a special kind of networks with a higher degree of clustering and a
small average distance. The degree of the randomness of networks often has a strong influence
on the network properties. Recently, Watts and Strogatz [1998] has presented a mathematical
model to characterises the network structure and to study the dynamic properties of small-
world networks. Such small-world phenomenon can be obtained by adding randomly only a
small fraction of the connections, and some common networks such as power grids, film stars
networks and neural networks behaves like small-world networks [Newman and Watts, 1999;
Moukarzel,1999; Newmann et al.,2000, Boots and Sasaki,1999; Barthelemy and Amaral,1999].
Mostrecentstudiesfocusonthespreadingandshortestpathsinsystemwithsparselong-range
connectionsbyusingthesmall-world model[Newman andWatts,1999; Moukarzel,1999; Pandit
and Amritkar,1999]. Thespreadingofsomeinfluencesuchasaforest fire,aninfectiousdisease
oraparticleinpercolatingmediaisstudiedusingasimplerule: ateachtimestep,theinfluence
propagates from theinfected site to all uninfected sites connected toit viaa link although this
linkisnot necessary physical. Along-range connection orshortcutcan simulate thespark that
starts a new fire spot, the infect site (say person with flu) suddenly travel to a new place or
site,oraportablecomputerwithvirusthatstarttoconnecttothenetworkanewplace. These
researchmainlyfocusontheimmediateresponseofthenetworkbyaddingrandomlysomelong-
distance shortcuts, there is no time delay in the network systems. However, in reality, a spark
oraninfection cannotstartanewfirespotornewinfection immediately,itusuallytakessome
time ∆, called ignition time or waiting time, to start a new fire or infection. Thus the existing
modelsarenolongerbeabletopredicttheresponseinthenetworksorsystemswithtimedelay.
Yang [2000] has studied theeffect of time delay on theresponse of small-world networks.
The purpose of the present work is to model geophysical processes such as pollutant trans-
port, permeability model and saltwater intrusion [Holzbercher, 1998] as a particle percolation
processonthesmall-worldnetworkswithtime-delaybyusingormodifyingthesmall-worldthe-
ory so as to characterise the small-world networks with time-delay by using fractal dimension
and system saturation time in the percolative media. The present model will generally lead to
adelaydifferentialequation,whosesolution isusuallyverydifficulttoobtainifitisnotimpos-
sible. Thus the numerical simulation becomes essential. However, we will take the analytical
analysis as far as possible and compare with theresults from numerical simulations.
Mathematical Model of Small-World Networks
Consideringarandomlyconnectednetworkwithn-dimensionallattice[WattsandStrogatz,1998;
Bollobas, 1985; Watts, 1999] and n = 1,2,3. Overlapping on the n-dimensional networks are
a number of long-range shortcuts randomly connecting some vertices, and the fraction of the
long-range shortcuts or probability p is relative small p ≪ 1. Now assuming an influence or a
pollutant particle spreads with a constant velocity u=1 in all directions and a newly infected
site in the other end of a shortcut will start but with a time delay ∆. Following the method
developedbyNewmanandWatts[1999]andMoukarzel[1999],thetotalinfluencedvolumeV(t)
comes from two contributions: one is the influenced volume with Γ t tn−1dt where t is time,
andtheothercontributionis2pV(t−ζ−∆)foraspherestartedattimeRζ. Byusingacontinuum
approach to the network,then V(t) satisfies thefollowing equation with time delay
where n=1,2,3 and Γ is shape factor of a hypersphere in n-dimensions. The length scale of
Newman-Watts type[1999] can bedefined as
where k=const being some fixed range. By properrescaling t by (Γ u(n−1)!)1/n, that is
By rewriting (1) in therescaled form and differentiating theequation n times, we have atime-
delay equation
which is adelay differential equation,whose explicit solutions is not always possible depending
on the initial conditions. For a proper initial condition V(τ)= 0 for −δ ≤τ ≤0, the solution
can be explicitly written byusing the time-steppingmethod,
(nj)!
Clearly, for τ 6=0 and δ→0, theour solution degenerates into
(nj)!
given by Moukarzel [3]. The solutions explicitly become V(τ) = ξ(eτ −1) for n = 1, and
V(τ) = ξ2(coshτ −1) for n = 2. However, when δ 6= 0, there is no such simple expressions.
It can be expected that the time-delay parameter δ will have a strong effect on the evolution
behaviourV(τ) of an influence.
Pollutant Transport and Saturation Time
By using the small-world network model, we can simulate the diffusion and transport process
in the disordered media. Imagine a pollutant particle walk randomly on the networks which
correspond to the interconnected networks in a way structured like the swiss-cheese model for
disorderedporousmedia,whilethelongerangeshortcutscorrespondstothefracturesandcracks
in soil or porous rocks. One practical interest is that how long it would take for the pollutant
to reach the whole (but finite) media or the typical saturation time of process. Obviously, the
speed and efficiency of thediffusion process dependson thepermeability, and thepermeability
in turn depends on the structure of porous rocks and the way of connections. The fraction or
probabilitypofthecracksmayhavestronginfluenceonthepermeabilityevenfortheverysmall
p≪1, which is a typical feature of small-world networks.
TheevolutionarysolutionofV(τ)withtimeτ andtimedelayδ givesthevolumeaffectedby
thepollutant. Solution(5)isvalidforaninfinitenetwork. However,inrealitymostsystemsare
finite. Since V(τ) increases dramatically as τ increases. we can expect that the whole system
will be reached and saturated when τ tends to a typical value τ , which represents a system
saturation time. For a finite system with a size N ∼ Ln, the characteristic saturation time τ
can be estimated by
Ln ∼ξn s . (7)
(nj)!
In most random walk models, it often the time delay is small or δ →0. Now for simplicity, we
takeδ=0. For n=1, we have
or in terms of real time t∼(ξ/A)ln(L/ξ) where A=(Γ (n−1)!)1/n. For n=2, we have
−1(L2/ξ2),
Ingeneral, τ (or t ) is a function of typicallength scale ξ. Substitutingtheexpressξ in terms
of p into theabove equation, we have
t ∼ . (10)
Thisshowsthatthefractionpofcracksindisorderedporousrockscaninfluenceonthesaturation
time significantly. For a fixed large L, then t ∼ (lnL)/p1/n. Thus, the increase of p, say,
will decrease t by a factor of 10 for n = 1. This have important
implications in management of the waste disposal and pollutant control. For example, the
pollutant wastes were disposed in the area with possible cracks even the possibility is very
small, the risk increases dramatically as the probability increases as seen from the saturation
time.
Thismodelcanalsoapplytootherprocessessuchastheforestfire,oilrecoveryandsaltwater
intrusion. If there is a fire start in a forest, the sparking effect will increase the probability
of the long range shortcuts, and thus decrease the saturation time and the fire spread more
rapidly. Similarly, saltwater intrusion proceed more quickly in the permeable zone with even
small portion of cracks.
Multifractals
Since the velocity of a particle travels at a constant speed u = 1, we can rewrite the solution
(5) in terms of the distance r and τ =rA/ξ with A=(Γ (n−1)!)1/n,we have
(nj)!
SinceV(r)increases asr increases orV(r)∼rD. Onecan expectthatfractal dimension of the
small-world networks will give a measure of the network properties as first done by Newman
10 10 10 10 10
time-delay δ =0 1 5 δ =10 )D( noisnemiD
Figure 1: Fractal dimension of small-world networks with time-delay δ = 0,1,5,10 for a network
size N = 500,000, r = 1000 and n = 1. Numerical results (marked with ◦, ⋄ etc) agree well with
analytical express (solid) calculated from (11).
and Watts[1999]whichdoesnotincludetheeffectoftime-delay. ThenthefractaldimensionD
can be calculated bydifferential formulae
whichcanbecalculatedusing(11). Wenowshowhowthetime-delayaffectthefractaldimension
D of the small-networks. For δ → 0 and n = 1, we have D → 1 for r/ξ ≪ 1 and D → Aξ −1
for r/ξ → ∞. For δ 6= 0, there is no general explicit asymptotic expressions and numerical
evaluations can be easily done. The dependenceof thefractal dimension D on the length scale
ξ and the time-delay δ suggests themultifractal features of the small-networks.
Inordertocomparetheanalyticalsolutionwithnumericalsimulations,wealsousenumerical
simulations [Watts,1999]. The numerical simulations for n = 1 and the comparison of fractal
dimension with the analytical solution (11) is shown in Figure 1 where the network size N =
500,000, r = 1000 and δ = 0,1,5,10. We can see that numerical results (marked with ◦, ⋄
etc)areingoodagreementwiththeanalyticalsolution(solidlines)byusing(11). Asexpected,
for p ∼ 1/ξ ≪ 10 −3 (or ξ ≫ r so that r/ξ ≪ 1), both numerical results and analytical fractal
dimension approach ton=1. Thetime-delay hasa verystrong effect on thefractal dimension
D of the small-world networks. For δ ≫ 1, D is substantially reduced compared with the one
without time-delay δ = 0, and D is quite near n for most of the region. The large time-delay
actually makes the network become larger, and the influence spread slowly in more localized
areas.
Percolation in Porous Media
Diffusion and transport process can be considered as a percolation phenomenon. In addition,
permeability and conductivity can also be modelled as a percolation process on the intercon-
nectednetworksbyusingMonteCarlosimulationsorfractionalBrownianmotionmethod. From
thediscussionintheprevioussections,wecanseenaturallythatthesmall-worldnetworkmodel
canshownewlightinthemodelling ofsubsurfaceflowandcontaminant transportindisordered
porous media [Holzbercher, 1998]. In small-world model, all the site or vertices are susceptible
to pollutant particles. However, in reality, there is only a fraction of the sites can do so as in
the case of site percolation. In other words, each site is occupied with a probability or density
of φ. Site percolation can also be used as the idealized model for the distribution of oil/gas
or hydrocarbon inside porous rocks. The average concentration of fluids in the porous rocks is
presented by the occupation probability φ, which happens to be the porosity in the saturated
sediments or shales. A test particle or ant in the labyrinth move randomly on the intercon-
nectednetworkandvariousstudies[e.g.,StaufferandAharony,1994;Yang,2000]showthatthe
percolation pattern has thefractal feature. Now we shall discuss how φ affect thebehaviour of
thesmall-world model.
With site occupation probability φ as an additional parameter, the solution (5) shall be
modified as
where φ is the critical probability and the above solution is only meaningful for φ >φ . The
critical value φ can be estimated numerically. However, for some type of lattice structure, it
can be caculated exactly (e.g., for 1-D lattice, φ = 1). The introduction of a number of pkN
shortcuts(whereN is thenetworksize) will generally change φ as discovered byNewman and
Watts [1999] by solving the 1-D case
p= c . (14)
For 2-D or higher dimension case, there is no general explicit solution for φ and numerical
approachisusuallyused. Foralatticein n-dimensionalpercolation structure,formation ofone
verylarge cluster gives
c 2 ks c c
wherethesummationisoverswhichistheclusterperimeter[Stauffer andAharony,1994]. The
coefficientg dependsonthenetworkorlatticestructure. Forexample,thetripletonasquare
latticecorrespondstok=3ands=8withg =2ors=7withg =4. Anon-zeropusually
gives a lower value of φ than that for p = 0, which means that cracks or higher permeability
connectionwillreducethecriticalsiteoccupationprobabilityandthusincreasetheefficiencyof
thetransport and diffusion process in disordered porous media.
Discussion
Amodifiedsmall-worldnetworkmodelhasbeenpresentedheretocharacterisetheeffectoftime-
delayonsmall-worldnetworks. Numericalsimulationsandanalyticalanalysisfornetworkswith
time-delayshowthatthetime-delayparameterδhasaverystrongeffectonthefractaldimension
andotherpropertiessuchasthespeedandsaturationtimeofthedelaynetworks. Asmall-world
network can become larger if sufficient time-delay in thesystem response in introduced.
On the other hand, in order to make a large world network transfer into a small-world or
toincreasethetransport anddiffusionefficiency ofthenetwork,aslight higherprobability pof
long-range random shortcuts are necessary compared with the one without time-delay because
this essentially reduce the characteristic length scale ξ = O(1/p) quite significantly. Cracks
andotherlong-rangeconnectionscanhaveastronginfluenceonpermeability,conductivityand
percolationindisorderedporousmedia. Furtherstudiesofthedynamicsofsmall-worldnetworks
areobviously necessary andthepresentworkisjust oneofsuchattemptstotheunderstanding
of dynamics of networks and application in geophysical modelling.