Sociological Inequality and the Second Law
Oded Kafri
Varicom Communications, Tel Aviv 68165 Israel.
There are two fair ways to distribute particles in boxes. The first way is to divide the
particles equally between the boxes. The second way, which is calculated here, is to
score fairly the particles between the boxes. The obtained power law distribution
function yields an uneven distribution of particles in boxes. It is shown that the
obtained distribution fits well to sociological phenomena, such as the distribution of
votes in polls and the distribution of wealth and Benford's law.
It seems that nature dislike equality. In many cases distributions are uneven, a
few have a lot and many have to be satisfied with little. This phenomenon was
observed in many sociological systems and has many names. In economy it is called
Pareto law [1,2], in Sociology it is called Zipf law [3,4] and in statistics it is called
Benford law [5-7]. These distributions differ from the canonic (exponential)
distribution by a relatively moderate decay (a power-law decay) of the probabilities of
the extremes that enables a finite chance to become very rich. Here it is shown that
the power law distributions are a result of standard probabilistic arguments that are
needed to solve the statistical problem of how to distribute P particles in N boxes.
Intuitively one tends to conclude that P particle will be distributed evenly among N
boxes, since the chance of any particle to be in any box is equal, namely, .
However, this is an incorrect conclusion, because the odds that each box will score the
same amount of particle are very small. Usually there are some lucky boxes and many
more unlucky ones. The distribution function of particles in boxes should maximize
the entropy. This is because in nature, fairness does not mean an equal number of
particles to all boxes N, but an equal probability to all the microstates (configurations)
Ω. The equal probability of all the microstates is the second law of thermodynamics,
which, exactly for this reason, causes heat to flow from a hot place to a cold place.
Calculating the distribution of P particles in N boxes with an equal chance to any
configuration is not simple, as the number of the configurations Ω(P,N) is a function
of both P and N namely,
(N +P−1)!
(N −1)!P!
The derivation of the distribution function to Eq.(1) is not new. Planck
published it in 1901 in his famous paper in which he deduced that the energy in the
radiation mode is quantized [8,9]. Here the Planck's calculation is followed with the
modifications needed to fit our, somewhat simpler, problem. Planck first expressed
the entropy, namely S =k lnΩ (k is the Boltzmann constant), as a function of the
number of modes N and the number of light quanta P in a mode n= . Using
Stirling formula, he obtained that S =k N{(1+n)ln(1+n)−nlnn}. Then he used the
Clausius inequality in equilibrium [10] to calculate the temperature T, from the
expression, δS = = N , where Q is the energy of all the radiation modes and q
is the energy of a single radiation mode. Therefore, the temperature is T = N .
Then, Planck made his assumption that q = nhν, namelyT = Nhν . Therefore,
= k Nln( ) = N , this is the famous Planck equation, namely, the number
of quanta in a radiation mode is, n= . The calculation of Planck is comprised
of three steps. First he expressed the entropy S by the average number of quanta n in a
box and the number of boxes (radiation modes) N. Next, he used the Clausius equality
to calculate the temperature. The equality sign in Clausius inequality expresses the
assumption of equilibrium in which all the configurations have the same probability.
Then Planck added a new law that was verified by the data of the blackbody radiation
that the energy of the quant is proportional to the frequency. This law is responsible
for the observation that in the higher frequencies n is lower.
In our problem we do not have energies or frequencies. We just have particles
and boxes. Therefore, we will write the dimensionless entropy, namely the Shannon
information as a function of n and N, and obtain that I = N{(1+n)ln(1+n)−nlnn}.
Parallel to Planck, we calculate the dimensionless temperature Θ according to
Θ= = Nφ(n) . Here we replace the total energy Q by P and q by nφ(n), where
φ(n)is a distribution function that tells us the number of boxes having n particles.
φ(n) is the analogue of Planck’s hν. Changing the frequency enabled Planck to
change the number of the particles in a mode at a constant temperature. Here we
change the probability of a box with n particles at a constant temperature. The
sociologic temperature Nφ(n) =Θ is equal, in equilibrium, in all the boxes. Since,
= Nln( ) = one obtains that φ(n)=Θln . This is the analogue of
the Planck's equation, namely n = . When P is large as in many statistical
systems, we are interested in the normalized distribution. Since ∑φ(n)=Θln(N +1)
we obtain that the normalized distribution function is,
This is the main result of this paper. This result can be applied to any natural random
distribution of inert particles in N boxes∗.
To check the validity of this distribution we start with Benford's law.
Benford's law was found experimentally by Newcomb in the 19th century, was
extended later by Benford [5] and explained on a statistical basis by Hill [6,7]. It says
that in numerical data files, which were not generated by a randomizer, namely
balance sheets, logarithmic tables, the stocks value etc, the distribution of the digits
follows the equation ρ(n)=log(1+ ). For example, the frequency of the digit 1 is
about 6.5 times higher than that of the digit 9. It is seen that if one substitute in Eq.(2)
N=9 the Benford law is obtained. One can assume that the digit 1 is a box with n=1
particle and n=9 is a box with 9 particles. In fact, it is obvious that the equation valid
for n=C×1, for the digit 1 and n=C×9 for the digit 9, where C is any number
bigger than one.
Another way, intriguing even more, to check the informatics Planck
distribution of Eq.(2) is to compare its results to polls statistics. In polls there are
usually N choices and P voters that suppose to select their preferred choice. Usually
each voter can select only one choice. A poll is not necessarily a statistical system. An
example for a non-statistical poll is a poll with the three questions: 1. Do you prefer to
be poor? 2. Do you prefer to be young, healthy and rich? 3. Do you prefer to be old
and sick? In this poll one expects that most people will vote 2 (at least for
themselves). However, it is clear that nobody will make the effort to make this poll, as
its result is predictable. However, in the Internet there are many examples of multi-
choice votes with unpredictable answers. Here we study three choices polls that were
done on the Internet by the Globes newspaper [11] (an Israeli economical daily news)
on variety of subjects between 10 Feb. 2008 and 10 Apr. 2008, for eight consecutive
weeks on various issues. The results are presented in Fig 1.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 Average Theoretical
A 55% 39% 47% 64% 46% 56% 65% 47% 52% 50%
B 32% 38% 31% 20% 37% 30% 19% 33% 30% 29%
C 13% 23% 22% 17% 17% 15% 16% 19% 18% 21%
Fig 1. The average distribution of votes of consecutive eight polls: Each poll has three
choices selected by about 1500 voters. The blue line is the actual distribution. The red
one is the theoretical calculation based on maximizing the Shannon information.
It is seen that although the individual votes for the preferred choices A, B and C are
quite different from the theoretical values, namely, 50%, 29% and 21% respectively.
The average is with a good agreement with the experimental results. It is plausible
that on the average, the polls reflect more uncertainty about the best choice than in an
individual poll. Therefore, one expects that the average of the eight polls will be
closer to equilibrium.
If we consider the number of particles in a box as an indicator of wealth, one
may use Eq.(2) to calculate the theoretical particles wealth of boxes in equilibrium.
For example, in a set of a million boxes the richest box will have a relative density of
≅ 0.05. Namely, 5% of the particles will be in one box. Similarly, the
richest 10% will have ≅0.29. That means that 10% of the boxes will posses
29% of the particles. The richest half of the boxes will have about 63% of the wealth.
The poorest 10% of the boxes will posses ≅0.044of the particles, namely
less than the richest single box. From the point of view of the boxes this is an unfair
distribution. Nevertheless, from the point of view of the microstates (which are the
configurations of boxes and particles) this is the just way to distribute the wealth.
It was shown previously that Planck formula yields a power law with slop
1[12]. There are many publications that find power-law distributions with variety of
slopes [2]. If we assume that the probability of the particles in a box isφα(n), we can
generalize this theory to a slopα power-law.
To conclude: the uneven distributions that are so common in life are partially
an outcome of an unbiased distribution of configurations. This is the second law of
thermodynamics as manifested by Boltzmann and Planck. Namely, the probability of
all the microstates is equal. Not all the systems are in equilibrium, but systems in
equilibrium are more stable. Thermal equilibrium is reached by the dynamics of the
system. In blackbody, photons are emitted and absorbed constantly by the hot object,
therefore one can expect to a thermal distribution. In economy the money exchanges
hands all the time. The digits in numerical data are also changed by the number
crunching operations. Nevertheless, the situation in polls is different. Voting in the
Internet is a spontaneous non-interactive social activity; therefore, it is surprising that
the solitary autonomic action of an individual yields a result of a statistical ensemble.
A possible explanation is that our decision process mimics the behavior of a group,
after all a human is a coalition of cells.