1v6202110/hp-ortsa:viXra
Software and Sociology in UK Astronomy
Kevin A. Pimbblet
E-mail:K.A.Pimbblet@durham.ac.uk
Address: Department of Physics, University of Durham, South Road, Durham, DH1 3LE, UK.
Accepted for publication in Astronomy & Geophysics.
I discuss the remit of Starlink’s software strategy groups and a particular item on the agenda
of a meeting of the image processing software strategy group held on 26 January 2001: ‘Why
don’t people use Starlink software?’. The answer to this question was speculated to be primarily a
sociological effect: those people supervising UK astronomy Ph.D. students are largely people who
had learnt their trade at a time when Starlink had a less than perfect reputation. I report on the
recommendations made to Starlink to counter this effect.
Introduction
teractive data processing facilities for astronomers for over 18 years. Starlink has provided both
hardware and software on behalf of PPARC; ‘the primary purpose ...[being] ...to maximize the
.
1999, Starlink’s budget stood at approximately 2 5 million pounds sterling per annum. Out of this
.
sum, approximately 0 6 million pounds is ear-marked for the provision of software. These provisions
include the development, distribution and documentation of the software.
The Starlink software collection is a set of software written both by members of the Starlink
ProjectandimportedfromoutsidetheProjectfortheuseoftheUKastronomicalcommunity. Many
utilities and packages exist, mostly focussing on data reduction but there are also some (limited)
theoretical tools.
Software Strategy Groups
A mainstay of Starlink’s software development is the existence of Software Strategy Groups (SSGs).
There aresix such SSGs whose remit covers different aspects of astronomical research: spectroscopy,
image processing , information services & databases, radio, mm, & sub-mm astronomy, theory &
infrastructure and X-ray astronomy. The SSGs were set up after the 1991/1992 review of Starlink
to provide feedback, re-assess software priorities and identify future objectives. Membership of the
SSGs is composed of both Starlink’s programmers and expert users drawn from across a broad
The Author of this article has been a member of the Image Processing SSG since 1999.
spectrum of personal experience and opinion. The SSGs are annually asked to advise on strategies
to be adopted over in the coming years in order to ‘satisfy (and continue to satisfy) the needs
identified by users in the [Starlink Users] questionnaire. ...They will also be asked to identify
in more detail those software projects that should be carried out over the next year in order to
Sociological Issues
Third on the agenda of the image processing SSG for 26 January 2001 was the loaded question
‘Why don’t people use Starlink software?’ This question came as a surprise for a few members of
the SSG as many of the users used Starlink’s software on a daily basis in the research.
Starlink software, however, is by no means the only available source of software for astronomers.
The major competition for users is the successful Image Reduction and Analysis Facility (IRAF).
IRAF is a publicly available ‘general purpose software system for the reduction and analysis of
the areas that the Starlink software does (e.g. general purpose image reduction software). One may
expect that there would be substantial competition for users between the two, however, this is not
the case. UK astronomers have tended in the past to migrate towards using the IRAF option in
preference to Starlink’s software. Contributory factors to this may be that in many observatories
(e.g. theIsaacNewtonGroup)IRAFhashistoricallybeenmuchmorereadilyavailablethanStarlink
and UK astronomers have used IRAF to be more compatible with their American collaborators.
So why do many UK astronomers use IRAF when much of the equivalent Starlink software is
arguably better, more stable and more reliable? In answering this question, the image processing
SSG expediently pointed out that this was not always the case. During the 1980’s, Starlink software
had a less than perfect reputation. But why in 2001 is there still such a trend for astronomers to be
preferentially using IRAF packages over Starlink ones? The image processing SSG speculated that
the major reason was a sociological one. Post-graduate students who are presently commencing
work on their Ph.D. theses will primarily be introduced to the tools of their trade by their Ph.D.
supervisors. Their supervisors, on the whole, in turn learnt their trade during, or lived through the
aforementioned time when Starlink had a less than perfect reputation. Their supervisors prejudices
and perspectives naturally influence their students: in guiding their post-graduate students they
are likely to recommend IRAF in preference to Starlink software to their charges. Thus, Starlink
softwarehasbecomelessusedovertime, potentiallycreatingafurtherproblem: alackoflocalexpert
users. Even if new post-graduate students chose to use Starlink software, they would probably have
little to no personal guidance available to them whereas if they were to chose IRAF, many people
within the given astronomy department would potentially be able to assist.
IRAFwrittenandsupportedbytheIRAFprogramminggroupattheNationalOpticalAstronomyObservatories
(NOAO) in Tucson, Arizona.
Discussion
To remedy this situation, the image processing SSG has recommended a number of changes be
implemented. Firstly, to give the software a higher visibility, the Starlink newsletter would be re-
introduced to publicize new software developments. More ideas were to implement a method for
disseminating what software is available on-line; the introduction of a ‘man’ page; and an education
scheme to provide novice and infrequent users reach rapid decisions about what Starlink software
could be helpful. Although these recommendations are a start, it is probably going to take some
time to wash away the memories of the imperfect reputation that Starlink had in the 1980s and
counter the present sociological prejudice against Starlink software. In the immediate future, many
new software products will be released. Of particular note is the Interactive Data Language (IDL).
The recent rise and increasing use of IDL has shown that quality, new software will always have a
place within the astronomical community and Starlink must re-double its efforts to compete.
Acknowledgements
I sincerely acknowledge the data analysis facilities provided by the Starlink Project which is run
by CCLRC on behalf of PPARC, without which my Ph.D. would not be what it is. I thank Peter
Draper and Nigel Metcalfe for useful discussions on the factual content of this article and the image
processing SSG that inspired this.