“Some comments on the possible causes of climate change”
L.PadgetandJ.Dunning-Davies,
DepartmentofPhysics,
UniversityofHull,
HullHU67RX,
England.
email: j.dunning-davies@hull.ac.uk
Climate change is an important current issue and there is much debate about the causes and
effects. This article examines the changes in our climate, comparing the recent changes with
those in the past. There have been changes in temperature, resulting in an average global rise
overthelast300years,aswellaswidespreadmeltingofsnowandice,andrisingglobalaverage
sealevel.There are manytheories for the causes of therecent changein theclimate, including
some natural and some human influenced. The most widely believed cause of the climate
changeisincreasinglevelsofGreenhousegasesintheatmosphereandastheatmosphereplays
an important role in making our planet inhabitable, it is important to understand it in order to
protect it. However, there are other theories for the cause of climate change, the Sun and
cosmic rays, for example, are felt by some to have a significant role to play. There is also well-
established evidence that the three Milankovitch cycles change the amount and alter the
distributionof sunlightovertheEarth,heatingandcoolingit. Therearemanyinfluencesonour
planet and they all have differing levels of impact. The purpose of this article is to review the
presentoverallpositionandurgeopen,reasoneddiscussionoftheproblem.
Introduction
Climate change is quite possibly the most hotly debated issue at the moment and there are
many conflicting views about the causes. As well as being an issue that affects most of us on a
dailybasis,itisaveryimportantpoliticalissue.
So what is happening to convince people that there is a problem? The BBC news reports that
average global temperatures have risen by 0.7° C over the last 300 years. 0.5 ° C of that
warming occurred during the 20th century, and most of that occurred between 1910-1940 and
from 1976 onwards. Four out of five of the warmest years ever to be recorded were in the
1990’s,with1998being thewarmest year globallysincerecordsbeganin1861.Itisalsowidely
believed that arcticseaice is thinning and that there has been an averageincrease of between
0.1 and 0.2 meters in sea levels globally over the last 100 years. In many high and mid level
areas in the northern hemisphere, precipitation has increased by 0.5-1% per decade. Finally in
Asia and Africa the frequency and intensity of droughts has increased in the last few decades.
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) begins its Climate Change 2007:
Synthesis Report with the statement “Warming of the climate system is unequivocal, as is now
evident from the observations of increases in global average air and ocean temperatures,
widespreadmeltingofsnowandice,andrisingglobalaveragesealevel”.AccordingtotheIPCC:
temperature increase is widespread over the globe and greater at higher northern latitudes,
withlandregionswarmingfaster thantheoceans.Globalaveragesealevelhasrisensince1961
at an averagerate of 1.8 [1.3to2.3]1 mm/year andsince 1993 at an averagerate of 3.1[2.4to
3.8]mm/year, duetothermal expansion,melting glaciersandicecaps, andthepolaricesheets.
It follows that observed decreases in snow and ice extent are also consistent with warming.
Satellite data has shown that arctic sea ice has shrunk by 2.7 [2.1 to 3.3] % per decade with
larger decreases in summer of 7.4 [5.0 to 9.8] % per decade. Also mountain glaciers and snow
cover on average have declined in both hemispheres. They state that there is a very high
confidence that the earlier timings of spring events and poleward and upward shifts in plant
andanimalrangesarelinkedtorecentwarming.Insomemarineandfreshwatersystems,shifts
in ranges and changes in algal, plankton and fish abundance are with high confidence linked to
rising water temperatures as well as ice cover, salinity, oxygen levels and circulation. Of the
29,000 plus observational data series, taken from 75 studies, which show significant change in
physical and biological systems, more than 89% are consistent with the change expected as a
response to warming. Nevertheless, there is a geological imbalance with a notable lack of data
andliteratureonchangescomingfromdevelopingcountries. (IPCC,2007)
However, according to reportsfrom the U.S. National Oceanic andAtmosphericAdministration
(NOAA), almost all the allegedly ‘lost’ ice is back, they show that ice which had shrunk from 13
million square kilometres in January 2007 to just 4 million in October is almost back to its
originallevelandfiguresshowthatthereisnearlyathirdmoreiceinAntarcticathanisusualfor
this time of year. Scientists are saying that last winter, the northern hemisphere endured its
coldest winter in decades and that snow cover across that area was at its greatest since 1966.
One exception to this was Western Europe which experienced unseasonable warm weather;
the UK reported one of its warmest winters on record. Vast parts of the world have, however,
suffered chaos because of some of the heaviest snowfalls in decades, including central and
southern China, the United States and Canada. In China, the snowfall was so severe that over
100,000 houses collapsed under the weight of it. Jerusalem, Damascus, Amman and Saudi
Arabia all reported snow and below zero temperature and in Afghanistan snow and freezing
weatherkilled120people.(Bonnici,18.02.08)(Brennan,19.02.08)
It is clear that our planet’s climate is changing and some opinion suggests that this is down to
us. But some scientists believe that because the climate has changed naturally before that it is
supposed to change and therefore disagree that there is even a problem. Our climate is an
incredibly complex system and there is doubt over whether enough is known about it to make
predictionsandwhetherthecomputermodelsthatarebeingusedareadequate.(BBC08)
Possible causes.
TheatmospherethatsurroundstheEarthplaysanessentialroleinmakingourplanethabitable,
it is transparent to the visible radiation emitted by the Sun and this heats the Earth’s surface,
without it the temperature would soar by day and plummet by night, and the average
temperature would be around -18°C. About 30% of the Sunlight that reaches our planet is
reflected back to space by clouds, dust or the ground, more than 20% is absorbed in the
atmosphere and almost 50% is absorbed by the Earth’s surface. Some of the infrared radiation
that is radiated by the Earth’s Sun-warmed surface escapes through the atmosphere directly
intospacebut most of it isabsorbedonthewaybycloudsandgreenhousegaseswhichrelease
partofthatheatintospaceandradiatesomebacktothesurfaceincreasingthetemperaturein
the lower atmosphere. As the temperature of the Earth’s surface rises, the amount of IR
radiationincreases.Thetemperatureadjustsuntiladelicatebalanceisachieved.Unlikethetwo
maincomponentsofair,oxygen(20%)andnitrogen(78%)thathavealineardiatomicstructure,
greenhousegasesintheatmospheresuchaswater,carbondioxideand methanehavethreeor
more atoms which make them well suited to absorbing radiation. As these greenhouse gases
accumulate they block each other’s radiation to space and so, the more greenhouse gas there
is, thewarmer itgets.The averageheight at whichtheradiationcan now escape tospace then
begins to increase and at higher altitudes the temperatures are cooler andradiationintospace
decreases. The system then starts to readjust, more water evaporates from oceans and lakes
andseaicewhichreflectsSunlightbackintospacebeginstomelt,reducingthereflection,these
bothamplifythewarmingeffect. (Henson,2006)
Another theory for the cause of global warming, developed by Henrik Svensmark amongst
others, is that the Sun and cosmic rays play a role in the change in our climate. They believe
thatcosmicrays areanessentialingredient,whichexpertshavesofarbeenslowtoappreciate.
The cosmic rays must break through three defensive shields before they can reach the Earth’s
surface, first the Sun’s magnetic field then the Earth’s magnetic field and finally the air around
us and only the most energetically charged particles can get as far as sea level. In Svensmark’s
theory it is these energetically charged particles called muons or heavy electrons, which are
producedwhencosmicrayshittheatmosphere,thathelpcloudstoformlowintheairandcool
the Earth. Whist someclouds higher upcan have a warming effect; these clouds which areless
than 3000 meters high keep the Earth cool. Put simply this means more cosmic rays, more
cloudsandcoolertemperatures.(Svensmark,etal.,2007)
The clouds play a very important role in our climate, about 60% of the globe is covered by
cloud and we all appreciate how important cloudiness is in determining the temperature on a
daytodaybasis.CloudsmodulatetheEarth’sradiationbalance,bothinthevisibleandinfrared
spectra. Clouds cool the Earth by reflecting incoming Sunlight, the tiny drops in clouds can
scatterbetween20and90%oftheSunlightthatreachesthem,acloudfreeEarthwouldabsorb
nearly 20% more heat from the Sun that it does at present. However, the clouds also have a
warming effect on the Earth, they absorb the infrared radiation emitted from the surface and
reradiate it back down. This process traps heat like a blanket and slows the rate at which the
surfacecools down. The cloudsreflect about 50Wm-2of solar radiationuptospaceandradiate
around 30Wm-2 down to the ground, the net effect being 20Wm-2 cooling on average. This
greatly exceeds the 4Wm-2 warming due to atmospheric carbon dioxide levels doubling from
300to600ppm.Whatwedon’tknowhowever,iswhat thenetcooling or warming effectof all
cloudsonEarthwillbeinachangingatmosphereorhowthecloudsthemselveswillbechanged
byachangeinthetemperatureoftheEarth. Ifthecoolingeffectofcloudsincreasesmorethan
the heating effect does, the clouds would reduce the magnitude of the greenhouse-induced
warming but speed its arrival, this is called negative feedback. Both effects decreasing could
have the same effect but if the cooling decreases more than the heating the cloud changes
would boost the magnitude of the warming but delay its arrival. In any scenario the important
factoris theneteffectoftheclouds. Tocomplicatemattershowever,thealtitudeof theclouds
has an influence. High clouds have a net warming effect, they block little incoming solar
radiationbutbecausetheyareatlowtemperaturetheyreturnlittleoutgoinginfraredradiation
to the Earth’s surface. Clouds at a low altitude have a net cooling effect because they have a
high albedo and being at a temperature which is nearly as warm as the surface of the Earth
they emit nearly as much infrared radiation to space as the surface would under clear skies.
(Rossow,etal.,January1995)
There is also well established evidence that the Three Milankovitch Cycles in the Earth’s
rotation and orbit, change the amount and alter the distribution of Sunlight over the Earth,
heating and cooling the Earth over cycles of 100,000- 41,000 and 23,000 years. (Page,
27.06.07) The Milankovitch cycles is the name given to the collective effects of changes in the
Earth’smovementsontheclimate.Theeccentricity,axialtiltandprecessionoftheEarth’sorbit
vary in several patterns which have resulted in 100,000 year ice age cycles over the last few
millionyears.TheEarth’stiltgoesupanddownrangingfromabout21.8°to24.4°andbackover
a approximately 41,000 year cycle. The tilt is currently around 23.4° and decreasing. When the
tilt is most pronounced it gives rise to stronger summer Sun and weaker winter Sun. Ice ages
often occur because as the tilt decreases the progressively cooler summers cannot melt the
past winter’s snow. The Earth’s orbit around the Sun is not precisely circular but elliptical in
shape,with theSun positionedslightly tooneside of thecentrepoint. Theeccentricity, or ‘off-
centeredness’ of the orbit varies over time in a complicated way, the result is two main cycles,
one averages about 100,000 years long and the other 400,000 years. When the eccentricity is
low there is little change through the year in the distance between the Earth and Sun. When
the eccentricity is high the Sunlight reaching the Earth can be more than 20% stronger at
perihelion(currentlyJanuary)thanataphelion(currentlyJuly).TheEarth’saxisalsoplaysarole,
the main cycle of the rotation around the axis is known as the precession, and takes about
26,000 years. It shifts the dates of the perihelion and the aphelion forward by about one day
every 70 years. Currently the Earth is 3% closer to the Sun in early January (perihelion) than in
earlyJuly(aphelion)withabout7%moresolarenergyreachingtheEarthatperihelion.Inabout
13,000yearstheEarthwillbeclosesttotheSuninJulyinsteadofJanuary;thiswillintensifythe
seasonal changes in solar energy across the Northern Hemisphere and weaken them in the
South.
CO emissions
It is reported that man is producing and releasing into the atmosphere higher levels of carbon
dioxide through increased industry and de-forestation and that this is affecting our climate by
adding to the layer of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere. However, there are many factors
which affect the levels of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere; the sea for example absorbs
carbondioxide.
Geologist Dr Norman J Page published an article in June 2007 entitled ‘Climate Change and
Carbon Dioxide’ for the Alpha Institute for Advanced Study saying “As a geologist, I find the
currentclimateof fear inwhichthedebateonGlobalWarmingisconductedveryalarming”.He
startsbypointingoutsomecommonmisconceptionsoftenreportedinthemedia:
The United States is often referred to as the worlds biggest polluter but, whilst the U.S. does
emitalargeamountofCO ,thelandusepatternsmeansthattheyalsoabsorbsalargeamount
and it is the net amount not the amount emitted which is the important figure. It has been
shown byapaper publishedinScienceMagazinein1998that, whenthenet amountof carbon
dioxide is taken into account, North America actually takes up more carbon dioxide than it
emitsbyabout100milliontonnesperyear,whilstEuropeemitsalargeamountoverall.Carbon
dioxide is often reported as being the biggest offender but in fact water vapour is Earth’s most
abundantgreenhousegasandCO makesuplessthan3%. DrPagestatesthat the Earthisnow
impoverished in CO and that at various times in the last 550 million years levels of CO2 have
oftenbeenfourorfivetimesthecurrentlevelsandattimestentofifteentimesgreater.
Annually,humancontributiontogreenhousegasissaidtobebetweenoneandtwotenthsofa
percentandithas beensuggestedthat termitesaloneproducetentimes moregreenhousegas
than humans. It has also been reported that the amount of CO producedby the population of
India breathing is more than all of the coal burning plants in the U.S. Page states “If we
eliminated human use of fossil fuels entirely it would have little impact on future
temperatures”. Dr Roth,atMIT, hasshownthat overtimescalesof morethan10millionyears
it is very difficult to prove a connection between the climate and CO . There is, however, a
connection between temperature and CO over shorter time intervals but data extracted from
ice cores show that a natural warming period precedes a CO increase and is not caused by it.
(Page,27.06.07)
ThelatestdatafromBritain’sClimateResearchUnitshowsthattheglobalmeantemperaturein
October 2007 was 0 .159 degrees lower than in October 1997; there has been no warming in
thelast10yearsbutinthissameperiodthelevelsofCO haveincreasedby6%. Thelatestdata
from the Met Office also shows that the average global temperature for the first quarter of
2008wascooler thantheaverageof anyyear since1996,whilstlevels of CO haverisenby6%.
(Page, 14.04.08). On the other hand the IPCC state that eleven of the last twelve years, from
1995 to 2006, rank among the twelve warmest years in the instrumental record of global
surfacetemperaturesince1850.
In November 2007, the Parliamentary Office of Science and Technology periodical Postnote
published the report Climate Change Science. It stated that the atmospheric concentration of
CO has increased from a pre-industrial concentration of about 280 parts per million (ppm) to
379 ppm in 2005 and that over the last 650,000 years CO varied within a range of 180 to 300
ppm, but there were approximately 90,000 measurements of CO levels made since 1812,
throughthe19thandearly20thcenturywhichshowthatlevelsofCO wereatabout440ppmin
the 1820s and 1940s and about 370 ppm in the 1850s. The historical chemical data shows a
clear trend, with the changes in CO tracking the changes in temperature and therefore the
climate. These measurements were made by chemists, several of whom had Nobel Prize level
distinction, and the chemical methods used to make the measurements are good enough to
measure with high accuracy, for example the Pettenkofer process was the standard analytical
methodfordeterminingatmosphericcarbondioxidelevelsbetween1857and1958andusually
achieved an accuracy better than 3%. This data was recently published by Ernest-Georg Beck,
but modern climatologists have generally ignored the historic figures, discrediting the methods
as unreliable despite the techniques being standard textbook procedures in several different
disciplines. Furthermore this data was recently not acknowledged by the IPCC when it
publisheditsfindings.(Beck,March2007)
The factors that drive climate change are separated into two categories, forcings and
feedbacks. Changesinsolarenergyoutputorintheconcentrationofgreenhousegases,natural
or otherwise, are classed as forcings. Scientists quantify and compare the contributions of
different agents that affect surface temperatures by measuring their ‘radiative forcing’ which
canbepositiveornegativeandismeasuredinWattspermetresquared.Feedbacksareinternal
climate processes that amplify or reduce the climate’s response depending on how responsive
the climate is to various forcing processes, for example, a warmer atmosphere can hold more
moisture which itself acts as a greenhouse gas causing further warming, this is a positive
feedback.
Postnote reports that scientists have estimated the combined human-caused radiative forcing
to be +1.6Wm-2, and have decided that it is extremely likely2 that humans have exerted a
substantial warming influence on the climate, and that this radiative forcing is likely to be at
least five times greater than the radiative forcing due to solar changes. Solar irradiance is
estimated to have caused a small warming effect +0.12Wm-2. It concludes that, for the period
from 1950 to 2005, it is extremely unlikely that the combined natural radiative forcing (solar
plus volcanic sources of aerosols) has had a warming influence that is comparable with that of
the combined human made radiative forcing. But there is an uncertainty in the predictions of
thefutureclimatestatesthatisduetotheuncertaintyinthemagnitudeofclimateforcingsand
feedbacks. The IPCC has classed the level of scientific understanding (LOSU) as low for the
climate forcings of Solar irradiance, contrails from aircrafts, cloud reflectivity and water vapour
fromthemethaneintheupperatmosphere.
Scientists use climate models to help quantify these forcings and feedbacks to predict the
future state of the climate. Mathematical equations of the climate are fed into a three
dimensional grid of pointsthat cover the Earth’s atmosphereand oceans. Theresolution of the
model, which is essentially the spacing between the points on the grid, is limited by the power
of the computer used by the researcher, but is generally less than 150km in the horizontal
direction and 1km in the vertical, with finer resolution near the surface of the Earth. Some
scientistsareconfidentthatclimatemodelsprovidecredibleestimatesoffutureclimatechange
at least on large scales, because their design is based on established physical laws which are
used inweather forecasting models. The models have also been used to reproduce features of
past climates and climatechanges. But these models do have their limitations, some processes
such as cloud formation, occur on time and space scales which are too small for the climate
modelstoresolve.Modellersdealwiththisproblembyrepresenting smallscaleprocesseswith
average values over one grid box, but these assumptions are often a big source of climate
model uncertainty. Climate modellers run a number of programs and average the results,
hoping to try and remove or reduce some of the effects of natural variability, leaving the
humancausedchanges.(Smith,November2007)(Page,29.11.07)(Page,14.04.08)
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change is a United Nations organisation and is there
to help policymakers decide how to respond to climate change. Its role is not to carry out any
scientific investigation but to evaluate studies carried out by thousands of researchers around
theworld andthensynthesisetheresultsintoonereport. For the 2001and2007reportsthere
were three working groups to deal with: the basis in physical science, impacts, adaptation and
vulnerabilityandmitigation, eachgroupisheadedby apair of scientists, onefroma developed
and one from a developing country. Climate Change 2007: Synthesis Report is based on the
assessment carried out by the three working groups. The report starts by discussing the
observed changesinthe climate andtheir effects, theysayit is verylikely that over the past 50
years hotdays andhotnightshavebecomemore frequentover most land areas andcolddays,
cold nights and frost have become less frequent. From observational evidence from all
continents and most oceans it seems that many natural systems are being affected by regional
climatechanges,particularlytemperatureincreases.
Thereport thengoesontodiscuss thecausesof thechange. Theenergybalanceoftheclimate
system is altered by changes in the atmospheric concentrations of greenhouse gases and
aerosols, land cover and solar radiation. Levels of global greenhouse emissions due to human
activity have grown since pre-industrial times and there was an increase of 70% between 1970
and 2004. The annual emissions of carbon dioxide grew by approximately 80% between 1970
and2004.
The atmospheric concentration of CO , 379 ppm, far exceeds the natural range over the last
650,000 years and this increase is primarily attributed to fossil fuel use. At 1774 ppb the
atmospheric concentration of methane also exceeds the natural range over the same time
period and it is very likely that this is predominantly due to agriculture and fossil fuel use. The
IPCCconcludes that thereis a veryhigh confidence that the net effectof human activities since
1750 has been one of warming and that continued greenhouse gas emissions at the current
rate or above would cause further warming and induce changes in the global climate system
thatwouldverylikelybelargerthanthoseobservedalready.
It is often reported that there is a consensus of opinion amongst the leading climate scientists
that greenhouse gases are the cause of climate change but this is not the case. According to
many involved with the IPCC including Professor John Christy, lead author, not all of the 2500
plustopscientist listed ascontributorsagreewithfindings of thereport, andsomehavehadto
fighttohavetheir namesremoved.TherehaveevenbeenclaimsthattheIPCC hascensoredits
scientists. Professor Frederick Seitz wrote a letter to the Wall Street Journal saying that the
version of the IPCC’s latest report that was released was not the version approved by the
scientists listed on the title page. He claims that at least 15 of the key sections in the science
chapterhavebeendeletedincludingthefollowingstatements“Noneofthestudiescitedabove
has shown any clear evidence that we can attribute the observed [climate] changes to the
specificcauseofincreasesingreenhousegases”and“Nostudytodatehaspositivelyattributed
all or part [of theclimatechangeobservedtodate] to anthropogeniccauses”. TheIPCC didnot
denyremovinganysectionsbutsaidtherewas“nobias”intheirreport. (Durkin,2007)
American politician Al Gore is a passionate believer that greenhouse gases are the cause of
climate change and has been campaigning world wide for change. The documentary An
Inconvenient truth comprises the lectures he has been giving around the world on climate
change and interviews with Gore. He claims that there is no doubt that the CO emitted by
humans thickens the layer of greenhouses gases and that this warms the planet. However, the
documentaryfocusesmore on the effects that globalwarming is having ontheclimate andthe
weatherthanshowingthatitiscausedbyCO . Goresaysthattheideatheworldstemperature
has been warmer than it is at present is untrue and shows a graph which depicts the
temperatureduring the Medieval Warming Period as being much cooler than that of today. He
discusses the ice core method used to measure levels of temperature and carbon dioxide at
periods in the past but does not mention what conclusions have been drawn from the results
obtained. Gore then uses a graph showing the levels of CO , going back millions of years which
shows thatlevels havenever exceeded300ppm untilnow,whichdoesnotagreewiththedata
published by Beck. According to An Inconvenient Truth, the poles experience a much greater
impact due to global warming, claiming that because Earth’s climate is non-linear, a global rise
of5°Fwouldcausea1°Friseattheequatorbuta12°Friseatthepoles.DuringtheInconvenient
truth lecture Gore uses the images of icebergs breaking off and falling into the sea, ice sheets
melting and a polar bear clinging to a melting iceberg; all images which have widely been used
to show the need to fight climate change. It is claimed that our global warming is melting
icebergswhichiscausing polar bearstodrownintheoceans.However,hefailstomentionthat
the polar bear population has soared in recent years or even that many of the photographs
weretakeninAugustwhenmeltingisnormal.Gore’ssolutiontotheproblemofglobalwarming
istoreducecarbonemissionsbysuchmeasuresasusingrenewableenergyandincreasingboth
electricity and transport efficiency. Whilst the message of the documentary is conveyed
strongly and emotively, using footage of natural disasters and stories of his own personal
tragedies, the scientific content of the documentary seems questionable, many of the graphs
shown do not have axes or scales and much of the data quoted has no units. (Gore, 2007)
(Brennan,19.02.08)
In response to an inconvenient truth, Martin Durkin made the documentary The Great Global
Warming Swindle, which was shown last year on Channel Four. It features interviews and
opinions of many top climate scientists who disagree with the greenhouse gas explanation of
climatechange. Thedocumentarybeginsbydiscussing afew of thepointsinhistorywherethe
temperaturewassignificantlyhigher thanthat of today,theMedievalWarmPeriod,beforethe
Little Ice Age for example and the Holocene Climatic Maximum, when the temperature was
significantlyhigherthanitisnowfor threemillennia.Thewarmingeventseemstohavepeaked
between 11,000 and 8,000 years ago and North-western Europe experienced warming, while
there was cooling in the south. There is evidence at 120 of 140 sites across the western Arctic
of temperatures warmer than at present. At 16 sites where quantitative estimates were
obtained they show local temperatures that were on average 1.6±0.8 °C higher than present.
The cause of this eventis believed to be the Milankovitch cycles and acontinuation of changes
that caused theendof thelast glacial period. Whenthe axial tiltwas at 24° andtheEarth at its
nearest approach to the Sun the warming would have been at its maximum in the Northern
Hemisphere. The Milankovitch forcings would have provided 8% more solar radiation,
calculatedtobe+40W/m²totheNorthernHemisphereinthesummer,causinggreaterheating.
(Durkin,2007)(Davis,etal.,2003)(Kaufman,etal.,2004)
The data the IPCC used to demonstrate climate change, as well as that used by Al Gore and
manyothers, indicates a period of intense warming during theearly 20thcentury.Clearlyin the
periodbetween1905and1940industrywasfairlyprimitive.However,intheyearsafterthe2nd
World War when the world economy boomed, industry thrived and CO levels soared but
according to thedata,from approximately1940 to 1960theworld cooled. Soitseemsthat the
timedoesnotfitwithgreenhousewarming.
It is known that incoming radiation from the Sun is trapped by the greenhouses gases in the
troposphere,soitfollowsthat,if anincreasinglevelofgreenhousesgasesisresponsiblefor the
warming, the rate of warming should increase the higher you go. The temperature of the
atmospherecanbemeasuredusingasatelliteorbyweatherballoon.Usingbothmethodsithas
been found the rate of warming is in fact higher at the surface than the upper atmosphere,
whichdoesnotfitthetheory.
Itisoftenreportedinthemediathatatemperatureriseofjustafewdegreescouldhaveahuge
warmingimpact, melting theicecaps. ButrecordsshowthatGreenlandhasbeenmuchwarmer
thanitistodayanddidnot haveabig warming event.Picturesof pieces of icebreaking offand
falling into the sea are also often shown, but the icecaps are always naturally expanding and
contractinganditisperfectlynormalforpiecestobreakoff.
Dr Ian Clarke used ice drilling to try and find out if there is a link between CO and the climate
andalthoughhefoundaconnectionitwasanunexpectedone.ThetemperatureonEarthleads
the levels of CO by 800 years. Several major ice surveys since have confirmed these findings.
This can be explained by looking at the oceans. They contain CO and each year they absorb
some and emit some, but how much depends on the temperature. When the temperature is
warm they release more and when it is cooler they absorb more. The oceans are so big that it
takes a long time for them to warm or cool, often hundreds of years, which explains the time
lagbetweenthetemperatureandlevelofCO .
Thereisalsodoubtraisedinthedocumentaryabouttheaccuracyoftheclimatemodelsused.A
modelisonlyasgood as the assumptions onwhichitisbased. Theseclimate models arebased
on hundreds of assumptions and it only takes one to seriously distort a models findings. The
other concern with the current climate models is that they assume CO is the main climate
driver and do not incorporate any other possible influences. It is claimed that tweaking the
parametersofthemodel,evenslightly,canshowanumberofpossibleoutcomes.
CO makes up 0.054% of all thegasesin the atmosphere, the percentage of anthropogenic CO
is even smaller and it is known that CO accounts for just 3% of greenhouse gases which are
themselves only a small part of the Earth’s whole climate system. So what do the greenhouse
scepticsbelieveisdrivingthechangingclimate?TheSun!
Sunspotsareintensemagneticfieldswhichappearattimesofincreasedsolaractivitybuteven
before this was understood astronomers would count the number of Sun spots in the belief
that more heralded warmer weather. Edward Maunder noticed in 1893, during the Little Ice
AgethattherewerebarelyanySunspotsvisible,thisbecameknownastheMaunderMinimum.
Eigil Friis-Christensen compared the Sun spots with temperature over the last 120 years and
found a very close correlation, using astronomical data for the past 400 years the comparison
wastakenfurtherbackandwasfoundtobeintimatelylinked.
Astrophysicists from Harvard University conducted a study, in 2005, into the temperature-
carbon dioxide and temperature- Sun relationships. No obvious link was found linking
temperature and carbon dioxide, although a close link on a decade to decade basis was found
betweentemperatureandtheSun;thiswasbasedonindependentdatafromNASAandtheU.S
OceanicandAtmosphericAdministration,displays.(Durkin,2007)
Cosmic Rays
In February 2007 A&G magazine- News and reviews in Astronomy & Geophysics published the
article Cosmoclimatology: a new theory emerges by Henrik Svensmark. This report contains a
lot of in depth information on the research finding by Svensmark and emerging scientific
evidence. The Sun’s influence on our climate had long been recognised, by Herschel in 1801,
Eddy in 1976, Friis Christensen and Lassen in 1991, but Henrik Svensmark and Eigil Friis
Christensen noted the link between this relationship and the small 0.1% variations in the solar
irradianceover asolar cyclemeasuredbysatellites.Thepair publishedapapertitled“Variation
of cosmic ray flux and global cloud coverage- a missing link in solar-climate relationships” in
1997 after they announced their findings at the COSPAR space science meeting in Birmingham
in1996.(Svensmark,February2007)
The Chilling Stars- A new theory of climate change was published in 2007 by Henrik Svensmark
and Nigel Calder. The theory that cosmic rays play a role in the change in our climate has
recently been developed and this book goes into detail to explain the theory and the evidence
for it. It stems from Svensmark’s research at the Danish National Space Centre. The book is a
collaboration between Svensmark, who contributed the majority of the scientific input, and
Calder who wrote it up. The pair met in 1996 when they were introduced by Friis-Christensen,
who has also contributed toward the cosmic ray theory. They continued to discuss the theory
over the following years and decided to collaborate on a book. The text evolved in 2005/06
whilsttheintensiveresearchcontinued,despitedifficultieswithfunding.
Our Ancestors sometimes believed that the Moon and stars sucked heat from the Earth, but
astronomersnowknowthatmostofthebrighteststarsarefarhotterthantheSun.Despitethis
Svensmark and Calder believe that, when the biggest of the stars expire in mighty supernova
explosions and spray the galaxy with cosmic rays, they do in fact cool the Earth by making the
atmospherecloudier.
WhencosmicraysweredetectedbyanAustralianscientistnearlyacenturyago,itseemedthat
they were an interesting but unimportant extra, but it could be that they are an essential
ingredientintheuniverseandavitalcomponentinchangingtheclimateonourplanet.
Svensmarksaw thefirstcluesthatcosmicrayshaveaneffectontheclimatewhenhelookedat
the alternating episodes of warmth and cold over the past few thousand years, starting with
the Little Ice Age which peaked around 300 years ago, giving way to the present warm
interlude. At the time of the Little Ice Age the Sun was in an unusual state, the Maunder
Minimum, and there was very low Sun spot activity. This coupled with a jump in production
rate of radiocarbon atoms and other long lived tracers, which are made by cosmic rays in
nuclear reactions in the air, is an indication of low magnetic activity. Cosmic rays are deflected
awayfrom Earth by the Sun’s magneticfield, but when it weakens more of them canreach the
Earth. Since the most recent ice age ended 11,500 years ago, there have been nine chilling
events like the Little Ice Age and these have always been associated with high counts of
radiocarbonsandothertracers.
The Cosmic rays must break through three defensive shields before they can reach the Earth’s
surface.FirsttheSun’s magneticfield,thenthe Earth’s magneticfieldandfinallytheair around
us. Only the most energetically charged particles can get as far as sea level. In Svensmark’s
theory it is these energetically charged particles called muons or heavy electrons, which are
producedwhencosmicrayshittheatmosphere,thathelpcloudstoformlowintheairandcool
theEarth. Whilstsomecloudshigherupcanhaveawarmingeffect;thosecloudswhichareless
than 3000 meters high keep the Earth cool. Put simply this means more cosmic rays, more
clouds and cooler temperatures. During the 20th century the Sun’s magnetic shield more than
doubled in strength and so reduced the cosmic rays and clouds enough to explain a large
fraction of the global warming reported by climate scientists. When they first revealed their
ideasaboutthelinkbetweencosmicrays,cloudsandtheclimate,Svensmarkandhiscolleagues
experienced a lot of criticism. To gain credibility for their theory, the team had to find out
exactly how the cosmic rays affect the formation of clouds. Understanding of where clouds
came from was surprisingly limited. Elementary text books said that when air becomes cold
enough, moisture can condense and form clouds. But there must first be small specks floating
intheair,thecloudcondensationnucleionwhichthewaterdropletscanform. Theyneededto
be seeded too, but how that happened was a mystery. The experiment SKY was set up in2005
at the Danish National Space Centre and began to provide the scientists with some answers.
Cosmic rays enter throughthe laboratory ceiling and into a large box of air, releasing electrons
in the air which then encouraged the clumping of molecules to make micro-specks. The micro-
specks are capable of gathering into the larger specks which are needed for the formation of
clouds, the speed and efficiency at which the electrons worked took the team by surprise. In
2006 a more elaborate experiment CLOUD was set up at CERN, Europe’s particle physics lab in
Geneva, using accelerated particles to simulate the cosmic rays and test other possible effects.
TheinfluxofcosmicraysontheEarthdependsnotjustonthestatebutonwhereweareinthe
galaxy. TheSun, along withthe Earth,orbitsroundthecentreof theMilky Wayandsometimes
finds itself in a dark region where hot, bright explosive stars are few. In those regions cosmic
raysarerelativelyscarceandtheEarth’sclimateiswarm.Thisisreferredtobygeologistsasthe
hothouse mode. In the opposite periods when the starlight and cosmic rays are abundant, the
planet goes into an icehouse phase and ice sheets and glaciers form. An Israeli scientist has
suggested that the major changes in theses phases could be accounted for by visits to the
brightspiralarmsoftheMilkyWay. (Svensmark,etal.,2007)
AlthoughwedonotfullyunderstandtheSun-climateinterfaceitisseemsthatSunspotactivity
isagoodproxyforsolaractivityingeneral.The11yearSuncycleiswellknownbutothercycles
of varying lengths have been suggested. One which is of particular interest is an approximately
1000 year cycle which is believed to have peaked recently. A previous peak in this cycle is
reported to have produced the well documented medieval warming period. The forecast for
thenexttwosolar cycles,number 24andparticularlynumber25,showthat weareheadingfor
aperiodofreducedactivityfor atleast thenext15-20years,perhapsuntil themidcenturyand
this would produce generally declining temperatures, as opposed to the temperature rises
predictedbytheIPCC. (Page,29.11.07)
Recently Richard Black, BBC environment correspondent wrote a report for BBC news online
entitled ‘No Sun link’ to climate change. This article is about a new scientific study carried out
by Dr Mike Lockwood of the UK’s Rutherford-Appleton Laboratory and Dr Claus Froehlich from
the World Radiation Centre in Switzerland. Their findings claim to disprove the cosmic ray
hypothesis developed by, amongst others, Henrik Svensmark. The study was initiated by Dr
Lockwood, partly in response to the television documentary ‘The Great Global Warming
Swindle’, whichfeatures thecosmicray hypothesis.Heclaimsthat “Allthe graphsthey showed
stopped in about 1980, and I knew why, because things diverged after that” “You can’t just
ignore bits of data that you don’t like”. That is simply not true, the graphs extend to at least
2000.Seefigures 5and 6,takenfromthe2007 Astrophysics &Geophysicsarticle, for examples
ofjust4graphswhichcontinuepast1980.
The scientists looked at the solar output andcosmic ray intensity over the last 30-40 years and
comparedthosetrendswiththegraphforglobalaveragesurfacetemperatureshowingariseof
about 0.4°C over the period. This article does not go into a great deal of scientific detail to
explainthefindings ofthisnewstudy,tosupport theclaimstherearetwographs, oneshowing
the cosmic ray count and one showing the global mean surface air temperature from 1975 to
2005.Asdiscussedbefore,theSunvariesonacycleofapproximately11yearsbetweenperiods
of high and low activity, but that cycle coinciding with longer term trends saw most of the 20th
century showing a slight but steady increase in solar output. All except for the period between
1985-90 when the trend appears to reverse and the solar output declines. However, the other
graph shows that during this period the temperature rises just as fast. But although the graph
does not show any obvious link,itisquite possible that it is part of along term trend asshown
byLassenandFriis-Christenseninfigure5.
The study has been criticised by some for not recognising the work of Svensmark, Friis-
Christensen and others. The article concludes that “changes in the Sun’s output cannot be
causing modern-dayclimatechange”.Lockwood does agreethat thereis acosmicrayeffect on
cloud cover but thinks that, whilst it may have had a significant effect on the climate of pre-
industrial Britain, it cannot be applied today because the situation is completely different.
Lockwood’sanalysisissaidbyBlacktohave“putalarge,probablyfatalnail”intothecosmicray
theory. (Black,10.07.07)
In a follow up article, also entitled ‘No Sun link’ to climate change, Black discusses the work
donebyscientistsatLancasterUniversitytofurthercontradictthecosmicraytheory.Theteam,
headed by Professor Terry Sloan, has found that there has been no significant link between
solar activity and cosmic ray intensity in the last 20 years. They presented their findings in the
InstituteofPhysicsjournalandexplainedthattheyusedthreedifferentmethodstosearchfora
correlation but found virtually none. To try and establish a link, Professor Sloan’s team looked
for periods in time and for places on Earth where weak or strong cosmic ray arrivals had been
documented and then examined whether that had affected the cloudiness observed in those
locationsoratthosetimes.
When speaking to the BBC News, Sloan explained that the Sun sometimes throws out a huge
burst of charged particles, describedas a ‘burp’, and that they had looked to see if cloud cover
had increased after one of these bursts and that they found nothing. They did observe what
they described as a ‘weak’ correlation between cosmic ray intensity and cloud cover over the
course of one of the Sun’s natural 11 year cycle, but concluded that at most, cosmic ray
variabilitycouldaccountforonlyaquarterofthechangesincloudiness.
DrGilesHarrisonofReadingUniversity,whoisaleadingresearcherinthephysicsofclouds,has
also conducted research, looking at the UK only, which has suggested that cosmic rays only
make a very weak contribution to cloud formation. Sloan says that the team did try to
corroborate Svensmark’s hypothesis but was unable to and the article concludes that the
assessments made and the conclusions reached by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change last year are correct and that Svensmark has no reason to challenge them. (Black,
Conclusion
It is clear that there are many different theories for the cause of climate change and valid
evidence to support them all. It seems that a great many politicians have made up their minds
thatgreenhousegasesarethemaindriverofclimatechange,andtheydonotseemverywilling
to explore other possibilities. The media seems to have followed their lead. They report
greenhouses gases being the cause of climate change as irrefutable fact and rarely report on
any other possibilities. With sources of fossil fuels becoming more unstable because of
dwindlingstocksandpoliticalissues,warming duetocarbondioxideemissionsgivesevenmore
reason to switch to alternate sources of energy, which as well as being beneficial to
governmentsarealsopreferabletoenvironmentalcampaigners.Ithasbeensuggestedbysome
that politicians are providing scientists with funding to prove the CO – temperature link and
that the IPCC’s findings are politically lead. Climate science is a big industry now with a lot of
moneyinvestedandjobsdependingonit.
Bytheend of the midcentury, theEarthisexpectedtohave 3billionmorepeopletofeed and,
because CO is the main source of plant food, the easiest and most environmentally harmless
way to increase foodproduction would be to double levels of CO . This would have little effect
on temperature (the CO - temperature forcing equation is logarithmic) but a significant effect
on crop productivity, up to 40% in some varieties of soy bean. As the global temperatures fall,
the oceans will absorb more CO and CO levels will begin to fall, this coupled with our efforts
totryandcutCO emissionswillmakeworldfoodproductionfar moredifficult.Becauseof this
we must be very certain that CO is causing a major change in the climate before we take
action.
If cosmicrays are the main driver of climatechange, it is goodnewsfor the world’sinhabitants
asitinfersthattheeffectofcarbondioxideisquitesmalland,althoughthereisnothingwecan
do about it, any global warming in the 21st century is likely to be much less than the typical
predictionsof3or4°C.
It seems that the climate of our planet is such a complicated system that not enough is known
to draw definite conclusions about the reasons for climate change. It does, however, seem
difficult to believe that our species, that has dominated the planet for a relatively short period
of time, could have such a huge impact on our planet’s climate, whilst the Sun, the most
massive body in the solar system whose influence dominates our planet, could have such little
impact. Clearly all the causes discussed in here have an impact but their exact contributions
have yet to be determined. Possibly one useful stepforward couldbe made by a reassessment
of all the data gathered concerning the Sun’s activity since the days of William Herschel. This,
together with the data gathered in other countries over hundreds of years, needs to be re-
examined before possibly erroneous claims are made which could have disastrous
consequencesformankind.
AppendixA: IPCC language
1 Numbers in square brackets indicate an IPCC calculated 90% uncertainty interval around a
best estimate, i.e. there is an estimated 5% likelihood that the value could be above the range
given in square brackets and 5% likelihood that the value could be below that range.
Uncertaintyintervalsarenotnecessarilysymmetricaroundthecorrespondingbestestimate.
2TheIPCClanguageofuncertainty