SOME INNOVATIONS IN DESIGN OF LOW COST VARIABLE
COMPRESSION RATIO TWO STROKE PETROL ENGINE.
A.Srinivas1, G.Venkatasubbaiah2, P.Venkateswar rao3 & M. Penchal Reddy4
1,2&3.Associate Professor, Department of Mechanical Engineering, Vasavi College
of Engineering, Hyderabad-31, India. gvsubbaiah@yahoo.com
4 Asst. Engineer, APGENCO, RTPP, Muddanur, Kadapa dist, India.
ABSTRACT:
Historically two stroke engine petrol engines find wide applications in
construction of two wheelers worldwide, however due to stringent environmental laws
enforced universally; these engines are fading in numbers. In spite of the tight norms,
internationally these engines are still used in agriculture, gensets etc. Several designs of
variable compression ratio two stroke engines are commercially available for analysis
purpose. In this present investigation a novel method of changing the compression ratio is
proposed, applied, studied and analyzed. The clearance volume of the engine is altered by
introducing a metal plug into the combustion chamber. This modification permitted to
have four different values of clearance value keeping in view of the studies required the
work is brought out as two sections. The first part deals with the design, modification,
engine fabrication and testing at different compression ratios for the study of performance
of the engine. The second part deals with the combustion in engine using FLUENT and
analysis of exhaust gases. Increase in compression ratio improves fuel efficiency and
power output. The novelty in this work is to permit the two wheeler driver to change the
compression ratio.
Key Words: Two stroke engine, Variable compression ratio, thermal efficiency and petrol
engine.
Introduction:
The two stroke engine is simple to construct. The engine requires two piston
strokes or one complete revolution for each cycle. Exhaust ports in the cylinder walls are
uncovered by the piston, permitting the escape of exhaust of gases and reducing the
pressure in the cylinder. The charge now flows into the cylinder and is compressed in a
separate crank case compartment to a pressure greater than atmosphere pressure. Intake
ports are uncovered by the piston and the compressed charge flows into the cylinder,
expelling most of the exhaust products, however some charge do escape with the exhaust
[1, 2]. Comparing four stroke engines, two stroke engines can delivers 50 to 80 % greater
power per one piston displacement, high power to weight ratio(twice as many power
impulses per cylinder revolutions) piston pin & crank pin experience force in one
direction and finally, low cost due to valueless design [3]. The above mentioned features
are exploited by the two wheelers stunt drivers, mountain climbing bikes, drag race motor
cycles etc.
Worldwide pressure to reduce automotive fuel consumption and exhaust
emissions is leading to the introduction of various new technologies for the petrol engine
as it fights for market share with the diesel. Variable compression ratio is the technology
to adjust internal combustion engine cylinder compression ratio. In a VCR engine high
compression ratio is employed for greater efficiency and low load operation, and low
compression ratio is employed at full load allowing the turbocharger to work without
problem of detonation. So far, variable compression ratio (VCR) engines have not
reached the market, despite patents and experiments dating back over decades. VCR
technology could provide the key to enable exceptional efficiency at light loads without
loss of full load performance [4]. A study on the efficiency and exhaust gas analysis of
variable compression ratio spark ignition engine fuelled with alternative fuels reveals that
the brake thermal efficiency and volumetric efficiency improved with higher compression
ratio [5]. Traditionally, every mechanical element in the power conversion system has
been considered as a means to achieve variable compression.
Different methods to obtain variable compression ratio are moving the cylinder
head, variation of combustion chamber volume, variation of piston deck height, moving
the crankpin or crankshaft, modification of connecting rod geometry[6-11].
1. Moving Head:
By combining head and liners into a semi monoblock construction which pivots
with respect to the remainder of the engine, this enables tilting motion to adjust the
effective height of the piston crown at TDC. The rotary eccentric can be used to alter the
relative position of the two halves of the engine has to overcome the combined inertia of
head, liners, supercharger, intercooler and manifolds.
2. Variation of combustion chamber volume:
The volume of the combustion chamber is changed to obtain the variable
compression ratio by moving a small secondary piston which communicates with the
chamber. The compression ratio is adjusted by using a secondary piston or valve. The
device is presented primarily as a means of controlling knock as its dormant state is the
high CR condition. It is suggested that the piston could be maintained at an intermediate
position, corresponding to the optimum CR for a particular condition, however this would
require a finite length bore in which the piston could travel which raises further questions
of sealing, packaging and durability.
In another design secondary piston moves continuously at half crankshaft speed
and could, potentially, share drive with a camshaft. Phase variation between the
secondary pistons and the crankshaft assembly enables the required variation in CR.
Introduction of additional elements may affect the ideal geometry and layout of
the valves and ports, hydrocarbon emissions increases due to additional crevice volumes.
3. Variable height piston:
Variation in compression height of the piston offers potentially the most attractive
route to the production of VCR engine since it requires relatively minor changes to the
basic engine architecture when compared to other options. Unfortunately, it requires a
significant increase in reciprocating mass and, more importantly, a means to activate the
height variation within a high speed reciprocating assembly. This is typically proposed by
means of hydraulics using the engine lubricating oil, however reliable control of the
necessary oil flow becomes a major problem.
4. Movement of the crankshaft or crankpins:
Several systems have been proposed which either carry the crankshaft main
bearings in an eccentric assembly or move the crankpins eccentrically to affect a stroke
change at TDC.
5. Modification of connecting rod geometry:
A popular approach has been to replace the connecting rod with a two piece
design in which an upper member connects with the piston while a lower member
connects with the crankshaft. By constraining the freedom of the point at which the two
members join, the effective height of the connecting rod can be controlled and, hence, the
compression volume.
All the above mentioned methods require additional mechanism to vary the
compression ratio and make the engine operation complicated. They also results in
increased reciprocating masses and cost of the engine. Hence in the present work a simple
and cheaper method without using additional mechanism is proposed.
MATERIALS &METHODS
In the present work an air-cooled, two stroke engine of Bajaj India is modified to
operate at different compression ratios. The specifications of the engine are given in the
table 1.
Table 1: Test engine specifications:
Engine type 2-stroke air cooled single
Engine Power 3.5 hp (2.576kW)@1500 rpm
Scavenging system Crankcase scavenging
Displacement 145.5 cm3
Compression ratios after 6.4
modification
Bore and stroke 57 x 57 mm
Ignition timing 220 bTDC
Scavenging timing 1220 TDC
Combustion chamber Two-staged semi spherical
This engine is a proven one with good track record. A hole is drilled and tapped
at a distance of 10mm from the spark plug location and the metal plug (made by EN-8
material) is introduced. The schematic view of the plug along with collars is shown in
Figure: 1.
Fig.1: Metal plug and collar
Four variations in the compression
ratio are obtainable within the proposed
work. The original compression ratio given
by the manufacturer cannot be altered at the
piston end. However by machining the piston
crown it is possible to increase the clearance
volume. This machining is restricted by the
piston design limitation. The investigation in
this line of study has to consider the factor of
safety before going for machining. Four
collars are made to get four compression
ratios apart from existing compression ratio.
The compression ratios obtained are 6.4, 6.7,
6.9 & 7.2. Separate levers are provided for
shifting gear and operating the clutch and a
separate rig is used to mount the engine.
A drum is mounted on the output shaft and is
loaded with a brake dynamometer as shown
in the test rigin Figure: 2.
Fig.2: Bajaj scooter engine test rig
The cost of entire test rig is only $150 and this kind of setup can be used for
demonstration purposes and for carrying routine experiments as variable compression
ratio engine. No attempt is made to patent the design and the future investigations are
interested in this area are most welcome to use or modify the proposed retrofit of the
engine. The cylinder head with plug in position is shown in Fig. 3, and the inside view of
cylinder head with plug in position is shown in Fig. 4. Some clearance volume is
occupied by the projection of metal plug in the combustion chamber.
Fig.3: Metal plug & spark plug in position Fig.4: plug and spark plug inside view
The engine is coupled to an eddy current dynamometer to measure brake power.
The fuel consumption was measured on mass consumption basis. The clearance volume is
found by measuring the length of the pin projected into the combustion chamber
The experiments are carried out at different compression ratios of 6.4, 6.7, 6.9 and 7.2.
The load is varied from no load to full load for each compression ratio at constant speed
of 1500 rpm of the engine. The variation of total fuel consumption, brake specific fuel
consumption, brake thermal efficiency and mechanical efficiency with brake power is
studied at constant speed of the engine.
Results and Discussions:
The variation of total fuel consumption with brake power at different compression
ratios is shown in the fig.5. The total fuel consumption increased with the brake power at
all the compression ratios. The total fuel consumption increased up to a compression ratio
of 6.9. The improvement in the fuel consumption is considered to be a result of the
reduced specific heat ratio of the working gases and increased mechanical loss, cooling
loss and time loss.
Total Fuel Consumption Vs Brake Power
0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5
Brake Power (kW)
noitpmusnoC
Fig.4 Variation of total fuel consumption with BP at different compression ratios.
The variation of brake specific fuel consumption with brake power at different
compression ratios is shown in the fig.6. The BSFC reduced with BP at all compression
ratios. The BSFC reduced up to the compression ratio 6.9 but slightly increased with the
compression ratio of 7.2.
Brake Specific Fuel Consumption Vs Brake
0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5
Brake Power (kW)
)rh-Wk/gk(
noitpmusnoC
Fig.5 Variation of brake specific fuel consumption with BP
The variation of brake thermal efficiency with brake power at different
compression ratios is shown in the fig 6. The results show that the BTE increases with
compression ratio. It is due to the working gas temperature affected by an increase in
compression ratio. Variation of the working gas specific heat ratio does not prevent the
effect of compression ratios.
Brake Thermal Efficiency Vs Load
0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5
Brake Power ( kW)
ycneiciffE
Fig.6: Variation of Brake Thermal Efficiency with compression ratio
The variation of mechanical efficiency with brake power at different compression
ratios is shown in the fig 7. The mechanical efficiency increases with compression ratio.
The maximum mechanical efficiency is observed with compression ratio of 7.2 at all
loading conditions of the engine.
Mechanical Efficiency Vs Load
0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5
Brake Power (kW)
ycneiciffE
lacinahceM
Fig.7: Variation of Mechanical Efficiency with compression ratio
Conclusions:
The significant conclusions from the present work are summarized as follows.
1. The compression ratio is varied by using a simple.
2. The total fuel consumption increased with the compression ratio.
3. Thespecific fuel consumption reduced with compression ratio.
4. The brake thermal efficiency increased with compression ratio.
5. The mechanical efficiency increased with compression ratio
6. No elaborate setup is required to change the compression ratio and new design
enables the driver to operate at compression ratio of his choice based on terrain he
wishes to drive. A knurled head is provided to the pin for easy change.