Sovereign Default Risk and Uncertainty Premia
By Demian Pouzo and Ignacio Presno ∗
This paper studies how international investors’ concerns about
model misspecification affect sovereign bond spreads. We develop
a general equilibrium model of sovereign debt with endogenous de-
fault wherein investors fear that the probability model of the under-
lying state of the borrowing economy is misspecified. Consequently,
investors demand higher returns on their bond holdings to compen-
sate for the default risk in the context of uncertainty. In contrast
with the existing literature on sovereign default, we match the bond
spreads dynamics observed in the data together with other business
cycle features for Argentina, while preserving the default frequency
at historical low levels.
JEL: D81, E21, E32, E43, F34.
Keywords: sovereign debt, default risk, model uncertainty, robust
control.
I. Introduction
Sovereign defaults, or debt crises in general, are a pervasive economic phe-
nomenon,especiallyamongemergingeconomies. RecentdefaultsbyRussia(1998),
Ecuador (1999) and Argentina (2001), and the ongoing debt crisis of Greece and
other peripheral eurozone countries have put sovereign default issues at the fore-
front of economic policy discussion. A central issue for the assessment of any
policy proposal hinges on how the borrowing costs and market conditions are
expected to evolve once the policy is adopted. Therefore, constructing economic
models that can provide accurate predictions in terms of pricing while generating
seldom default events, is key.
Asdocumentedbyseveralstudies,however,awell-knownpuzzleinthesovereign
default literature built on the general equilibrium framework of Eaton and Gerso-
vitz (1981) is: why are these models unable to account for the observed dynamics
of the bond spreads, while preserving the default frequency at historical low lev-
els1? Apossibleexplanationofthelackofsuccessofthesemodelswhenconfronted
with asset prices data may be attributed to the fact that they follow the rational
∗ Pouzo: DepartmentofEconomics,UCatBerkeley,530EvansHall#3880,Berkeley,CA94720-3880.
E-mail: dpouzo@econ.berkeley.edu. Presno: DepartmentofEconomics,UniversidaddeMontevideo,2544
PrudenciodePenaSt.,Montevideo,Uruguay11600. Email: jipresno@um.edu.uy. Wearedeeplygrateful
to Thomas J. Sargent for his constant guidance and encouragement. We also thank Fernando Alvarez,
David Backus, Timothy Cogley, RicardoColacito, Ernestodal Bo, Bora Durdu, Ignacio Esponda, Gita
Gopinath, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, Juan Carlos Hatchondo, Lars Ljungqvist, Jianjun Miao, Anna Orlik,
ViktorTsyrennikovandStanleyZinforhelpfulcomments.
1Thisphenomenonisnotlimitedtothesovereigndebtliterature,sinceitisalsowell-documentedin
thecorporatedebtliterature;seeHuangandHuang(2003)andEltonetal.(2001),forexample.
]CE.nif-q[
1v06960.2151:viXra
2 AMERICAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL MONTH YEAR
expectationhypothesis: agentsknowthedata-generatingprocess,whichcoincides
with their own subjective beliefs.
Thispapertacklesthis“pricingpuzzle”—whilealsoaccountingforothersalient
empirical features of the real business cycles2— by introducing international
lenders that distrust their probability model governing the evolution of the state
of the borrowing economy and want to guard themselves against specification er-
rors in it. In doing so, we relax the rational expectations assumption by allowing
the lenders to exhibit “uncertainty aversion”, also commonly known as “Knigh-
tian uncertainty”. In our model, a borrower (e.g., an emerging economy) can
trade long-term bonds with international lenders in financial markets, similar to
Chatterjee and Eyingungor (2012). Debt repayments cannot be enforced and the
emerging economy may decide to default at any point of time. Lenders in equi-
librium anticipate the default strategies of the emerging economies and demand
higherreturnsontheirsovereignbondholdingstocompensateforthedefaultrisk.
In case of default, the economy is temporarily excluded from financial markets
and suffers a direct output cost. In this setting, we show how lenders’ desire to
make decisions that are robust to misspecification of the conditional probability
of the borrower’s endowment alters the returns on sovereign bond holdings.3
The assumption about concerns about model misspecification is intended to
capture the fact that international lenders may distrust their statistical model
usedtopredictrelevantmacroeconomicvariablesoftheemergingeconomy. Alter-
natively, lenderscouldbeawareofthelimitedavailabilityofreliable officialdata.4
This issue has become more severe in recent years in some emerging economies,
particularly in Argentina, where the government’s intervention in the computa-
tion of the consumer price index is known worldwide, motivating warning calls
for correction coming from international credit institutions. By under-reporting
inflation, the Argentinean government has been over-reporting real GDP growth.
Concerns about model misspecification can also be attributed to measurement
errors, and lags in the release of the official statistics together with subsequent
revisions. These arguments are aligned with the suggested view of putting the
econometrician and the economic agent in a position with identical information,
and limitations on their ability to estimate statistical models.
The novelty in our paper comes from the fact that lenders are uncertainty
averse in the sense that they are unwilling or unable to fully trust a unique prob-
ability distribution or probability model for the endowment of the borrower, and
at the same time dislike making decisions in the context of multiple probability
models. To express these doubts about model uncertainty, following Hansen and
2For a summary of the empirical regularities in emerging economies, see, e.g., Neumeyer and Perri
(2005).
3ByfollowingEatonandGersovitz(1981),weabstractfromtransactioncosts,liquidityrestrictions,
andotherfrictionsthatmayaffecttherealreturnonsovereignbondholdings.
4Boz,DaudeandDurdu(2011)documenttheavailabilityofsignificantlyshortertimeseriesformost
relevanteconomicindicatorsinemergingeconomiesthanindevelopedones. Forexample,inthedatabase
fromtheInternationalFinancialStatisticsoftheIMFthemedianlengthofavailableGDPtimeseriesat
aquarterlyfrequencyis96quartersinemergingeconomies,whileindevelopedeconomiesis164.
VOL. VOL NO. ISSUE DEFAULT AND UNCERTAINTY PREMIA 3
Sargent (2005) we endow lenders with multiplier preferences.5, Lenders in our
model share a reference or approximating probability model for the borrower’s
endowment, which is their best estimate of the economy’s dynamics. They ac-
knowledge, however, that it may be misspecified, and express their doubts about
modelmisspecificationbycontemplatingalternativeprobabilitydistributionsthat
are statistical perturbations of the reference probability model. To make choices
that perform well over this set of probability distributions, the lender acts as if
contemplatingaconditionalworst-caseprobabilitythatisdistortedrelativetohis
approximating one. This distorted distribution therefore arises from perturbing
the approximating model by slanting probability towards the states associated
with low utility. In our model, these low-utility states for the lender coincide
with those in which the payoff of the sovereign bond is lower, because default
occurs in the first place or the market value of the outstanding debt drops.
The main result of our paper is that by introducing lenders’ fears about model
misspecification our calibration matches the high, volatile, and typically counter-
cyclical bond spreads observed in the data for the Argentinean economy, together
with standard business cycle features while keeping the default frequency at his-
torical levels. At the same time, our model can account for the average risk-free
rate observed in the data. Interestingly, we find that if the borrower can issue
long-term debt model uncertainty almost does not affect quantitatively its level
of indebtness. It is worth pointing out that in the simulations we also find that in
a simple rational expectations framework, for plausible values of the parameters,
risk aversion alone on the lenders’ side with time-separable CRRA preferences
is not sufficient to generate the observed risk premia; to some extent, this is an
analogous result to the equity premium puzzle studied in Mehra and Prescott
(1985). Additionally, as the degree of lenders’ risk aversion increases, the average
net risk-free rate declines, eventually to negative levels.
The intuition behind our results is as follows. Under the assumption that inter-
national lenders are risk neutral and have rational expectations (by fully trusting
the data generating process), as for example in Arellano (2008), the equilibrium
prices of long-term bonds are simply given by the present value of adjusted condi-
tional probabilities of not defaulting in future periods. Consequently, the pricing
rule in these environments prescribes a strong connection between equilibrium
prices and default probability. When calibrated to the data, matching the default
frequency to historical levels (the consensus number for Argentina is around 3
percent annually), delivers spreads that are too low relative to those observed
in the data.6 Our methodology breaks this strong connection by introducing a
different probability measure, the one in which lenders’ uncertainty aversion is
5AxiomaticfoundationsforthisclassofpreferenceshavebeenprovidedbyStrzalecki(2011).
6Arellano (2008), Lizarazo (2013), and Hatchondo, Mart´ınez and Padilla (2012), use a default fre-
quencyof3percentperyear. Yue(2010)andMendozaandYue(2012)targetanannualdefaultfrequency
of2.78percent. Also,Reinhart,RogoffandSavastano(2003)findsthatemergingeconomieswithatleast
one episode of external default or debt restructuring defaulted roughly speaking three times every 100
yearsovertheperiodfrom1824to1999.
4 AMERICAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL MONTH YEAR
manifested. In our case, there is a strong connection between equilibrium prices
and the default probability under this new worst-case probability measure.
From an asset pricing perspective, the key element in generating high spreads
while matching the default frequency is a sufficiently negative correlation of the
market stochastic discount factor with the payoff of the bond. With fears about
model misspecification, the stochastic discount factor has an additional compo-
nentgivenbytheprobabilitydistortioninheritedintheworst-casedensityforthe
borrower’s endowment. This probability distortion, which is low when the bor-
rowerrepaysandparticularlyhighwhentheborrowerdefaultsorthemarketvalue
oftheoutstandingdebtfalls, inducesingeneralthedesirednegativeco-movement
between the stochastic discount factor and the payoff of the bond. Some re-
cent papers, such as Arellano (2008), Arellano and Ramanarayanan (2012), and
Hatchondo, Mart´ınez and Padilla (2012), assume instead an ad hoc functional
form for the market stochastic discount factor in order to generate sizable bonds
spreads as observed in the data. Our paper can therefore be seen as providing
microfoundations for valid stochastic discount factors.
In our model with a defaultable asset, this endogenous probability distortion
is non-smooth in the realization of the borrower’s next-period endowment and
exhibits an inverse V-shaped kink due to the default contingency. This yields
an endogenous hump of the worst-case density over the interval of endowment
realization in which default is optimal. This special feature is unique to this
current setting. A direct implication of this is that the subjective probability
assigns a significantly higher probability to the default event than the actual one.
7 Fears about model misspecification then amplify its effect on both allocations
and equilibrium prices, as they increase the lenders’ perceived likelihood of these
events occurring. As the latter are typically higher in the model than the de-
fault probability implied by the best proxy of the economic dynamics given the
data limitations, our story is therefore in line with the commonly known “peso
problems”. We find this an interesting contribution of our paper.
We also show analytically in our benchmark model that the relative size of
the endowment for the lender does not affect the equilibrium bond prices or the
borrower’s allocations. Besides the theoretical contribution, this result implies
thatthereisnoneedtoidentifywhothelendersareinthedata,and,inparticular,
to find a good proxy of their income relatively to the borrower’s endowment.
Related Literature. This paper builds on and contributes to two main
strands of the literature: sovereign default, and robust control theory and ambi-
guity aversion or Knightian uncertainty, in particular applied to asset pricing.
Arellano(2008)andAguiarandGopinath(2006)werethefirsttoextendEaton
andGersovitz(1981)generalequilibriumframeworkwithendogenousdefaultand
risk neutral lenders to study the business cycles of emerging economies. Chat-
7 Wecanviewthedefaulteventasa“disasterevent”fromthelenders’perspective,thisresultlinks
tothegrowingliteratureon“rareevents”;see,forexample,Barro(2006).
VOL. VOL NO. ISSUE DEFAULT AND UNCERTAINTY PREMIA 5
terjee and Eyingungor (2012) introduced long-term debt in these environments.8
Lizarazo (2013) endows the lenders with constant relative risk aversion (CRRA)
preferences. Borri and Verdelhan (2010) has studied the setup with positive cor-
relation between lenders’ consumption and output in the emerging economy in
addition to time-varying risk aversion on the lenders’ side as a result of habit
formation.
To our knowledge, the paper that is the closest to ours is the independent
work by Costa (2009). That paper also assumes that international lenders want
to guard themselves against specification errors in the stochastic process for the
endowmentoftheborrower, butthisisachievedinadifferentform. Inourmodel,
lenders are endowed with Hansen and Sargent (2005) multiplier preferences. In
contrast, in Costa (2009) the worst-case density minimizes the expected value
of the bond. Moreover, Costa (2009) considers one-period bonds and assumes
lenders live for one period only.
Otherrecentstudiesthathavefocusedonbusinesscyclesinemergingeconomies
in the presence of fears about model misspecification are Young (2012) and Luo,
Nie and Young (2012). Young (2012) studies optimal tax policies to deal with
sudden stops when households and/or agents distrust the stochastic process for
tradable total factor productivity shocks, trend productivity, and the interest
rate. Luo, Nie and Young (2012) explores the role of robustness and information-
processingconstraints(rationalinattention)inthejointdynamicsofconsumption,
current account, and output in small open economies.
Finally, our paper relates to the growing literature analyzing the asset-pricing
implications of ambiguity. Barillas, Hansen and Sargent (2009) finds that intro-
ducing concerns about robustness to model misspecification can yield combina-
tions of the market price of risk and the risk-free rate that approach Hansen and
Jagannathan (1991) bounds. Using a dynamic portfolio choice problem of a ro-
bust investor, Maenhout (2004) can explain high levels of the equity premium,
as observed in the data. Hansen and Sargent (2010) generates time-varying risk
premia in the context of model uncertainty with hidden Markov states. 9
Roadmap. Thepaperisorganizedasfollows. SectionIIpresentsthemodel. In
Section III we introduce the recursive equilibrium in our economy and describe
the implications of model uncertainty on equilibrium prices. In Section IV we
8From a technical perspective, Chatterjee and Eyingungor (2012) proposes an alternative approach
to handle convergence issues. The authors consider an i.i.d. output shock drawn from a continuous
distributionwithaverysmallvariance. Oncethisi.i.d. shockisincorporated,theyareabletoshowthe
existenceofauniqueequilibriumpricefunctionforlong-termdebtwiththepropertythatthereturnon
debtisincreasingintheamountborrowed.
9Inaconsumption-basedasset-pricingmodel,Boyarchenko(2012)studiesthedynamicsoftheCDS
spreads by contemplating uncertainty about the signal-extraction process and the underlying economic
model. Ju and Miao (2012) considers a pure-exchange economy with hidden Markov regime-switching
processes for consumption and dividends, with agents with generalized recursive smooth preferences,
closelyrelatedtoKlibanoff,MarinacciandMukerji(2005)modelofpreferences. EpsteinandSchneider
(2008) studies the impact of uncertain information quality on asset prices in a model of learning with
investors endowed with recursive multiple-priors utility, axiomatized in Epstein and Schneider (2003).
Moreasset-pricingapplicationswithdifferentformulationsofambiguityaversionareEpsteinandWang
(1994),ChenandEpstein(2002),Hansen(2007),BidderandSmith(2013)andDrechsler(2012).
6 AMERICAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL MONTH YEAR
calibrate our model to Argentinean data and present our quantitative results for
long-term bonds. Section V disciplines the degree of robustness in our economy
usingdetectionerrorprobabilitiesandanewmoment-baseduncertaintymeasure.
Finally, Section VI concludes.
II. The Model
In our model an emerging economy interacts with a continuum of identical
international lenders of measure 1. The emerging economy is populated by a
representative, risk-averse household and a government.
The government in the emerging economy can trade a long-term bond with
atomistic international lenders to smooth consumption and allocate it optimally
over time. Throughout the paper we will refer to the emerging economy as the
borrower. Debt contracts cannot be enforced and the borrower may decide to
default at any point of time. In case the government defaults on its debt, it
incurstwotypesofcosts. First, itistemporarilyexcludedfromfinancialmarkets.
Second, it suffers a direct output loss.
While the borrower fully trusts the probability model governing the evolution
of its endowment, which we will refer to as the approximating model, the lender
suspects it is misspecified. From here on, we will use the terms probability model
anddistribution interchangeably. Forthisreason, thelendercontemplatesasetof
alternative models that are statistical perturbations of the approximating model,
and wishes to design a decision rule that performs well across this set of distri-
butions.10
A. Stochastic Process of the Endowment
Time is discrete t = 0,1,.... Let (W )∞ ≡ (X ,Y )∞ be an stochastic process
t t=0 t t t=0
describing the borrower’s endowment. In particular, let (Y )∞ be a discrete-
state Markov Chain, (Y,P ,ν) where Y ≡ {y ,...,y } ⊆ R , P is the
Y(cid:48)|Y 1 |Y| + Y(cid:48)|Y
transition matrix and ν is the initial probability measure, which is assumed to be
the (unique) invariant (and ergodic) distribution of P . Let (X )∞ be such
Y(cid:48)|Y t t=0
that, for all t, X ∈ [x,x¯] ≡ X ⊆ R is an i.i.d. continuous random variable,
i.e., X ∼ P and P admits a pdf (with respect to Lebesgue), which we denote
as f . Henceforth, we define W ≡ X × Y and P denotes the conditional
X W(cid:48)|W
probability of W , given W , given by the product of P and P ; P denotes
t+1 t Y(cid:48)|Y X
the probability, induced by P over infinite histories, w∞ = (w ,...,w ,...);
W(cid:48)|W 0 t
finally, we also use Wt to denote the σ-algebra generated by the partial history
Wt ≡ (W ,W ,...,W ).
10In order to depart as little as possible from Eaton and Gersovitz (1981) framework, throughout
thepaperweassumethatthelenderdistrustsonlytheprobabilitymodeldictatingtheevolutionofthe
endowmentoftheborrower,notthedistributionofanyothersourceofuncertainty,suchastherandom
variable that indicates whether the borrower re-enters financial markets or not. At the same time, and
for the same reason, we assume the extreme case of no doubts about model misspecification on the
borrower’sside.
VOL. VOL NO. ISSUE DEFAULT AND UNCERTAINTY PREMIA 7
The reason behind our definition of W will become apparent below, but, es-
sentially, we think of Y +X as the borrower’s endowment at time t, and the sep-
aration between Y and X is due to numerical issues that appear in the method
for solving the model; see Chatterjee and Eyingungor (2012) for a more thorough
discussion.
Finally, we use z to denote the endowment of the lender, which is chosen to be
non-random and constant over time for simplicity.
REMARK II.1: Throughout the paper, for a generic random variable W, we use
W to denote the random variable and w to denote a particular realization. Except
for bond holdings, where we use B for the government’s and b for the lenders bond
holdings.
B. Timing Protocol
We assume that all economic agents, lenders, and the government (which cares
about the consumption of the representative household), act sequentially, choos-
ing their allocations period by period.
The economy can be in one of two stages at the beginning of each period t:
financial autarky or with access to financial markets.
Thetimingprotocolwithineachperiodisasfollows. First, theendowmentsare
realized. If the government has access to financial markets, it decides whether to
repayitsoutstandingdebtobligationsornot. Ifitdecidestorepay,itchoosesnew
bondholdingsandhowmuchtoconsume. Then,atomisticinternationallenders—
taking prices as given—choose how much to save and how much to consume. The
minimizing agent, who is a metaphor for the lenders’ fears about model misspec-
ification, chooses the probability distortions to minimize the lenders’ expected
utility. Due to the zero-sumness of the game between the lender and its mini-
mizing agent, different timing protocols of their moves yield the same solution. If
the government decides to default, it switches to autarky for a random number
of periods. While the government is excluded from financial markets, it has no
decision to make and simply awaits re-entry to financial markets.
C. Sovereign Debt Markets
Financial markets are incomplete. Only a non-contingent, long-term bond can
be traded between the borrower and the lenders. The borrower, however, can
defaultonthisbondatanytime,therebyaddingsomedegreeofstatecontingency.
As in Chatterjee and Eyingungor (2012), the long-term bond exhibits a sim-
plified payoff structure. We assume that in each period a fraction λ of the bond
matures, while a coupon ψ is paid off for the remaining fraction 1−λ, which is
carried over into next period; ψ and λ are primitives in our model. Modeling
the bond this way is convenient to keep the problem tractable by avoiding too
8 AMERICAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL MONTH YEAR
manystatevariables. Undertheseassumptions, itissufficienttokeeptrackofthe
outstanding quantity of bonds of the borrower to describe his financial position.
Bond holdings of the government and of the individual lenders, denoted by
B ∈ B ⊆ R and b ∈ B ⊆ R, respectively, are Wt−1-measurable. The set B is
bounded and thereby includes possible borrowing or savings limits.11
The borrower can choose a new quantity of bonds B at a price q . A debt
contract is given by a vector (B ,q ) of quantities of bonds and corresponding
bond prices. The price q depends on the borrower’s demand for debt at time t,
B , and his endowment y , since these variables affect his incentives to default.
In this class of models, generally, the higher the level of indebtness and/or the
lowerthe(persistent)borrower’sendowment,thegreaterthechancestheborrower
willdefault(infutureperiods)and,hence,thelowerthebondpricesinthecurrent
period.
For each y ∈ Y, we refer to q(y,·) : B → R as the bond price function.12 Thus,
we can define the set of debt contracts available to the borrower for a given w as
the graph of q(y,·).13
D. Borrower’s Problem
The representative household in the emerging economy derives utility from
consumption of a single good in the economy. Its preferences over consumption
plans can be described by the expected lifetime utility14
(cid:34) ∞ (cid:35)
where E[·|w ] denotes the expectation under the probability measure P (condi-
tional on time zero information w ), β ∈ (0,1) denotes the time discount factor,
and the period utility function u : R → R is strictly increasing and strictly
concave, and satisfies the Inada conditions.15
Thegovernmentinthiseconomy, whichisbenevolentandmaximizesthehouse-
hold’s utility (1), may have access to international financial markets, where it can
tradealong-termbondwiththeforeignlenders. Whilethegovernmenthasaccess
to the financial markets, it can sell or purchase bonds from the lenders and make
a lump-sum transfer across households to help them smooth consumption over
time.
For each (w ,B ), let V(w ,B ) be the value (in terms of lifetime utility) for
11Positive bond holdings Bt means that the government enters period t with net savings, that is, in
nettermithasbeenpurchasingbondsinthepast.
12Asweshowbelow,thebondpricefunctiononlydependson(yt,Bt+1),andnotonxt.
13Thegraphofafunction,f :X→Y,isthesetof{(x,y)∈X×Y:y=f(x)andx∈X}.
14Aconsumptionplanisastochasticprocess,(ct)t,suchthatct isWt-measurable.
15Note that the assumption that the representative household and the government fully trust the
approximatingmodelP isembeddedinE[·|w0].
VOL. VOL NO. ISSUE DEFAULT AND UNCERTAINTY PREMIA 9
the borrower of having the option to default, given an endowment vector w , and
outstanding bond holdings equal to B . Formally, the borrower’s value of having
access to financial markets V(w ,B ) is given by
V(w ,B ) = max{V (x,y ),V (w ,B )},
t t A t R t t
where V (x ,y ) is the value of exercising the option to default, given an endow-
ment vector w = (y ,x ), and V (w ,B ) is the value of repaying the outstanding
t t t R t t
debt, given state (w ,B ). In the period announcing default, the continuous com-
ponent of endowment x drops to its lowest level x. For the rest of the autarky
periods, however, x is stochastic and drawn from the distribution P , mentioned
before. Throughout the paper we use subscripts A and R to denote the values
for autarky and repayment, respectively.
Every period the government enters with access to financial markets, it evalu-
atesthepresentlifetimeutilityofhouseholdsifdebtcontractsarehonoredagainst
the present lifetime utility of households if they are repudiated. If the former out-
weighs the latter, the government decides to comply with the contracts, makes
the principal and coupon payments for the debt carried from the last period B ,
totaling (λ+(1−λ)ψ)B , and chooses next period’s bond holdings B . Other-
wise, iftheutilityofdefaultingontheoutstandingdebtandswitchingtofinancial
autarky is higher, the government decides to default on the sovereign debt.
Consequently, the value of repayment V (w ,B ) is
R t t t t+1 t+1 t
t t t t t+1 t+1 t t
Finally, the value of autarky V (w ) is
A t t t t A t+1 t+1 t
where π is the probability of re-entering financial markets next period.16 In that
event,theborrowerentersnextperiodcarryingnodebt,B = 0.17 Thefunction
φ : Y → Y such that y ≥ φ(y) ∀y ∈ Y represents an ad hoc direct output cost
on y , in terms of consumption units, that the borrower suffers when excluded
16As in Arellano (2008), we do not model the exclusion from financial markets as an endogenous
decision by the lenders. By modeling this punishment explicitly in long-term financial relationships,
Kletzer and Wright (1993) show how international borrowing can be sustained in equilibrium through
thissinglecrediblethreat.
17Noticethatweassumethereisnodebtrenegotiationnoranyformofdebtrestructuringmechanism.
Yue(2010)modelsadebtrenegotiationprocessasaNashbargaininggameplayedbytheborrowerand
lenders. For more examples of debt renegotiation, see Benjamin and Wright (2009) and Pitchford and
Wright(2012). PouzoandPresno(2014)assumesadebtrestructuringmechanisminwhichtheborrower
receives random exogenous offers to repay a fraction of the defaulted debt. A positive rate of debt
recoverygivesrisetopositivepricesfordefaulteddebtthatcanbetradedamongstlendersinsecondary
markets.
10 AMERICAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL MONTH YEAR
from financial markets. This output loss function is consistent with evidence that
shows that countries experience a drop in output in times of default due to the
lack of short-term trade credit and financial disruption in the banking sector,
among others.18 Notice that in autarky the borrower has no decision to make
and simply consumes y −φ(y )+x .
The default decisions are expressed by the indicator δ : W × B → {0,1},
that takes value 0 if default is optimal; and 1, otherwise; i.e., for all (x,y,B),
E. Lenders’ Preferences and their Fears about Model Misspecification
Weassumethatthelenders’haveper-periodpayofflinearinconsumption,while
alsobeinguncertaintyaverseorambiguityaverse. Sincethei.i.d. componentx is
introduced merely for computational purposes —to guarantee convergence, as in
ChatterjeeandEyingungor(2012)—,weassumenodoubtsaboutthespecification
of its distribution.
The lenders distrust, however, the probability model which dictates the evo-
lution of y , given by the approximating model P . For this reason, they
t Y(cid:48)|Y
contemplate a set of alternative densities that are statistical perturbations of the
approximating model, and wish to design a decision rule that performs well over
thissetofpriors. Thesealternativeconditionalprobabilities,denotedbyP(cid:101)Y,t (·|wt)
forall(t,wt), areassumedtobeabsolutelycontinuouswithrespecttoP (·|y ),
Y(cid:48)|Y t
i.e. for all A ⊆ Y and wt ∈ Wt, if P
Y(cid:48)|Y
) = 0, then P(cid:101)Y,t (A|wt) = 0.19
In order to construct any of these distorted probabilities P(cid:101)Y,t , for each t, let
m : Y×Wt → R be the conditional likelihood ratio, i.e., for any y and wt,
P(cid:101)Y,t(yt+1|wt)
if P (y |y ) > 0
m t+1 (y t+1 |wt) = P Y(cid:48)|Y (yt+1|yt) Y(cid:48)|Y t+1 t .
1 if P (y |y ) = 0
Y(cid:48)|Y t+1 t
Observe that for any (t,wt), m (·|wt) ∈ M where:
M ≡ {g: Y → R | g(y(cid:48))P (y(cid:48)|y) = 1, ∀y ∈ Y}.
y(cid:48)∈Y
Following Hansen and Sargent (2005) and references therein, to express fears
aboutmodelmisspecificationweendowlenderswithmultiplierpreferences. While
the lenders choose bond holdings to maximize their utility, the minimizing agent
18MendozaandYue(2012)endogenizethisoutputlossasanoutcomethatresultsfromthesubstitution
ofimportedinputsbyless-efficientdomesticoneswhenthefinancingcostoftheformerincreasesalong
withthesovereigndefaultrisk.
19Note that the distorted probabilities P(cid:101)Y,t do not necessarily inherit the properties of P Y(cid:48)|Y , such
as its Markov structure. At the same time, they may depend on the history of past realizations of all
shocks,includingxt,asthesemayaffectequilibriumallocations.
VOL. VOL NO. ISSUE DEFAULT AND UNCERTAINTY PREMIA 11
chooses a sequence of distorted conditional probabilities (P(cid:101)Y,t+1 )
, or equivalently
a sequence of conditional likelihood ratios (m ) , to minimize it. The choice of
probability distortions is not unconstrained but rather subject to a penalty cost.
Thelenders’preferencesoverconsumptionplanscL afteranyhistoryany(t,wt)
can be represented by the following specification
(cid:110) (cid:104) (cid:105) (cid:111)
Ut(cL;wt)=cL
where γ ∈ (0,1) is the discount factor, the parameter θ ∈ (θ,+∞] is a penalty
parameter that measures the degree of concern about model misspecification20,
and the mapping E : M → L∞(Y) is the conditional relative entropy, defined as
for any λ ∈ M and y ∈ Y. Finally, U (cL;wt,y ) is the expected value of
Ut(cL;wt,yt+1,Xt+1), conditioned on y
, but before the realization of X
, i.e.
(4) U (cL;wt,y ) ≡ E (cid:2) U (cL;wt,y ,X ) (cid:3) ,
t+1 t+1 X t+1 t+1 t+1
and U (cL;wt) is the present value expected utility at time t, given that the
previous history is given by wt and the agent follows a consumption plan cL.
By looking at expression (2) we see that the probability distortion m pre-
multiplies the expected continuation value before the realization of X , i.e.
U (cL;wt,y ), in line with our measurability assumption. For the sequential
formulation of the lenders’ lifetime utility and the derivation of the recursion
(2)-(4), see Section S.2 in the Supplementary Material.
For any given history wt, E[m (·|wt)](y ) measures the discrepancy of the
distorted conditional probability, P(cid:101)Y,t (· | wt), with respect to the approximating
conditional probability P (·|y ). Through this entropy term, the minimizing
Y(cid:48)|Y t
agent is penalized whenever she chooses distorted probabilities that differ from
the approximating model. The higher the value of θ, the more the minimizing
agent is penalized. In the extreme case of θ = +∞, there are no concerns about
model misspecification.
F. Lenders’ Problem
As it will become clear below, for the recursive equilibrium in our particular
environment, thelifetimeutilityintheprevioussectionbecomesW (w ,B ,b )or
20Thelowerboundθisabreakdownvaluebelowwhichtheminimizationproblemisnotwell-behaved;
seeHansenandSargent(2008)fordetails.
12 AMERICAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL MONTH YEAR
W (y ).21 Here, W (w ,B ,b ) is the equilibrium value (in lifetime utility) of an
A t R t t t
individual lender with access to financial markets, given the state of the economy
(w ,B ,b ). W (y ) is analogously defined, but when the borrowing economy has
no access to financial markets.
Since lenders are atomistic, each individual lender takes as given the price
function and the aggregate debt B . The lender has a perceived law of motion
for this variable, which only in equilibrium will be required to coincide with the
actual one.22
When lender and borrower can engage in a new financial relationship, the
lender’s min-max problem at state (w ,B ,b ), is given by:
(cid:110) (cid:111)
WR(wt,Bt,bt)= min max cL
mR∈McL t,bt+1
(5) s.t.cL
where for all y ∈ Y the continuation value W(y ,B ,b ) is given by
t+1 t+1 t+1 t+1
W(y ,B ,b ) ≡ E [W(y ,X ,B ,b )],whereW(w ,B ,b ) ≡
t+1 t+1 t+1 X t+1 t+1 t+1 t+1 t+1 t+1 t+1
δ(w ,B )W (w ,B ,b )+(1−δ(w ,B ))W (y ) is the value of
t+1 t+1 R t+1 t+1 t+1 t+1 t+1 A t+1
thelenderwhentheborrowerisgiventheoptiontodefaultatstate(w ,B ,b ),
t+1 t+1 t+1
and Γ : W×B → B is the perceived law of motion of the individual lender for the
debt holdings of the borrower, B . Observe that the optimal choice of m , is a
mapping from (w ,B ,b ) ∈ W×B2 to M.
From equation (5) we note that lenders receive every period a non-stochastic
endowment given by z. Since the per-period utility is linear in consumption, the
level of z does not affect the equilibrium bond prices, bond holdings, and default
strategies in our original economy; see Lemma III.1.
In financial autarky, as with the borrower, the lender has no decision to make.
The lender’s autarky value at state (y ), is thus given by
A t A t Y A t+1 A t+1 t+1 t
where π is the re-entry probability to financial markets. Note that the optimal
choice, m , is a mapping from Y to M. In contrast with the borrower’s case, no
output loss is assumed for the lender during financial autarky.
III. Recursive Equilibrium
As is standard in the quantitative sovereign default models, we are interested
in a recursive equilibrium in which all agents choose sequentially.
21Aswewillsee,xt isnotastatevariableforthelender’sprobleminfinancialautarkyduetoitsi.i.d.
nature,andthefactthatthereisnodecisionmakingduringthatstage.
22Remember that we denote bt as the individual lender’s debt, while Bt refers to the representative
lender’sdebt.
VOL. VOL NO. ISSUE DEFAULT AND UNCERTAINTY PREMIA 13
DEFINITION III.1: A collection of policy functions {c,cL,B,b,m ,m ,δ} is
given by mappings for consumption c : W×B → R and cL : W×B2 → R ,
bond holdings B : W×B → B and b : W×B2 → B for borrower and individual
lender, respectively; and, probability distortions m : W×B2 → M, m : Y →
M and default decisions, δ : W × B → {0,1}. A collection of value functions
{V ,V ,W ,W } is given by mappings V : W×B → R, V : W → R, W :
R A R A R A R
W×B2 → R, W : Y → R.
DEFINITION III.2: A recursive equilibrium for our economy is a collection of
policyfunctions{c∗,cL,∗,B∗,b∗,m∗,m∗,δ∗}, acollectionofvaluefunctions{V∗,V∗,W∗,W∗},
R A R A R A
a perceived law of motion for the borrower’s bond holdings, and a price schedule
such that:
1) Policy functions, probability distortions, and value functions solve the bor-
rower and individual lender’s optimization problems.
2) For all (w,B) ∈ W×B, bond prices q(y,B∗(w,B)) clear the financial mar-
kets, i.e., B∗(w,B) = b∗(w,B,B).
3) The actual and perceived laws of motion for debt holdings coincide, i.e.,
B∗(w,B) = Γ(w,B), for all (w,B) ∈ W×B.
After imposing the market clearing condition above, vector (w ,B ) is sufficient
to describe the state variables for any agent in this economy. Hence, from here
on, we consider (w ,B ) as the state vector, common to the borrower and the
individual lenders.
A. Equilibrium Bond Prices and Probability Distortions
In our competitive sovereign debt market, uncertainty-averse lenders make zero
profits in expectation given their subjective beliefs. 23 Hence, for an endowment
level y and a loan size B , the bond price function satisfies for all (y ,B ),
t t+1 t t+1
(cid:104) (cid:12) (cid:105)
(6) q(y ,B ) = γE χ(Y ;B )m∗(Y ;y ,B )(cid:12)y ,
t t+1 Y t+1 t+1 t+1 t t+1 (cid:12) t
where χ : Y×B → R denotes the payoff of the long-term bond, given by
(cid:104)(cid:16) (cid:17) (cid:105)
t+1 t+1 X t+1 t+1 t+1 t+1 t+1
23InArellano(2008)competitiverisk-neutrallendersareindifferentbetweenanyindividualdebthold-
ings level bt+1. In our environment this is not true anymore. Taking q(Yt+1,B∗(Wt+1,Bt+1)) and
the borrower’s strategies as given, lenders solve a convex optimization problem with a strictly concave
objectivefunctionandhencethereisauniqueinteriorsolutionforindividualdebtholdings.
14 AMERICAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL MONTH YEAR
and m∗ : Y2×B → R is given by
(cid:110) (cid:111)
m∗(y ;y ,B ) ≡ .
(cid:111)(cid:12)
Thefunctionm∗ isessentiallythereactionfunctionfortheprobabilitydistortions,
whichisconsistentwiththeFOCsintheminimizationproblem(5)andthemarket
clearing condition for debt.24
Given the state of the economy next period, if defaults occurs, the payoff of the
bond is zero. Otherwise, a fraction λ of the bond matures while the remaining
(1−λ) pays off a coupon ψ and keeps a market value of q(Y ,B∗(W ,B )).
t+1 t+1 t+1
In the absence of fears about model uncertainty, i.e. θ = +∞, the probability
distortionvanishes,i.e. m∗ = 1,thatmeansthatlenders’beliefscoincidewiththe
approximating distribution P , and hence the price function (6) is the same as
Y(cid:48)|Y
in the rational expectations environment of Chatterjee and Eyingungor (2012).
REMARK III.1 (One Period Bonds): In the case with one-period bonds, that is,
λ = 1 and setting X = 0, the pricing equation 6 collapses to
(cid:104) (cid:12) (cid:105)
(7) q(y ,B ) = γE δ∗(Y ,B )m∗(Y ;y ,B )(cid:12)y .
t t+1 Y t+1 t+1 t+1 t t+1 (cid:12) t
For θ = +∞ the expression coincides with that of Arellano (2008). 25
Under model uncertainty, the lender in this economy distrusts the conditional
probability P and wants to guard himself against a worst-case distorted dis-
Y(cid:48)|Y
tribution for y , given by m∗(·;w ,B∗(y ,B ))P (·|y ). The fictitious min-
t+1 t t t Y(cid:48)|Y t
imizing agent will be selecting this worst-case density by slanting probabilities
towards the states associated with low continuation utility for the lender. In the
presence of default risk, the states associated with lowest utility coincide with
the states in which the borrower defaults and therefore the lender receives no
repayment. In addition, in this economy with long-term debt, upon repayment,
the payoff responds to variations in the next-period bond price. Hence, states
in which the latter is lower will be associated with relatively higher probability
distortions.
Figure 1 illustrates the optimal distorting of the probability of next period
realization of Y , given current state (w ,B ) with access to financial markets.26
B is computed using the optimal debt policy, i.e. B = B∗(w ,B ). In
t+1 t+1 t t
24Observe that, by construction, m∗(yt+1;yt,B∗(wt,Bt)) = m∗
(yt+1;wt,Bt). While m∗
optimal probability distortions along the equilibrium path, commonly computed in the robust control
literatureforatomisticagents,thereactionfunctionm∗ isanecessaryobjectofinterestinthisenviron-
menttoevaluatealternativedebtchoicesfortheborrower.
25Wereferthereadertoourworkingpaperversionforamorethoroughdiscussionandresultforthe
oneperiodbondcasewithθ<∞.
26Forillustrativepurposes,alowendowmentyt andlowbondholdingsBt,orequivalentlyhighdebt
VOL. VOL NO. ISSUE DEFAULT AND UNCERTAINTY PREMIA 15
the top panel of this figure we plot the conditional approximating density and
the distorted density for y , as well as its corresponding probability distortion
m∗ (with m∗(y ;w ,B ) = m∗(y ;y ,B∗(w ,B ))). The bottom panel plot
R R t+1 t t t+1 t t t
depicts the expected payoff of the bond χ(Y ;B ) at t+1 for each value of
y , before the realization of X . Note that this expected payoff is continuous
in Y as a result of the smoothing of the conditional default probability by the
output shock X . The shaded area in both panels corresponds to the range of
values for the realization of y in which the borrower defaults with probability
equalorhigherthan50percent(notethatthedefaultdecisionatt+1alsodepends
on the realization of X ).
In order to minimize lenders’ expected utility, the minimizing agent places a
non-smooth probability distortion m∗(·;w ,B ) over next-period realizations of
y , with values strictly larger than 1 over the default interval, that drops dra-
matically below 1 as repayment becomes more certain. By doing so, the minimiz-
ing agent takes away probability mass from those states in which the borrower
does not default, and puts it in turn on those low realizations of y in which
default is optimal for the borrower. For this particular state vector (y ,B ) in
consideration, the conditional default probability under the approximating model
is 9.3 percent quarterly, while under the distorted one it is 16.2 percent, almost
twice as high. The kinked shape of m∗ follows from the kinked shape of the
lenders’ utility value with respect to y , which in turn is due to the kinked
shape in next-period payoff of the bond as function of y .27
With long-term debt, additional probability distorting takes place over the re-
payment interval. Since the payoff of the bond remains state contingent due to
its dependence on the next-period bond price, so will the lenders’ utility. Conse-
quently, states associated with relatively lower next-period prices will be assigned
relatively higher weights.
Thetiltingoftheprobabilitiesbytheminimizingagentgeneratesanendogenous
hump of the distorted density over the interval of y associated with default
risk, as observed in Figure 1. The bi-peaked form of the resulting distorted
conditional density differs from the standard distortions in the robust control
literature, in which it typically displays only a shift in the conditional mean from
the approximating one.28,29
Sovereign default events in our model can be interpreted as “disaster events”,
which in our economy emerge endogenously from the borrower’s decision making
and the lack of enforceability of debt contracts. Fears about model misspecifica-
level,weresuitablychosentohaveconsiderabledefaultriskundertheapproximatingdensity. Thecurrent
endowmentlevelytcorrespondstohalfastandarddeviationbelowitsunconditionalmean,andthebond
holdings Bt are set to the median of its unconditional distribution in the simulations. Also, current xt
wassettozero.
27If there were no output shock, the payoff of the bond would be discontinuous due to the default
contingency,andsowouldtheprobabilitydistortion.
28See,forexample,Barillas,HansenandSargent(2009)andAnderson,HansenandSargent(2003).
29Table S.31 in Section S.3 of the Supplementary Material reports distortions in several moments of
yt foroureconomy.
16 AMERICAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL MONTH YEAR
approximatingmodel PY0j Y
distorted model P~ Y;t probabilitydistortion m$ 1.5
0.85 0.9 0.95 1 1.05
0.85 0.9 0.95 1 1.05
Figure 1. Approximating and distorted densities.
tioninturnamplifytheireffectonbothallocationsandequilibriumprices,asthey
increasetheperceivedlikelihoodinthemindofthelendersoftheserareeventsoc-
curring. Asaresult, themodelcanbeviewedasgeneratingendogenouslyvarying
disaster risk.
State-dependency of probability distortions. Inoureconomy, probability
distortions are state-dependent and thereby typically time-varying. The default
risk under the approximating density and the quantity of bonds carried over to
next period, which the borrower can default on, affect the extent to which the
minimizing agent distorts lenders’ beliefs. Figure 2 shows the approximating
and distorted density of next period y for different combinations of current
endowment and bond holdings, (y ,B ).30
Bycomparingthetwopanelsinthetoprow(orthebottomrow),wecanseehow
the probability distortion changes with the level of current debt. In this general
equilibrium framework, we need to take into account the optimal debt response
of the borrower for the current state of the economy. For the state vectors in
consideration, the higher the current level of indebtness B , the more debt the
borrower optimally chooses to carry into next period, B . To see how the
perceived probability of default next period varies, we check at how the default
risk under the approximating model and the probability distortions change as
30Low and high endowment yt+1 correspond to half and a quarter a standard deviation below the
unconditional mean of yt, respectively. The i.i.d. output shock xt is set again to zero. Also, low debt
is given by the median of the debt unconditional distribution, and high debt corresponds to the 60th
percentile.
VOL. VOL NO. ISSUE DEFAULT AND UNCERTAINTY PREMIA 17
current bond holdings B increase. First, the interval of realizations of y for
which the borrower defaults is enlarged. The larger the quantity of bonds that
the borrower has to repay at t+1, the greater the incentives it would have to not
do it. Consequently, the default risk under the approximating model is higher.
Also, those new states on which there is default with higher debt become now
low-utility states for the lender, and hence probability distortions m∗ larger than
1 are assigned to them in the new, worst-case density.
Second, the change in levels of the probability distortions may not be straight-
forward. On the one hand, since for these cases, more bond holdings B are
carried into next period, more is at stake for the lender, as the potential losses in
the event of default are larger. Hence, the probability mass on the default states
would be even higher than before. One the other hand, higher B also means
higherdefaultriskinthefuture,whichwouldalsodepressnext-periodbondprices
andtherebythepayoffofthebondovertherepaymentinterval. Sincetheoptimal
probabilitydistortionsareassignedonthebasisoftherelativepayoffineachstate,
they may be higher or lower than before. While probability distortions (over the
default interval) turn smaller in the top panels of Figure 2 as debt increases, the
opposite occurs in the bottom ones.
By comparing the two panels in the left-side column (or the right-side column)
we can see how the probability distortion changes with the level of current en-
dowment. Due to the persistence of the stochastic process for (y ) , the lower
the current endowment, y , the lower the conditional mean of next period’s en-
dowment, y of the approximating density. For the state vectors considered
here, the agent gets relatively more indebted as current endowment y rises. This
follows from the fact that output costs of default are increasing in the endowment
y . The higher y , the more severely the borrower is punished if it defaults. As
the incentives to default are smaller, the returns are lower, or equivalently the
bond prices demanded by the lenders are higher, for the same levels of debt. Fac-
ing relatively cheaper debt, the borrower responds by borrowing more. In this
way, more bond holdings B widens the intervals of y -realizations for which
default is optimal. At the same time, probability distortions over the new default
interval become relatively larger for similar reasons as discussed previously when
debt B rises. In these cases, the perceived probability distortions, however, de-
crease due to the rightward shift of the conditional mean of y , as endowment
y increases.
Comparison to CRRA and Epstein-Zin Utilities. A natural question is
whether risk aversion on the lenders’ side with time separable preferences could
generate a stochastic discount factor, negatively correlated with default decisions
δ∗ , that could help account for low bond prices, while preserving the default
frequency at historical low levels. We explore this in Section S.5 of the Supple-
mentary Material. Our findings indicate that in our calibrated economy with
CRRA separable preferences for the lender plausible degrees of risk aversion on
the lenders’ side are not sufficient to generate high bond returns; to some ex-
18 AMERICAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL MONTH YEAR
tent, this is analogous to the equity premium puzzle result studied in Mehra and
Prescott (1985). See Table S.52 for details. Our results are also consistent with
the findings by Lizarazo (2013) and Borri and Verdelhan (2010).
Evenifsufficientlyhighvaluesofriskaversioncouldeventuallyrecoverthehigh
spreads shown in the data, doing so, however, would lower the risk-free rate to
levels far below those exhibited in the data, in line with Weil (1989) risk-free rate
In our environment with model uncertainty, however, the extent to which
lenders are uncertainty-averse does not affect the equilibrium gross risk-free rate,
given by the reciprocal of γ, as their period utility function is linear in consump-
Inawideclassofenvironments, theutilityrecursionwithmultiplierpreferences
can be reinterpreted in terms of Epstein-Zin utility formulation.33 In such a case,
the typical probability distortion through which the agent’s uncertainty aversion
is manifested would take the form of a risk-sensitive adjustment used to evaluate
future streams of consumption. In our framework, this apparent observational
equivalence, however, does not apply, because the lender contemplates pertur-
bations only to the probability model governing the evolution of the borrower’s
endowment, and not to the probability distribution of reentry to financial mar-
kets, which is assumed to be fully trusted. In our setup, since re-entry occurs
with zero debt and it does not directly affect prices, we expect that perturbations
on the probability of re-entry will not have a significant effect on the quantities
of interest.
Irrelevance of lenders’ wealth. We conclude this section by showing that
the size of lenders’ non-stochastic endowment is irrelevant for equilibrium bond
prices and the borrower’s allocations.
LEMMA III.1: Consider an arbitrary recursive equilibrium with lenders’ non-
stochastic endowment given by z. Then, for any other non-stochastic endowment
yˆL (cid:54)= z, there exists a recursive equilibrium with identical bond prices and bor-
rower’s allocations.
The proof and formal statement are deferred to the Appendix A.34 This result
has important implications for our calibrations, because there is no need to iden-
31NotethatthestochasticprocessassumedforYtisstationary. Ifweaddapositivetrend,therisk-free
ratewouldberising,ratherthandecreasing,asthelenders’coefficientofriskaversiongoesup.
32In our model with linear lenders’ per-period utility, equilibrium prices depend exclusively on eco-
nomicfundamentalsoftheborrowingeconomyandthelenders’preferenceforrobustness. Itisnoteworthy
toremarkthataddingcurvatureontheper-periodutilitywill,ingeneral,leadtoequilibriumpricesthat
alsodependoninternationallenders’characteristicssuchastheirtotalwealthandinvestmentflows, or
more generally, on global macroeconomic factors, in line with the empirical findings by Longstaff et al.
(2011). Thisseemstobeaninterestingextensiontopursueinfutureresearch.
33WenotethatEpsteinandZin(1989)accommodatesper-periodpayoffspecificationsthatgobeyond
thelogcase.
34IntheAppendixweactuallyproveamoregeneralresult,thatallowsforstochasticendowmentfor
thelenders.
VOL. VOL NO. ISSUE DEFAULT AND UNCERTAINTY PREMIA 19
low debt, low output high debt, low output
0.08 4.5 0.08 4.5
0.06 3.5 0.06 3.5
0.04 2.5 0.04 2.5
0.02 1.5 0.02 1.5
0 0.5 0 0.5
0.85 0.9 0.95 1 1.05 0.85 0.9 0.95 1 1.05
low debt, high output high debt, high output
0.08 4.5 0.08 4.5
0.06 3.5 0.06 3.5
0.04 2.5 0.04 2.5
0.02 1.5 0.02 1.5
0 0.85 0.9 0.95 1 1.05 0.5 0 0.85 0.9 0.95 1 1.05 0.5
approximatingmodelPY0jY distortedmodelP~Y;t probabilitydistortionm$R
Figure 2. Approximating and distorted densities for different state vectors (yt,Bt).
tify who the lenders are in the data, and, in particular, to find a good proxy of
their income relatively to the borrower’s endowment.
Finally, we note that by similar calculations it can be shown that equilibrium
bond prices or the borrower’s allocation remain unchanged even if lenders were
allowed to borrow or save at a given gross risk-free rate in positive net supply in
credit markets, e.g. investing in U.S. Treasury bills.
IV. Quantitative Analysis
In this section we analyze the quantitative implications of our model for Ar-
gentina. To do so, we specify our choices for functional forms and calibrate some
parameter values to match key moments in the data for the Argentinean econ-
omy. The period considered spans from the first quarter of 1993, when Argentina
regained access to financial market with the Brady Plan agreement after its 1982
default,tothelastquarterof2001,whenArgentinadefaultedagainonitsexternal
debt.
A. Calibration
For the quantitative analysis, we consider the following functional forms. The
period utility function for the borrower is assumed to have the CRRA form, i.e.,
where σ is the coefficient of relative risk aversion.
20 AMERICAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL MONTH YEAR
Weassumethattheendowmentoftheborrowerfollowsalog-normalAR(1)pro-
cess, logY = ρlogY +σ ε , where the shock ε ∼ N(0,1). As shown in
t+1 t ε t+1 t+1
Lemma III.1, the (non-stochastic) lenders’ endowment does not affect the equi-
librium bond prices and borrower’s allocations, allowing us to circumvent the
subtle challenge of providing a good proxy for lenders’ consumption or income.
We therefore set the lenders’ logged endowment, denoted by log(z), to 1.
Following Chatterjee and Eyingungor (2012), we consider the specification for
output costs
with κ > 0. As explained later, our calibrated output costs play a key role in
generating desired business cycle features for emerging economies, in particular
the volatility of bond spreads, in the context of lenders’ model uncertainty. In
Table 1 we present the parameter values for the calibration of our benchmark
model.
The coefficient of relative risk aversion for the borrower σ is set to 2, which
is standard in the sovereign default literature. The re-entry probability π is
set to 0.0385, implying an average period of 6.5 years of financial exclusion and
consistent with Benjamin and Wright (2009) estimates.35
We estimate the parameters ρ and σ for the log-normal AR(1) process for the
endowment of the borrower, using output data for Argentina for the period from
1993:Q1 to 2001:Q3.36,37
The (one-period) risk-free rate rf in the model is 1 percent, which is approx-
imately the average quarterly interest rate of a three-month U.S. Treasury bill
for the period in consideration. The lenders’ discount factor γ is set equal to the
reciprocal of the gross risk-free rate 1 + rf. 38 The parameters governing the
payoff structure of the long-term bond, λ and ψ, are chosen to replicate a median
debt maturity of 5 years and a coupon rate of 12 percent.
Bond spreads are computed as the difference between annualized bond returns
and the U.S. Treasury bill rate. The quarterly time series on interest rate for
sovereign debt for Argentina is taken from Neumeyer and Perri (2005). To calcu-
late the yield of the long-term bond, we use the internal rate of return.39
35PitchfordandWright(2012)reportanaverage6.5-yeardelayindebtrestructuringafter1976.
36We exclude the last quarter of 2001 since the default announcement by President Rodriguez Sa´a
tookplaceonDecember23,2001.
37Time series at a quarterly frequency for output, consumption, and net exports for Argentina are
taken from the Ministry of Finance (MECON). All these series are seasonally adjusted, in logs, and
filteredusingalineartrend. Netexportsarecomputedasapercentageofoutput.
38Lenders can be allowed to trade a zero net supply risk-less claim to one unit of consumption next
period. Sincealllendersareidentical,notradeinsuchaclaimtakesplaceinequilibrium,where1+rf =
1/γ.
39Theinternalrateofreturnofabond,denotedbyr(yt,Bt+1),isdeterminedbythepricingequation:
VOL. VOL NO. ISSUE DEFAULT AND UNCERTAINTY PREMIA 21
Wecalibratetheparametersβ,κ ,κ ,andθinourmodeltomatchkeymoments
for the Argentinean economy. We set the borrower’s discount factor β to target
an annual frequency of default of 3 percent. The calibrated value for β is 0.9627,
which is relatively large within the sovereign default literature.40
We select the output cost parameters κ and κ to match the average debt level
of 46 percent of GDP for Argentina and the spreads volatility of 4.58 percent.41
Regardingthedegreeofmodeluncertaintyinoureconomy,wetakethefollowing
strategy: we first set the penalty parameter θ to match the average bond spreads
of 8.15 percent observed in the data for Argentina. As pointed out by Barillas,
Hansen and Sargent (2009), the value of θ is itself not necessarily informative
of the amount of distortion in lenders’ perceptions about the evolution of y; its
impact on probability distortions is context-specific.42
To better interpret our results, we provide another statistic, the detection error
probabilities(DEP),commonlyusedintherobustcontrolliterature.43 Foramore
thorough discussion, details on its computation and an alternative measure, see
Section V. The lower the value of DEP, the more pronounced is the discrepancy
between these two models. If they are basically identical, they are indistinguish-
able and hence the DEP is 0.50. In contrast, if the two models are perfectly
distinguishable from each other, the DEP is 0. Barillas, Hansen and Sargent
(2009) suggest 20 percent as a reasonable threshold, in line with a 20-percent
Type I error in statistics. In our model the DEP implied by our calibrated θ is
only31percent,whichimpliesthataroundonethirdofthetimethedetectiontest
indicates the wrong model. This value is therefore quite conservative, suggesting
that only a modest amount of model uncertainty is sufficient to explain the high
average bond spreads observed in the data.
Computational algorithm. The model is solved numerically using value
functioniteration. Tothatend,weapplythediscretestatespace(DSS)technique.
The endowment space for y is discretized into 200 points and the stochastic
process is approximated to a Markov chain, using Tauchen and Hussey (1993)
quadrature-based method.44
When solving the model using the DSS technique, we may encounter lack of
convergenceproblems; seeChatterjeeandEyingungor(2012)fordetails. Toavoid
that for long-term debt, we introduce the i.i.d. continuous output shock X .
To compute the business cycle statistics, we run 2,000 Monte Carlo (MC)
simulations of the model with 4,000 periods each.45 Similarly to Arellano (2008),
40Forexample,Yue(2010)usesadiscountfactorof0.74andAguiarandGopinath(2006)use0.80.
41Theexternalgovernmentdebttooutputratioof46percentforArgentinaistakenfromtheNational
InstituteofStatisticsandCensus(INDEC)fortheperiodfrom1994:Q4to2001:Q4.
42See Barillas, Hansen and Sargent (2009) for a simple example with a random walk model and a
trendstationarymodelforlogconsumption.
43SeeAnderson,HansenandSargent(2003),Maenhout(2004),Barillas,HansenandSargent(2009),
BidderandSmith(2013),andLuo,NieandYoung(2012),forexample.
44Forbondholdings,weuse580gridpointstosolvethemodelandnointerpolation. Also,thedistri-
butionforxt istruncatedbetween[−2σx,2σx].
45Toavoiddependenceoninitialconditions,wepickonlythelast2,000periodsfromeachsimulation.
22 AMERICAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL MONTH YEAR
Parameter Value
Borrower Riskaversion σ 2
Timediscountfactor β 0.9627
Probabilityofreentry π 0.0385
Outputcostparameter κ1 −0.255
Outputcostparameter κ2 0.296
AR(1)coefficientforyt ρ 0.9484
Std. deviationofεt σε 0.02
Std. deviationofxt σx 0.03
Lender Robustnessparameter θ 0.619
Constantforz log(z) 1.00
Bond Risk-freerate rf 0.01
Decayrate λ 0.05
Coupon ψ 0.03
Table 1—Parameter Values
to replicate the period for Argentina from 1993:Q1 to 2001:Q3, we consider 1,000
sub-samples of 35 periods with access to financial markets, followed by a default
event.46 We then compute the mean statistics and the 90-percent confidence
intervals, across MC simulations, for these subsamples.
Output costs and implications. The choice of Chatterjee and Eyingungor
(2012) specification for the output costs of default given by expression (8) is key
for matching some business cycle moments.
Similar to their calibration, we have κ < 0, which implies that there are no
output costs for realizations y < κ /κ , and the output costs as a fraction of
output increase with y for y > κ /κ . In this sense, our output costs are similar
to those in Arellano (2008), both of which have significant implications for the
dynamics of debt and default events in the model. As explained before, when
output is high, there is typically less default risk, bond returns are low and there
is more borrowing. For low levels of output, the costs of default are lower, hence,
the default risk is higher, and so are the bond returns. If the borrower is hit by a
sequence sufficiently long of bad output realizations, it eventually finds it optimal
to declare default.
As noted by Chatterjee and Eyingungor (2012), this functional form for output
costs has an important advantage over those of Arellano (2008) for the volatility
of bond spreads. In Arellano (2008) output costs as a fraction of output vary
significantly with output, and so do the default incentives.47 Hence, the default
Theunconditionaldefaultfrequencyiscomputedasthesamplemeanofthenumberofdefaulteventsin
thesimulations.
46BecauseArgentinaexitedfinancialautarkywiththeBradybondswhileinourmodelitdoessowith
no debt obligations, we also impose no reentry in the previous four quarters (1 year) of each candidate
sub-sample.
47Quantitatively, in that specific framework with one-period bonds, spreads volatility can be con-
siderably reduced when using very fine grids or alternative computational methods to solve the model
numerically,asshownbyHatchondo,Mart´ınezandSapriza(2010). Forlong-termdebtmodels,however,
VOL. VOL NO. ISSUE DEFAULT AND UNCERTAINTY PREMIA 23
probability is very sensitive to the endowment realizations y. In our model, the
sensitivity of the distorted default probability is even higher. Beliefs’ distortions
play out in the same direction, by slanting probabilities even more towards the
range of endowment realizations in which default occurs. As a result, not surpris-
ingly, the variability of bond spreads rises significantly when we introduce doubts
about model misspecification.
Forthisreason, insteadofusingtheoutputcoststructurefromArellano(2008),
we consider the specification given by (8). In this case, the output loss as a
proportion of output is less responsive to fluctuations of y. It therefore yields
a lower sensitivity of default probabilities to y, reducing at the same time the
spreads volatility.
B. Simulation Results
Table 2 reports the moments of our calibrated model and in the data. For
comparison purposes, it also shows the corresponding moments for Chatterjee
and Eyingungor (2012), denoted CE model, probably the best-performing long-
term debt model in the literature. Apart from model uncertainty, a key feature
along which our calibrated model and the CE model differ is the targeted default
frequency (3 percent in th former vis-a-vis 6.6 percent in the latter). For this
reason, we introduce a re-calibrated version of our model that targets a default
frequency of 3 percent but without model uncertainty and denote it the Baseline
model. While the theoretical CE model and our baseline model are identical,
theircalibrationsdifferalongseveralotherdimensions. Inparticular,thetargeted
debt-to-output ratios are different: 70 percent in the CE model while 46 percent
in the baseline model.48
Overall, our model matches standard business cycle regularities of the Argen-
tinean economy. More importantly, we can replicate salient features of the bond
spreads dynamics. By introducing doubts about model misspecification, we can
account for all the average bond spreads observed in the data, as well as their
volatility, matching at the same time the historical annual frequency of default
of 3 percent and the average risk-free rate. An important contribution of our
paper is that we only require quite limited amount of model uncertainty to do it.
Indeed, we need on average smaller deviations of lenders’ beliefs to explain the
nocomparisonbetweensolutionmethodshasbeendriven.
48As mentioned before, in our calibration we consider the external government debt-to-output ratio
of 46 percent for Argentina taken from the INDEC, which is similar to the debt levels reported by
Arellano (2008), Yue (2010), and Mendoza and Yue (2012). In contrast, Chatterjee and Eyingungor
(2012) use as debt the total long-term public and publicly guaranteed external debt, provided by the
WorldBanksGlobalDevelopmentFinanceDatabase(GDF),whichtotaled70percentofGDP.Besides
targetingdifferentmomentsinthedata,adifferentparametrizationfortheAR(1)endowmentprocessis
considered,aswellasdifferentnumberofassetgrid-pointsandsamplingcriterionareused.
24 AMERICAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL MONTH YEAR
Statistic Data CEModel BaselineModel OurModel
Mean(r−rf) 8.15 8.15 5.01 8.15
Std.dev.(r−rf) 4.58 4.43 4.27 4.62
mean(−b/y) 46 70 42 44
Std.dev.(c)/std.dev. (y) 0.87 1.11 1.16 1.23
Std.dev.(tb/y) 1.21 1.46 0.89 1.23
Corr(y,c) 0.97 0.99 0.99 0.98
Corr(y,r−rf) −0.72 −0.65 −0.78 −0.75
Corr(y,tb/y) −0.77 −0.44 −0.80 −0.68
Dropiny(arounddefault) −6.4 −4.5 −3.9 −5.6
DEP NA NA 50.0 31.3
Defaultfrequency(annually) 3.00 6.60 3.00 3.00
Table 2—Business Cycle Statistics for the data, the CE model, the Baseline model and our
model.
spread dynamics than those used in the equity premium literature.49,50
Notably, our model can explain the average bond spreads of 8.15 percent in
the data, which is roughly three percentage points higher than the 5.01 percent
obtained by the baseline model. In our environment, risk-neutral lenders charge
an additional uncertainty premium on bond holdings to get compensated for
bearing the default risk under the worst-case density for output. In turn, their
perceived conditional probability of default next period —while having access to
financial markets— is on average 2.2 percent per quarter, while the actual one is
only 0.9 percent. Lenders’ distorted beliefs about the evolution of the borrowing
economy enable us to achieve the challenging goal of simultaneously matching
the low sovereign default frequency and the high average level (and volatility)
of excess returns on Argentinean bonds exhibited in the data. Additionally, our
model can account for a strong countercyclicality of bond spreads.
As shown in Table 2, Chatterjee and Eyingungor (2012) (CE model) has also
been able to match the average bond spreads observed in the data. To our knowl-
edge, only this paper and Hatchondo, Mart´ınez and Padilla (2012) have been
able to do that under rational expectations. These authors, however, reproduce
the average high spreads for Argentina at the cost of roughly doubling the de-
fault frequency to 6.6 percent annually. While it is difficult to determine what
the true value for the default frequency is in the data, it seems to be consensus
in the literature that it lies close to 3 percent per year (see footnote 7). These
papers and ours replicate this feature of the bond spreads in a general equilib-
49Toexplaindifferentasset-pricingpuzzles,Maenhout(2004),Drechsler(2012),andBidderandSmith
(2013) require a detection error probability in the range between 10 and 12 percent. Barillas, Hansen
andSargent(2009)needsevenlowervaluestoreachtheHansenandJagannathan(1991)bounds.
50It is worth noting that while we assume no recovery on defaulted debt in the model—which in
equilibrium pushes up the bond returns—, there is room to increase the amount of model uncertainty
(i.e.,decreaseθ)withintheplausiblerange,andthuswecouldstillaccountforthebondspreadaverage
levelifanymechanismofdebtrestructuringwithsubsequenthaircutsisintroduced.
VOL. VOL NO. ISSUE DEFAULT AND UNCERTAINTY PREMIA 25
rium framework. In contrast, Arellano (2008) and Arellano and Ramanarayanan
(2012)51, have been able to account for the bond spreads dynamics by assuming
an ad hoc functional form for the stochastic discount factor, which depends on
the output shock to the borrowing economy. Our paper can be seen as providing
microfoundations for such a functional form.52
Statistic Data Baseline Model Our Model
Q (r−rf) 4.40 2.12 4.66
Q (r−rf) 5.98 2.62 5.38
Q (r−rf) 7.42 3.57 6.66
Q (r−rf) 8.45 5.55 9.08
Q (r−rf) 11.64 9.65 13.61
Table 3—Quantiles of spreads for our Model, the Data and the Baseline Model. Qα(r−rf)
denotes the α-th quantile.
In order to shed more light on the behavior of the spreads, we report in Table 3
different percentiles. In all cases, the average across MC simulations is very close
to the one observed in the data. The baseline model, however, yields percentiles
thatareconsiderablybelowthevaluesobservedinthedata. Finally, wenotethat
the median is always lower than the average in the data and in the models, due
to the presence of large peaks because of the default events. These results show
how our model is able to match the average level, volatility and countercyclicality
of spreads, while not distorting other relevant moments.
Also, in Section S.5 of the Supplementary Material we provide simulations that
showthattheintroductionofplausibledegreesofriskaversiononthelenders’side
withtime-separablepreferencesisinsufficienttorecoverthehighspreadsobserved
in the data. With constant relative risk aversion, as in Lizarazo (2013), matching
highspreadscallsforaverylargeriskaversioncoefficientandimplausiblerisk-free
Our model can also generate considerable levels of borrowing, consistent with
levels observed in the data. High output costs of default jointly with a low prob-
ability of regaining access to financial markets imply a severe punishment to the
51SeealsoHatchondo,Mart´ınezandPadilla(2012).
52Indeed,thead-hocpricingkernelsusedinthesestudiescanbereinterpretedasaprobabilitydistor-
tionthatalterstheconditionalmeanbutnotthevarianceofthelog-normaldistributionoftheendowment
oftheborrower. SectionS.4intheSupplementaryMaterialelaboratesonthispoint.
53Borri and Verdelhan (2010) have studied the setup with positive co-movement between lenders’
consumption and output in the emerging economy in addition to time-varying risk aversion on the
lenders’ side. To generate endogenous time-varying risk aversion for lenders, they endow them with
CampbellandCochrane(1999)preferenceswithexternalhabitformation. However,theyfindthateven
withtheseadditionalcomponentsaveragebondspreadsgeneratedbythemodelarefarbelowfromthose
in the data. They report average bond spreads of 4.27 percent, for an annual default frequency of 3.11
percent.
26 AMERICAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL MONTH YEAR
borrower in case it defaults. Consequently, higher levels of indebtness can be sus-
tained in our economy. Since the magnitude of output cost can be hard to gauge
from the parameter values κ and κ , we report the average output drop that
the borrowing economy suffers in the periods of default announcements. We then
comparethisstatisticwiththeactualcontractioninArgentineanoutputobserved
in the data around the fourth quarter of 2001, which reached -6.4 percent; in our
model this number is -5.6 percent.54,55 Given the similarity of the results, we
conclude that our calibrated output cost function is quite in line with the data.
Finally, our model reproduces quantitatively standard empirical regularities of
emerging economies: strong correlation between consumption and output, and
volatility and countercyclicality of net exports. Along these dimensions, our
model performs similarly to that of Chatterjee and Eyingungor (2012) and the
baseline model.
C. A Graph for the Argentinean Case
In order to showcase the dynamics generated by long-term debt model, we
performthefollowingexercise. Weinputintothemodeltheoutputpathobserved
in Argentina for 1993:Q1 to 2001:Q4. Given this and an initial level of debt, the
model generates a time series for the annualized spread and for one-step-ahead
conditional probabilities of default under both the approximating and distorted
models. Figure 3 depicts the results. The top panel shows the output path,
jointly with the time series for bond spreads exhibited in the data and delivered
by our model. For comparison, we also plot the spreads generated by each of the
baseline models. The bottom panel displays the conditional default probabilities
according to our model.
Our model does a better job matching the actual spreads than the correspond-
ing baseline model. The difference between the spreads generated by the model
can be largely explained by the behavior over time of one-step-ahead conditional
probabilities of default. While we observe zero or negligible default risk right
before and after the year of 1995, a salient feature of long-term debt models is
that they can generate considerable bond spreads even in the absence of default
risk in the near future. Lenders typically demand high returns on their long-term
debt holdingsto get compensated forpossible capital losses dueto future defaults
on the unmatured fraction of their bonds. Additionally, further compensation is
required for potential drops in the future market value of outstanding bonds as
the borrower might dilute its debt.
In any case, while non-negligible, the subjective probability of default next
period is higher than the actual one. More importantly, the wedge between the
two probabilities is greater when output is low (and default is more likely next
period), e.g. see results for 1995:Q2 to 1995:Q4 and from 2000:Q2 onwards.
54To be consistent with our model, the same linear trend from the estimation was employed when
computingtheactualdropofoutputinthedata.
55Thedropobservedin2002Q1was7.3percent,slightlylargerthaninthepreviousquarter.
VOL. VOL NO. ISSUE DEFAULT AND UNCERTAINTY PREMIA 27
1993:Q1 1994:Q1 1995:Q1 1996:Q1 1997:Q1 1998:Q1 1999:Q1 2000:Q1 2001:Q1
output spreads (data) spreads (model) spreads (baseline)
1993:Q1 1994:Q1 1995:Q1 1996:Q1 1997:Q1 1998:Q1 1999:Q1 2000:Q1 2001:Q1
actual default probability distorted default probability
Figure3.TopPanel: OutputforArgentina;spreadsgeneratedbyourlong-termdebtmodel
and the baseline model; and actual spreads (measured by the EMBI+). Bottom Panel: One-
step-ahead conditional probabilities of default under the distorted model and the approxi-
mating model.
28 AMERICAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL MONTH YEAR
Finally, it is worth pointing out that our results are consistent with the findings
by Zhang (2008). Using CDS price data on Argentinean sovereign debt at daily
frequency from January 1999 to December 2001, Zhang (2008) estimates a three-
factor credit default swap model and computes the implied one-year physical and
risk-neutral default probabilities. In line with our results, his risk-neutral default
probability is always higher than its physical counterpart, and the wedge between
themistime-varying,andtypicallyincreaseswiththephysicaldefaultprobability.
V. Measuring Model Uncertainty
In this section we present two different procedures to measure the amount of
model uncertainty in this economy and interpret the value of penalty parame-
ter θ in the calibration. The first one is the Detection error probability (DEP)
procedure used in Anderson, Hansen and Sargent (2003), Maenhout (2004), and
Barillas, Hansen and Sargent (2009) among others. The second one is, to our
knowledge, a novel procedure which allows the researcher to focus on specific
aspects of the probability distribution implied by the model.
A. Detection Error Probabilities
Let L and L be the likelihood functions corresponding to the approx-
imating and distorted models for (Y )T , respectively. Let Pr and Pr be
the respective probabilities over the data, generated under the approximating
(cid:16) (cid:16) (cid:17) (cid:17)
and distorted models. Let p (θ) ≡ Pr log θ,T > 0 be the probabil-
A,T A LA,T
ity the likelihood ratio test indicates that the distorted model generated the
data (when the data were generated by the approximating model). We define
(cid:16) (cid:16) (cid:17) (cid:17)
p (θ) ≡ Pr log θ,T < 0 similarly. Finally, let the DEP be obtained by
D,T θ LA,T
averaging p (θ) and p (θ):
If the two models are very similar to each other, mistakes are likely, yielding high
values of p (θ) and p (θ); the opposite is true if the models are not similar.56
The aforementioned quantities can be approximated by means of simulation.
We start by setting an initial debt level and endowment vector. We then simulate
time series for output for T(cid:48) = 2,000+T periods (quarters), where T = 240.57
56Theweightofone-halfisarbitrary;seeBarillas,HansenandSargent(2009)amongothers. Moreover,
asthenumberofobservationsincreases,theweightbecomeslessrelevant,sincethequantitiespA,T and
pD,T getclosertoeachother;asshowninFigure4
57TomakeourresultsfortheDEPcomparablewiththoseofBarillas,HansenandSargent(2009)and
BidderandSmith(2013),weconsiderasimilarnumberofperiodsandtherebyT=240ischosen. Ifinstead
T was set to replicate the number of periods used in the calibration, the DEP would be considerably
higher for the same probability distortions. For both models, we ignore the first 2,000 observations in
ordertoavoidanydependenceonourinitiallevelsofdebtandendowments.
VOL. VOL NO. ISSUE DEFAULT AND UNCERTAINTY PREMIA 29
The process is repeated 2,000 times. For each time-series realization, we con-
struct L and L . We then compute p (θ) as the percentage of times the
A,T θ,T A,T
likelihoodratiotestindicatesthattheworst-casemodelgeneratedthedata(when
the data were generated by the approximating model).58 We construct p (θ)
analogously.
For a given number of observations (in our case 74), as θ → +∞, the approx-
imating and distorted models become harder to distinguish from each other and
the detection error probability converges to 0.5. If instead they are distant from
each other, the detection error probability is below 0.5, getting closer to 0 as the
discrepancy between the models gets larger.
Following Barillas, Hansen and Sargent (2009) we consider a threshold for the
DEP of 0.2; values of DEP (θ) that are larger or equal are deemed acceptable.
In our calibration, our DEP is above this threshold, since DEP (θ) = 0.313. For
this value of θ (and other parameters), p = 0.306 and p = 0.321. So the
weight of 0.5 does not play an important role.
We conclude the section by proposing an alternative view for interpreting θ.
This is based on the following observation: for any fix finite θ (for which L
exists),L (cid:54)= L withpositiveprobability; thus,asthenumberofobservations
increases, p (θ) → 0 for k = {A,D}. Therefore, for a given level of θ and an
a priori chosen level α ∈ (0,1), which does not depend on θ, we can define
T ≡ max{T: p (θ) = α}, as the maximum number of observations before
DEP (θ) falls bellow α. A heuristic interpretation of this number is that the
agents need at least T observations to be able to distinguish between the two
models at a certainty level of α. The higher this number, the harder it is to
distinguish between the models.
Figure 4 plots {p (θ∗),p (θ∗),DEP (θ∗)}2,400 for θ∗ = 0.619, the value of
T,A T,D T T=90
θ in our calibration. For a level of α = 0.2, we see that T ≈ 700. That is,
one needs approximately 9.5 times our sample of 74, in order to obtain a level of
α = 0.2 for DEP (θ∗) and consequently claim that these models are sufficiently
different from each other, according to this criterion.
B. Moment Based Uncertainty Measure
The DEP criterion compares the likelihood implied by each model. In our
setting, however, as suggested by Figure 1, we expect the probabilities under
the approximating and distorted models to differ mainly in the lower tail of the
domain, where default predominantly occurs. We thus propose a measure of
model uncertainty which allow us to focus on such particular features of the
probabilities models. We achieve this by constructing the measure using a GMM-
based criterion function, which let us analyze these particular features of the
probability distribution through a chosen vector of moments.59
58InthecaseofLA=L
wecountthisasafalserejectionwithprobability0.5.
59ExtendingtheanalogytoDEP,onecanviewDEPasameasurebasedonthelikelihoodratio.
30 AMERICAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL MONTH YEAR
DEP ((cid:84)(cid:13))
p ((cid:84)(cid:13))
p ((cid:84)(cid:13))
0 500 1000 1500 2000
Number of periods, T
Figure 4. Detection error probability and its components as function of the number of
periods, T, for our calibrated economy.
Formally, wefirstdefinethefollowingfunction: givenany(stationary)distribu-
tionover(Y ) , P, letν(P) ∈ Rbetheparameter of P. Thatis, ν(P)summarizes
the features of the probability of the data we want to focus on. The parameter
functionsweconsideraresuchthatthereexistsafunctiong : Y×R → Rsuchthat
E [g(Y,ν(P))] = 0. That is, the parameter is identified by a moment condition
given by g.60
Inoursetup, duetothefactthatdefaultoccurspredominantlyforlowvaluesof
the endowment, we are interested in the τ-quantile of the distribution, i.e., ν(P)
such that E [1{Y ≤ ν(P)}] = τ and thus g(y,ν) = 1{Y ≤ ν}−τ. In particular,
we choose τ = 0.1 because around 70 percent of the default episodes in our model
occur for endowment realizations below the associated level ν(P); i.e., the set
{Y ≤ ν(P)} is a very good approximation of the set where most of the defaults
Given data (Y )T , let Q (P) = (T−1(cid:80)T g(Y ,ν(P)))2V where V is a posi-
t t=1 T t=1 t
tive number. That is, Q (P) is the (sample) GMM criterion function associated
to the moments determined by g and ν.
60Itisstraightforwardtoextendoursetuptoallowforvector-valuedg.
61Inourcaseν isreal-valued, butouranalysiscaneasilybeextendedtothecasewhereν isvector-
valued.
VOL. VOL NO. ISSUE DEFAULT AND UNCERTAINTY PREMIA 31
400 600 800 1000 1200 1400 1600 1800
Number of periods, T
Figure5.Theuncertaintymeasureπ (θ∗)asfunctionofthenumberofperiods,T,forour
calibrated economy.
The value of V is chosen such that when data is drawn from Pr ,62
For any ζ ∈ (0,1), let c be the (1−ζ)-quantile of χ2, and
T,ζ A T θ ζ
Clearly, as T → ∞, π (θ) → 1 for any finite θ. However, for our choice of g, if
θ is such that Pr (Y ≤ ν(Pr )) ≈ Pr (Y ≤ ν(Pr )) then, even for moderately
high values of T, we should expect π (θ) ≈ ζ.
In light of this remark, and similarly to DEP, given a T and a ζ ∈ (0,1), the
researcher needs to stipulate a threshold larger or equal than ζ for which values
of π (θ) below the threshold are deemed acceptable. That is, if θ is such that
π (θ) is below the threshold, then Pr is considered to be “close” to Pr and
hence cannot be distinguished from each other given the observations available.
Alternatively — also in line with what we proposed for DEP —, the researcher
can choose a value of α ∈ [ζ,1) and construct T = max{T : π (θ) ≤ α}.
For our choice of ν(Pr ), given by the 0.1-quantile of the distribution Pr , we
62UndermildassumptionsoverPrA whichensurethevalidityoftheCentralLimitTheorem,suchV
alwaysexists.
32 AMERICAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL MONTH YEAR
construct π for different values of T.63
The results we obtain are for ζ = 0.05. For a threshold of 0.05 and for T = 240
(thenumberofperiodsusedinthecomputationoftheDEP),ourcalibratedvalue
of θ, θ∗ = 0.619, yields an admissible value of π (θ∗) = 0.028. Figure 5 plots
{π (θ∗)}2,400 .64 We can see that for thresholds, α, of 0.05 or 0.10, the agent
T,0.05 T=400
needs at least (approx.) 430 or 580 observations to distinguish the models with
the desired certainty.
These values are smaller than those obtained for DEP, reflecting the fact that
our measure focuses on the low values of the endowment where the approximated
and distorted models differ the most; i.e. in this sense our measure is more
stringentthanDEP.Theyare,however,stilllargerthanoursampleof74quarters.
Thus, even also under this new measure of uncertainty we view our value of θ as
entailing a quite conservative amount of model uncertainty.
VI. Conclusion
This paper addresses a well-known puzzle in the sovereign default literature:
why are bond spreads for emerging economies so high if default episodes are rare
events, with a low probability of occurrence? Using Eaton and Gersovitz (1981)
generalequilibriumframework, extendedbyChatterjeeandEyingungor(2012)to
allow for long-term debt, we provide an explanation to resolve this puzzle based
on concerns about model misspecification.
In recent years, some emerging economies such as Argentina, South Africa,
Brazil,Colombia,andTurkeyhaveissuedGDP-indexedorinflation-indexedsovereign
bonds. Credibility of the sovereign and transparency of its statistic agency are
paramount for the success of these markets. Our framework suggests that po-
tential concerns of misreporting output growth or inflation would be priced in by
investors when lending to the sovereign, and might question the desirability of
these policies.