Sparse Projection Oblique Randomer Forests
Tyler M. Tomita∗, James Browne†, Cencheng Shen‡, Jaewon Chung§, Jesse L. Patsolic§,
Benjamin Falk§, Jason Yim¶, Carey E. Priebe(cid:107), Randal Burns†, Mauro Maggioni(cid:107), and Joshua T.
Vogelstein#
Decisionforests,includingRandomForestsandGradientBoostingTrees,haverecentlydemon-
strated state-of-the-art performance in a variety of machine learning settings. Decision forests
are typically ensembles of axis-aligned decision trees; that is, trees that split only along fea-
ture dimensions. In contrast, many recent extensions to decision forests are based on axis-
obliquesplits. Unfortunately,theseextensionsforfeitoneormoreofthefavorablepropertiesof
decision forests based on axis-aligned splits, such as robustness to many noise dimensions,
interpretability, or computational efficiency. We introduce yet another decision forest, called
“SparseProjectionObliqueRandomerForests”( ). SPORFusesverysparserandompro-
jections, i.e., linear combinations of a small subset of features. significantly improves
accuracyoverexistingstate-of-the-artalgorithmsonastandardbenchmarksuiteforclassifica-
tionwith> 100problemsofvaryingdimension,samplesize,andnumberofclasses. Toillustrate
how addresses the limitations of both axis-aligned and existing oblique decision forest
methods,weconductextensivesimulatedexperiments. typicallyyieldsimprovedperfor-
mance over existing decision forests, while mitigating computational efficiency and scalability
andmaintaininginterpretability. caneasilybeincorporatedintootherensemblemethods
suchasboostingtoobtainpotentiallysimilargains.
1 Introduction Overthelasttwodecades,ensemblemethodshaverisentoprominenceasthestate-
of-the-artforgeneral-purposemachinelearningtasks. Oneofthemostpopularandconsistentlystrong
ensemblemethodsisRandomForests( ),whichusesdecisiontreesasthebaselearners[1–3]. More
recently, another tree ensemble method known as gradient boosted decision trees (GBTs) has seen a
spike in popularity, largely due to the release of a fast and scalable cross-platform implementation,
[4]. GBTs have been a key component of many Kaggle competition-winning solutions, and
waspartoftheNetflixPrizewinningsolution[4].
RF XGBoost
and areensemblesof“axis-aligned”decisiontrees. Withsuchdecisiontrees,thefea-
turespaceisrecursivelysplitalongdirectionsparalleltothecoordinateaxes. Thus,whenclassesseem
inseparable along any single dimension, axis-aligned splits require very deep trees with complicated
step-like decision boundaries, leading to increased variance and over-fitting. To address this, Breiman
alsoproposedandcharacterizedForest-RC( ),whichsplitsonlinearcombinationsofcoordinates
rather than individual coordinates [5]. These so-called “oblique” ensembles include the axis-aligned
ensembles as a special case, and therefore have an increased expressive capacity, conferring po-
tentially better learning properties. Perhaps because of this appeal, numerous other oblique decision
forest methods have been proposed, including the Random Rotation Random Forest ( ) [6], and
the Canonical Correlation Forest ( ) [7]. Unfortunately, these methods forfeit many of the desirable
properties that axis-aligned trees possesses, such as computational efficiency, ease of tuning, insen-
sitivity to a large proportion of irrelevant (noise) inputs, and interpretability. Furthermore, while these
∗DepartmentofPsychologicalandBrainSciences,JohnsHopkinsUniversity(ttomita@jhu.edu)
†DepartmentofComputerScience,JohnsHopkinsUniversity
‡DepartmentofAppliedEconomicsandStatistics,UniversityofDelaware
§CenterforImagingScience,JohnsHopkinsUniversity
¶DeepMind,London,UK
(cid:107)DepartmentofAppliedMathematicsandStatistics,JohnsHopkinsUniversity
#Corresponding author; Department of Biomedical Engineering, Institute for Computational Medicine, Kavli Neuro-
6v01430.6051:viXra
methods perform much better than axis-aligned ensembles on some problems, they perform much
worse than axis-aligned ensembles on some problems for which axis-aligned splits would in fact be
highly informative. Therefore, there is a need for a method that combines the expressive capacity of
obliqueensembleswiththebenefitsofaxis-alignedensembles.
We propose Sparse Projection Oblique Randomer Forests ( ) for learning an ensemble of
oblique, interpretable, and computationally efficient decision trees. At each node of each tree,
searchesforsplitsoverasampleofverysparserandomprojections[8],ratherthanaxis-alignedsplits.
Very sparse random projections preserve many of the desirable properties of axis-aligned decision
trees,whilemitigatingtheirissues.
Insection3.1,wedelineateasetofdesirablepropertiesofadecisionforestalgorithm,anddescribe
how current axis-aligned and oblique decision forest algorithms each fail to possess at least one of
these. This motivates a flavor of Sparse Random Projections for randomly sampling candidate split
directions. In Section 4, we show on simulated data settings how our method possesses all of these
desirable properties, while other methods do not. In Section 5 we find that, in practice, our method
tendstobemoreaccuratethanRFandexistingmethodsonmanyrealdatasets. Last,inSection6we
demonstratehowaremethodiscomputationallyexpedientandscalable.
//neurodata.io/sporf/inbothRandPython. OurRpackageisavailableontheComprehensiveRArchive
2 Background&RelatedWork
2.1 RandomForests Theoriginalrandomforest( )procedurepopularizedbyLeoBreimanisone
of the most commonly employed classification learning algorithms [5]. proceeds by building T
decision trees via a series of recursive binary splits of the training data. The nodes in a tree are
split into two daughter nodes by maximizing some notion of information gain, which typically reflects
the reduction in class impurity of the resulting partitions. A common measure of information gain in
decision trees is the decrease in Gini impurity, I(S), for a set of observations S. The Gini impurity for
classificationisdefinedasI(S) = (cid:80)K f (1−f ),wheref = 1 (cid:80) I[y = c ].
k=1 k k k |S| i∈S i k
More concretely, let θ = (j,τ), where j is an index selecting a dimension and τ is a splitting
threshold. Furthermore,letSL = {i : x (j) ≤ τ,∀i ∈ S}andSR = {i : x (j) > τ,∀i ∈ S}bethesubsets
of S to the left and right of the splitting threshold, respectively. Here, x denotes the value of the jth
featurefortheithobservation. Letn ,n ,andn denotethenumberofpointsintheparent,left,and
rightchildnodes,repsectively. Asplitismadeona"best"θ∗ = (j∗,τ∗)viathefollowingoptimization:
This optimization is carried out by exhaustively searching for the best split threshold τ∗ over a random
subset of the features. Specifically, a random subset of the p features is sampled. For each feature
in this subset, the observations are sorted from least to greatest, and the split objective function is
evaluatedateachmidwaypointbetweenadjacentpairsofobservations.
Nodesarerecursivelysplituntilastoppingcriteriaisreached. Commonly,therecursionstopswhen
eitheramaximumtreedepthisreached,aminimumnumberofobservationsinanodeisreached,ora
nodeiscompletelypurewithrespecttoclasslabel. Theresultofthetreeinductionalgorithmisasetof
splitnodesandleafnodes. TheleafnodesaredisjointpartitionsofthefeaturespaceX,andeachone
is associated with a local prediction function. Let l be the mth leaf node of an arbitrary classification
tree,andletS(l ) = {i : x ∈ l ∀i ∈ [n]}bethesubsetofthetrainingdatacontainedinl . Thelocal
leafpredictionis:
h(l ) = argmax I[y = c ]
Atreemakesapredictionforanewobservationxbypassingtheobservationdownthetreeaccording
tothesplitfunctionsassociatedwitheachsplitnodeuntilaterminalleafnodeisreached. Lettingm(x)
be the index of the leaf node that x falls into, the tree prediction is h(l ). Let y(t) be the prediction
madebythetth tree. Thenthepredictionofthe RF isthepluralityvoteofthepredictionsmadebyeach
tree:
y = argmax I[y(t) = c ]
(cid:98) (cid:98) k
Breiman [5] proved that the misclassification rate of a tree ensemble is bounded above by a function
inversely proportional to the strength and diversity of its trees. decorrelates (diversifies) the trees
via two mechanisms: (1) constructing each tree on a random bootstrap sample of the original training
data, and (2) restricting the optimization of the splitting dimension j over a random subset of the to-
tal p dimensions. The combination of these two randomizing effects typically leads to generalization
performancethatismuchbetterthanthatofanyindividualtree[5].
2.2 ObliqueExtensionstoRandomForest Varioustacticshavebeenemployedtofurtherpromote
thestrengthanddiversityoftrees. Onefeatureof thatlimitsbothstrengthanddiversityisthatsplits
mustbealongthecoordinateaxesofthefeaturespace. Therefore,onemainfocusforimproving is
tosomehowrelaxthisrestriction. Theresultingforestsaresometimesreferredtoas“oblique”decision
forests, since the splits can be along directions oblique to the coordinate axes. This type of tree was
originally developed for computer graphics applications, and is also known as binary space partition-
ing (BSP) trees. Statistical consistency of BSP trees has been proven for a simplified data-agnostic
BSP tree procedure [9]. Various approaches have been proposed for constructing oblique forests.
Breiman[5]proposedtheForest-RC( )algorithm,whichconstructsdunivariateprojections,each
projection a linear combination of L randomly chosen dimensions. The weights of each projection are
independently sampled uniformly over the interval [−1,1]. Strangely, Breiman’s never garnered
thepopularitythat hasacquired;bothBreiman[5]andTomitaetal.[10]indicatethat tendsto
empirically outperform on a wide variety of datasets. Heath et al. [11] sample a randomly oriented
hyperplane at each split node, then iteratively perturb the orientation of the hyperplane to achieve a
good split. Rodriguez et al. [12] attempted to find discriminative split directions via PCA. Menze et al.
[13] perform supervised learning of linear discriminative models at each node. Blaser and Fryzlewicz
[6]proposedtheRandomRotationRandomForest( )method,whichuniformlyrandomlyrotates
the data prior to inducing each tree. Trees are then learned via the typical axis-aligned procedure on
the rotated data. Rainforth and Wood [7]’s Canonical Correlation Forests ( ) employ canonical cor-
relationanalysisateachsplitnodeinordertodirectlycomputesplitdirectionsthatmaximallycorrelate
with the class labels. Lee et al. [14]’s Random Projection Forests (RPFs) generates a discriminative
image filter bank for head-pose estimation at each split node and compresses the responses using
random projections. The key thing to note is that all of these aforementioned oblique methods utilize
someflavorofrandomprojections,whichwebrieflyintroducenext.
2.3 Random Projections Given a data matrix X ∈ Rn×p, one can construct a random projection
matrixA ∈ Rp×d andmultiplyitbyXtoobtain:
X(cid:101) = XA ∈ Rn×d, d (cid:28) min(n,p).
Iftherandommatrixentriesa arei.i.d. withzeromeanandconstantvariance,thenthemuchsmaller
matrixX(cid:101) preservesallpairwisedistancesofXwithsmalldistortionandhighprobability1.
1Inclassification,preservationofpairwiseinterpointdistancesisnotimportant. Rather,minimizingwithin-classdistances
whilemaximizingbetween-classdistancesiswhatisimportant.However,weintroducethetopicbecauseofitsrelevanceand
useinmanydecisiontreealgorithms,asisdiscussedinSection3.1.
Due to theoretical guarantees, random projections are commonly employed as a dimensionality
reduction tool in machine learning applications [15–19]. Different probability distributions over the en-
tries lead to different average errors and error tail bounds. Li et al. [8] demonstrates that very sparse
randomprojections,inwhichalargefractionofentriesinAarezero,canmaintainhighaccuracyand
significantly speed up the matrix multiplication by a factor of p or more. Specifically, a very sparse
random projection matrix is constructed by sampling entries a with the following probability distribu-
tion:
+1 withprob. 1
a ij = 0 withprob. 1− 1 s , typicallys (cid:29) 3
−1 withprob. 1
Dasgupta and Freund [20] proposed Random Projection Trees, in which they sampled dense ran-
dom projections in an unsupervised fashion to approximate low dimensional manifolds, and later for
vector quantization [21] and nearest neighbor search [22]. Our work is inspired by this work, but in a
supervisedsetting.
2.4 Gradient Boosted Trees Gradient boosted trees (GBTs) are another tree ensemble method
commonly used for regression and classification tasks. Unlike in , GBTs are learned in an itera-
tivestage-wisemannerbydirectlyminimizingacostfunctionviagradientdescent[23,24]. Despitethe
obviousdifferencesinthelearningproceduresbetweenGBTand ,theytendtoperformcomparably.
AstudybyWyneretal.[25]arguesthat andGBTarebothsuccessfulforthesamereason—namely
bothareweightedensemblesofinterpolatingclassifiersthatlearnlocaldecisionrules.
GBTs have recently seen a marked surge in popularity, and were used as components in many
recent Kaggle competitions. This is in part due to their tendency to be accurate over a wide range of
settings. Theirpopularityandsuccesscanalsobeattributedtotherecentreleaseof [4]and
[26], both extremely fast and scalable open-source software implementations. Due to the
success of GBTs in many data science applications, we compare the implementation to our
methods.
3.1 SparseProjectionObliqueRandomerForests Extensionsof areoftenfocusedonchanging
theprocedureforfindingsuitablesplits,suchasemployingasupervisedlinearprocedureorsearching
over a set of randomly oriented hyperplanes. Such extensions, along with , simply differ from each
other by defining different random projection distributions from which candidate split directions are
sampled. Thus,theyaredifferentspecialcasesofageneralrandomprojectionforest.
Specifically, let X ∈ Rn×p be the observed feature matrix of n samples at a split node, each p-
dimensional. Randomly sample a matrix A ∈ Rp×d from distribution f , possibly in a data-dependent
or supervised fashion. This matrix is used to randomly project the feature matrix, yielding X(cid:101) = XA ∈
Rn×d, where d is the dimensionality of the projected space. The search for the best split is then
performed over the dimensions in the projected space. As an example, in , A is a random matrix in
which each of the d columns has only one nonzero entry, and every column is required to be unique.
Searchingforthebestsplitovereachdimensioninthisprojectedsubspaceamountstosearchingover
arandomsubsetoftheoriginalfeatures.
While the best specification of a distribution over random projections (if one exists) is dataset-
dependent, it is unreasonable and/or undesirable to try more than a handful of different cases. There-
fore, for general purpose classification we advocate for a default projection distribution based on the
followingdesiderata:
• RandomSearchforSplits. Theuseofguided(supervised)linearsearchproceduresforcomputing
split directions, such as linear discriminant analysis (LDA), canonical correlation analysis (CCA), or
logistic regression (LR), can result in failure to learn good split directions on certain classification
problems (for example, the XOR problem). On the other hand, searching over a random set of
split directions can identify good splits in many of such cases. Furthermore, supervised procedures
run the risk of being overly greedy and reduce tree diversity, causing the model to overfit noise
(we demonstrate this in high-dimensional settings in Section 5.3). This is akin to why in it is
typically better to evaluate a random subset of features to split on, rather than exhaustively evaluate
allfeatures. Lastly,supervisedproceduresbecomecostlyifperformedateverysplitnode.
• Flexible Sparsity. s search for splits over fully sparse, or axis-aligned, projections. Thus, it
may perform poorly when no single feature is informative. On the other hand, methods that search
for splits within a fully dense randomly projected space, such as s, perform poorly in high-
dimensional settings for which the signal is contained in a small subset of the features. This is
because the large space renders the probability of sampling discriminative random projections very
small(wereferthereadertopages49-50ofVershynin[27]forrelevanttheoryofrandomprojections).
However,inducinganappropriateamountofsparsityintherandomprojectionsincreasestheproba-
bilityofsamplingdiscriminativeprojectionsinsuchcases. Tomitaetal.[10]demonstratedthat ,
whichallowscontroloverthesparsityofrandomprojections,empiricallyperformedmuchbetterthan
• EaseofTuning. stendtoworkfairlywellout-of-the-box,duetotheirrelativeinsensitivitytohyper-
parametersettings[28]. Unfortunately,existingobliqueforestsintroduceadditionalhyperparameters
towhichtheyaresensitiveto.
• Data Insight. Often times the goal is not simply to produce accurate predictions, but to gain insight
into a process or phenomenon being studied. While models can have complicated decision
rules, Gini importance [29] has been proposed as a computationally efficient way to assess the
relative contribution (importance) of each feature to the learned model. As is explained in Section
4.5,existingobliqueforestsdonotlendthemselveswelltocomputationofGiniimportance.
• Expediency and Scalability. Existing oblique forest algorithms typically involve expensive compu-
tationstoidentifyandselectsplits,renderingthemlessspaceandtimeefficientthan ,and/orlack
parallelizedimplementations.
Withtheseconsiderationsinmind,weproposeanewdecisiontreeensemblemethodcalledSparse
Projection Oblique Randomer Forests ( ). Our proposed method searches for splits over sparse
randomprojections[8]. Ratherthansamplingdnon-zeroelementsofAandenforcingthateachcolumn
gets a single non-zero number (without replacement), as does, we relax these constraints and
sample(cid:100)λpd(cid:101)non-zeronumbersfrom{−1,+1}withequalprobabilities,whereλ ∈ (0,1]isthedensity
(fraction of nonzeros) of A and (cid:100)·(cid:101) is the ceiling function rounding up to the nearest integer.2 These
nonzeros are then distributed uniformly at random in A. See Algorithms 1 and 2 for details on how to
growa decisiontree.
addressestheallofthedesideratalistedabove. Theuseofsparserandomprojectionswith
control over the sparsity via λ addresses the first two. Additionally, λ is the only new hyperparameter
to tune relative to . Breiman’s has an analogous hyperparameter L, which fixes the number
of variables in every linear combination. However, we show later that is less sensitive to the
choice in λ than is to the choice in L. By keeping the random projections sparse with only two
discreteweightingsof±1,Giniimportanceofprojectionscanbecomputedinastraightforwardfashion.
Last, sparse random projections are cheap to compute, which allows us to maintain computational
expediencyandscalabilitysimilartothatof .
3.2 Training and Hyperparameter Tuning Unless otherwise stated, model training and tuning for
XGBoost CCF
all algorithms except for and is performed in the following way. Each algorithm uses
500 trees, which was empirically determined to be sufficient for convergence of out-of-bag error in for
all methods. The split objective is to maximize the reduction in Gini impurity. In all methods, classi-
fication trees are fully grown unpruned (i.e. nodes are split until pure). While fully grown trees often
causeasingletreetooverfit,averagingovermanyuncorrelatedtreestendstoalleviateoverfitting. Are-
2Whileλcanrangefromzerotoone,weonlytryvaluesfrom1/pupto5/pinourexperiments.
centstudysuggeststhat isrelativelyinsensitivetoitshyperparameterscomparedtoothermachine
learning algorithms. Furthermore, tuning tree depth is shown to be much less critical than tuning the
number of variables sampled at each split node [28]. Two hyperparameters are tuned via minimization
of out-of-bag error. The first parameter tuned is d, the number of candidate split directions evaluated
at each split node. Each algorithm is trained for d = p1/4, p1/2, p3/4, and p. Additionally, Sporf and
F-RC are trained for d = p2. For RF , d is restricted to be no greater than p by definition. The second
hyperparameter tuned is λ, the average sparsity of univariate projections sampled at each split node.
Sporf F-RC RF
The values optimized over for and are {1/p,...,5/p}. Note, for λ is fixed to 1/p by
definition,sincetheunivariateprojectionsareconstrainedtobealongoneofthecoordinateaxesofthe
data.
For ,thenumberoftreesis500,treesarefullygrown,andthesplitobjectiveistomaximizethe
reduction in class entropy (this is the default objective found to perform best by the authors). The only
hyperparametertunedisthenumberoffeaturessubsampledpriortoperformingCCA.Weoptimizethis
hyperparameterovertheset{p1/4,p1/2,p3/4,p}. CCF usesadifferentobservationsubsamplingproce-
dure called projection boostrapping instead of the standard bootstrap procedure. Briefly, in projection
bootstrapping, all trees are trained on the full set of training observations. Bootstrapping is instead
performed at the node level when computing the canonical correlation projections at each node. Once
the projections are computed, the projection and corresponding split threshold that maximizes the re-
duction in Gini impurity is found using all of the node observations (i.e. not just the bootstrapped node
observations). Since there are no out-of-bag samples for each tree, we base the selection of the best
valueonminimizationofafive-foldcross-validationerrorrateinstead.
Hyperparameters in are tuned via grid search using the R caret package (see Appendix
Afordetails).
4 Simulated Data Empirical Performance In this section we demonstrate, using synthetic classifi-
Sporf Sporf
cation problems, that addresses the statistical issues listed above. In a sense, bridges
thegapbetween andexistingobliquemethods.
4.1 and Other Oblique Forests are “More Consistent” Than Typically, a proposed
oblique forest method is motivated through purely empirical examples. Moreover, the geometric in-
tuition behind the proposed method is rarely clearly provided. Here we take a step towards a more
theoreticalperspectiveontheadvantageofobliquesplitsintreeensembles.
Although we do not yet have a proof of the consistency of or other oblique forests, we do
propose that they are ”more” consistent than Breiman’s original . Biau et al. [30] proposed a binary
classification problem for which Breiman’s is inconsistent. The joint distribution of (X,Y) is as
follows: X ∈ R2 has a uniform distribution on [0,1]×[0,1]∪[1,2]×[1,2]∪[2,3]×[2,3]. The class
label Y is a deterministic function of X, that is f(X) ∈ {0,1}. The [0,1] × [0,1] square is divided
intocountablyinfiniteverticalstripes,and[2,3]×[2,3]squareissimilarlydividedintocountablyinfinite
horizontalstripes. Inbothsquares,thestripeswithf(X) = 0andf(X) = 1alternate. The[1,2]×[1,2]
squareisa2×2checkerboard. Figure1(A)showsaschematicillustration(becausewecannotshow
countably infinite rows or columns). On this problem, Biau et al. [30] show that cannot achieve an
error lower than 1/6. This is because will always choose to split either in the lower left square or
top right square and never in the center square. On the other hand, Figure 1(B) shows that ,
, and approach perfect classification. This is due to the fact that, although it is also greedy
(i.e. optimizes locally rather than globally), it will choose with some probability oblique splits of the
middlesquaretoenablelowererror. Therefore, andotherobliquemethodsareempiricallymore
consistentonatleastsomesettingsonwhich isneitherempiricallyortheoreticallyconsistent.
To our knowledge, this is the first result comparing the statistical consistency of to an oblique
forest method. More generally, this result suggests that relaxing the constraint of axis-alignment of
splitsmayallowobliqueforeststobeconsistentacrossonawidersetofclassificationproblems. Italso
highlightswhy,fromatheoreticalstandpoint,obliqueforestsareadvantageous.
0.1 1 5 10
n (in thousands)
Figure1: Classificationperformanceontheconsistency(p = 2)problemasafunctionofthenumberoftraining
samples. The consistency problem is designed such that has a theoretical lower bound of error of 1/6. (A)
Thejointdistributionof(X,Y). X isuniformlydistributedinthethreeunitsquares. Thelowerleftandupperright
squares have countably infinite stripes (a finite number of stripes are shown), and the center square is a 2×2
checkerboard. The white areas represent f(X) = 0 and gray areas represent f(X) = 1. (B) Error rate as a
functionofn. Thedashedlinerepresentsthelowerboundoferrorfor RF ,whichis1/6. Sporf andotheroblique
methodsachieveanerrorratedramaticallylowerthanthelowerboundfor .
4.2 Simulated datasets In the sections that follow, we perform a variety of experiments on three
carefully constructed simulated classification problems, refered to as Sparse Parity, Orthant, and
Trunk. These constructions were chosen to highlight various properties of different algorithms and
gaininsightintotheirbehavior.
Sparse Parity is a multivariate generalization of the noisy XOR problem. It is a p-dimensional
two-class problem in which the class label Y is 0 if the number of dimensions having positive values
amongst the first p∗ < p dimensions is even and Y = 1 otherwise. Thus, only the first p∗ dimensions
carryinformationabouttheclasslabel,andnosubsetsofdimensionscontainsanyinformation. Specif-
ically, let X = (X ,...,X ) be a p-dimensional feature vector, where each X ,...,X ∼ U(−1,1).
Furthermore,letQ = (cid:80)p∗ I(X > 0),wherep∗ < pandI(X > 0)istheindicatorthatthejth feature
hasavaluegreaterthanzero. Asample’sclasslabelY isequaltotheparityofQ. Thatis,Y = odd(Q),
where odd returns 1 if its argument is odd, and 0 otherwise. The Bayes optimal decision boundary for
this problem is a union of hyperplanes aligned along the first p∗ dimensions. For the experiments pre-
sentedinthefollowingsections,p∗ = 3andp = 20. Figure2(A,B)showcross-sectionsofthefirsttwo
dimensions taken at two different locations along the third dimension. This setting is designed to be
relativelyeasyfor ,butrelativelydifficultfor .
Orthant is a multi-class problem in which the class label is determined by the orthant in which a
datapointresides. AnorthantinRp isageneralizationofaquadrantinR2. Inotherwords,eachorthant
is a subset of Rp defined by constraining each of the p coordinates to be positive or negative. For
instance,inR2,therearefoursuchsubsets: X = (X ,X )caneitherbein1)R+×R+,2)R−×R+,
3)R−×R−,or4)R+×R−. Notethatthenumberoforthantsinpdimensionsis2p. Akeycharacteristic
of this problem is that the individual dimensions are strongly and equally informative. Specifically for
ourexperiments,wesampleeachX ,...,X ∼ U(−1,1). Associateauniqueintegerindexfrom1to
2p with each orthant, and let O(X) be the index of the orthant in which X resides. The class label is
Y = O(X). Thus,thereare2p classes. TheBayesoptimaldecisionboundaryinthissettingisaunion
of hyperplanes aligned along each of the p dimensions. We set p = 6 in the following experiments.
Figure 2 (D,E) show cross-sections of the first two dimensions taken at two different locations along
the third dimension. This setting is designed to be relatively easy for because all optimal splits are
axis-aligned.
Trunk is a balanced, two-class problem in which each class is distributed as a p-dimensional mul-
tivariate Gaussian with identity covariance matrices [31]. Every dimension is informative, but each
subsequent dimension is less informative than the last. The class 1 mean is µ 1 = (1, √1 2 , √1 3 ,..., √ 1 p ),
and µ = −µ . The Bayes optimal decision boundary is the hyperplane (µ −µ )TX = 0. We set
p = 10inthefollowingexperiments.
4.3 CombinestheBestofExistingAxis-AlignedandAxis-ObliqueMethods Wecompare
RF Sporf F-RC CCF
errorratesof , , ,and onthesparseparityandorthantproblems. Trainingandtuning
areperformedasdescribedinSection3.2. Errorratesareestimatedbytakingarandomsampleofsize
n,trainingtheclassifiers,andcomputingthefractionmisclassifiedinatestsetof10,000samples. This
is repeated ten times for each value of n. The reported error rate is the mean over the ten repeated
experiments.
performsaswellasorbetterthantheotheralgorithmsonboththesparseparity(Figure2C)
andorthantproblems(Figure2F). performsrelativelypoorlyonthesparseparityproblem. Although
the optimal decision boundary is a union of axis-aligned hyperplanes, each dimension is completely
uninformativeonitsown. Sinceaxis-alignedpartitionsarechosenoneatatimeinagreedyfashion,the
trees in struggle to learn the correct partitioning. On the other hand, oblique splits are informative,
Sporf F-RC F-RC
which substantially improves the generalizability of and . While performs well on
the sparse parity problem, it performs much worse than and on the orthant problem. On
the orthant problem, in which is is designed to do exceptionally well, performs just as well.
performs poorly on both problems, which may be because CCA is not optimal for the particular
data distributions. For instance, in the sparse parity problem, the projection found by CCA at the first
node is approximately the difference in class-conditional means, which is zero. Furthermore, only
evaluates d = min(l,C − 1) projections at each split node, where l is the number of dimensions
subsampledandC isthenumberofclasses. Ontheotherhand, evaluatesdrandomprojections,
anddcouldbeaslargeas3p (eachofthepelementscanbeeither0or±1. Overall, Sporf istheonly
methodofthefourthatperformsrelativelywellonallofthesimulateddatasettings.
4.4 is Robust to Hyperparameter Selection One key difference between the random pro-
Sporf F-RC F-RC
jection distribution of and is that requires that a hyperparameter be specified to fix
the sparsity of the sampled univariate projections (i.e., individual linear combinations). Breiman de-
noted this hyperparameter as L. on the other hand, requires that sparsity be specified on the
entire random matrix A, and hence, only an average sparsity on the univariate projections (details are
in Section 3.1). In other words, induces a probability distribution with positive variance on the
sparsityofunivariateprojections,whereasin thatdistributionisapointmass. IftheBayesoptimal
decision boundary is locally sparse, mis-specification of the hyperparameter controlling the sparsity of
F-RC Sporf
Amaybemoredetrimentalto than . Therefore,weexaminethesensitivityofclassification
Sporf F-RC
performanceof and tothesparsityhyperparameterλonthesimulateddatasetsdescribed
Sporf F-RC
previously. For , λ is defined as in Section 3.1. For , we note that λ = L/p (i.e. density of
a univariate projection is the number of features to combine, divided by the total number of features).
For each of λ ∈ {2,..., 5}, the best performance for each algorithm is selected with respect to the
hyperparameterbasedonminimumout-of-bagerror. Errorrateonthetestsetiscomputedforeachof
the four hyperparameter values for the two algorithms. Figure 3 shows the dependence of error rates
Sporf F-RC
of and on λ for the Sparse Parity (n = 5,000) and Orthant (n = 400) settings. The n =
F-RC Sporf
5,000settingforSparseParitywaschosenbecauseboth and performwellabovechance
(see Figure 2C). The n = 400 setting for Orthant was chosen for the same reason and also because
it displays the largest difference in classification performance in Figure 2F. In both settings, is
morerobusttothechoiceofsparsitylevelthan .
4.5 Learns Important Features For many data science applications, understanding which
features are important is just as critical as finding an algorithm with excellent predictive performance.
One of the reasons is so popular is that it can learn good predictive models that simultaneously
lend themselves to extracting suitable feature importance measures. One such measure is the mean
decreaseofGiniimportance(hereaftercalledGiniimportance)[9]. Thismeasureofimportanceispop-
l l l l l l ll ll l l l ll l l l l l l ll l l l l l l l l l l l ll l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l ll l l ll l l l l l l l l ll l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l ll l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l ll l l l l ll l l l l ll l l l ll l l l l l l l l l l lll l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l
esrapS 1 0 −1
X ˛ - 1, 0 (B)
− 0 1 1 l l l l l l l l l l l l l l ll l l l l l l l l l l l l ll l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l ll l ll l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l ll l l l l l l l l ll l l l l ll l l l ll l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l ll l l l ll l l l l ll l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l ll l l l l l l l l l l l ll l l l l l l l l l l ll l l l l l l l l l
l l l l l l l l l l ll l l l l l ll l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l ll l l l l l l l l l l l l ll ll l l l l l l l l l l l l l ll l l l l l l ll l l l l l l ll l l l l l l l l l ll l l ll l l l l l l l ll l l l l l l ll l l l l l l l l l ll l l l l l ll l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l ll l l l l l ll l l l l l l ll l l l l l l l l l tnahtrO 1 0 −1
X ˛ - 1, 0 (E)
− 0 1 1 ll l ll l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l ll l l l ll l l l l ll l l l l l l l l l ll l l l l l l l l l l ll l l l l l ll l l l ll l l l ll l l l ll l l l l l l l l l l l l l l ll ll l ll l l ll l l l ll l l ll l l l l l ll l l l l l ll l l ll ll l l l l ll l ll l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l ll l l l l ll l l l l l l l l l ll l ll l
0.40 0.20 0.00
n (in thousands)
etaR rorrE
0.15 0.10 0.05 0.00
n (in thousands)
etaR rorrE
Figure 2: Classification performance on the sparse parity (p = 20) and orthant (p = 6) problems for various
numbersoftrainingsamples. Inbothcase,wesampleX ,...,X i ∼ id U(−1,1). F-RC hasbeenknowntoperform
much better than on the sparse parity problem [10]. The orthant problem is designed for to perform well
becausetheoptimalsplitsareaxis-aligned. (A)Across-sectionofthefirsttwodimensionsofsparseparitywhen
X ∈ (−1,0). Only the first three dimensions are informative w.r.t. class label. (B) The same as (A), except
that the cross-section is taken over X ∈ (0,1). (C) Error rate plotted against the number of training samples
forsparseparity. Errorrateistheaverageovertenrepeatedexperiments. Errorbarsindicatethestandarderror
ofthemean. (D)-(F)Sameas(A)-(C)exceptfortheorthantproblem. istheonlymethodofthefourthat
performswellacrossallsimulateddatasettings.
2/p 3/p 4/p 5/p
1 − Sparsity
Sparse Parity (B)
2/p 3/p 4/p 5/p
1 − Sparsity
F−RC SPORF
Figure 3: Dependence of error rate on the hyperparameter λ, which controls the average density (1 - sparsity)
of projections for two different simulation settings. (A) Error rate as a function of λ on sparse parity (n = 5000,
p = 20). (B) The same as (A) except on orthant (n = 400, p = 6). In both cases, Sporf is less sensitive to
differentvaluesofλthanis F-RC .
ularbecauseofitscomputationalefficiency: itcanbecomputedduringtrainingwithminimaladditional
computation. For a particular feature, it is defined as the sum of the reduction in Gini impurity over all
splitsofalltreesmadeonthatfeature. Withthismeasure,featuresthattendtoyieldsplitswithrelatively
pure nodes will have large importance scores. When using , features with low marginal information
about the class label, but high pairwise or other higher-order joint distributional information, will likely
receive relatively low importance scores. Since splits in are linear combinations of the original
features, such features have a better chance of being identified. For , we compute Gini impor-
tanceforeachuniqueunivariateprojection(i.e. singlelinearcombination). Ofnote,twoprojectionsthat
differonlybyasign,projectintothesamesubspace. However,intheexperimentthatfollowswedonot
checkwhetheranytwoprojectionsusedinthegrownforestdifferonlybyasign.
Another measure of feature importance which we do not consider here is the permutation impor-
tance. Permutation importance of a particular feature is computed by shuffling the values along that
feature and subsequently assessing how much the error rate increases using the shuffled feature to
predict (relative to intact). This measure is considerably slower to compute than is Gini importance in
high-dimensional settings because predictions are made for each permuted feature. Furthermore, it is
uncleartoushowtoappropriatelycomputepermutationimportanceforlinearcombinationsoffeatures.
Sporf F-RC RR-RF CCF
Anotheradvantageof isthatmethodssuchas , and donotlendthemselves
to computation of Gini importance. The reason for this is that a particular univariate projection must
be sampled and chosen many times over many trees in order to compute a stable estimate of its
Gini importance. Since the aforementioned algorithms randomly sample continuous coefficients, it is
extremelyimprobablethatthesameexactunivariateprojectionswillbesampledmorethanonceacross
trees. On the other hand, the projections sampled in are sparse and only contain coefficients
of ±1, making it much more likely to sample any given univariate projection repeatedly. Furthermore,
and splitondenseunivariateprojections,whichtendtobeuninterpretable.
Gini importance was computed for each feature for both and on the Trunk problem with
n = 1,000. Figure 4 depicts the features that define each of the top ten split node projections for
(A) and (B). Projections are sorted from highest to lowest Gini importance. The top ten
projectionsin arealllinearcombinationsofdimensions,whereasin theprojectionscanonly
bealongsingledimensions. Thelinearcombinationsin tendtoincludethefirstfewdimensions,
which contain most of the “true” signal. The best possible projection that could sample is the
vector of all ones. However, since λ = 1/2 for this experiment, the probability of sampling such a
denseprojectionisalmostnegligible. Figure4(C)showsthenormalizedGiniimportanceofthetopten
projections for each algorithm. The top ten most important features according to are all more
important(intermsofGini)thananyofthe features,excepttheveryfirstone. Figure4(D)showsthe
Bayes error rate of the top ten projections for each algorithm. Again, the top ten features according to
Sporf RF Sporf
are more informative than any of those according to . In other words, learns features
thataremoreimportantthananyoftheobservedfeatures,andthosefeaturesareinterpretable,asthey
aresparselinearcombinationsoftheobservedfeatures. Theabilityof tolearnnewidentifiable
featuresdistinguishesitfrom ,whichcannotlearnnewfeatures.
5 RealDataEmpiricalPerformance
5.1 Exhibits Best Overall Classification Performance on a Large Suite of Benchmark
Sporf RF XGBoost RR-RF CCF
Datasets compares favorably to , , , and on a suite of 105 benchmark
datasets from the UCI machine learning repository (Figure 5). This benchmark suite is a subset of
the same problem sets previously used to conclude that outperformed >100 other algorithms [1]
(16 were excluded for various reasons such as lack of availability; see Appendix B for preprocessing
details).
RF Sporf XGBoost RR-RF
Figure 5(A) shows pairwise comparisons of with (red), (yellow), (pur-
ple), and (green) on the UCI datasets. Specifically, let κ(·) denote Cohen’s kappa (fractional
decrease in error rate over the chance error rate) for a particular classification algorithm. Here, error
rates are estimated for each algorithm for each dataset via five-fold cross-validation. Error rates for
each data set are reported in Appendix F. Let ∆(A) = κ(RF)−κ(A) be the difference between κ for
somealgorithmA—either Sporf , XGBoost , RR-RF ,or CCF —withκ(RF). Eachbeeswarmplotin5(A)
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 910
Projection
Top 10 Projections
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 910
Projection
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 910
Projection
Top 10 Projections
coefficient −1 0 +1
ecnatropmI
0.1 l l l l l l l
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 910
Projection
classifier l SPORF l RF
Figure 4: The ten projections with the highest Gini importance found by and on the Trunk problem
with p = 10,n = 1000. (A) Visual representation of the top 10 projections identified by Sporf . The x-axis
indicates the projection. The y-axis indicates the index of the ten canonical dimensions. The colors in the heat
map indicate the linear coefficients of each canonical dimension that define each of the projections. (B) The
same as (A), except for . (C) Comparison of the Gini importances of the 10 best projections found by each
algorithm. (D) Comparison of the Bayes error rate of the 10 best projections found by each algorithm. The
top10projectionsusedin allhavesubstantiallylowerBayeserrorthanthoseusedin ,indicatingthat
learnsinterpretableinformativefeatures.
represents the distribution of ∆(A), denoted "Effect Size," over data sets. Comparisons are shown for
the 65 numeric datasets (top), the 40 datasets having at least one categorical feature (middle), and
all 105 datasets (bottom). A positive value on the x-axis indicates that performed better than the
algorithm it is being compared to on a particular dataset, while a negative value indicates it performed
worse. Valuesonthey-axisgreaterthan10%weresquashedto10%andvalueslessthan-10%were
squashed to -10% in order to improve visualization. Mean values are indicated by a black "x." As in-
dicated by the downward skewing distribution, tends to outperform over all datasets, due in
particular to its relative performance on the numeric datasets. and also tend to perform
RF Sporf RF
similar to or better than on the numeric datasets, but unlike they perform worse than on
thecategoricaldatasets;theobliquemethodsarelikelysensitivetotheone-hotencodingofcategorical
features. κvaluesforindividualdatasetsandalgorithmscanbefoundinTable1.
Additionally,weexaminedhowfrequentlyeachalgorithmrankedintermsofκacrossthedatasets.
A rank of one indicates first place (best) on a particular dataset and a rank of five indicates last place
(worst). Histograms (in fraction of data sets) of the relative ranks are shown in Figure 5(B). Overall,
Sporf XGBoost
tends to outperform the other algorithms. This is despite the fact that is tuned signif-
icantly more than in these comparisons (see Section 3.2 for details). Surprisingly, we find that
, one of the most recent methods to be proposed, has a strong tendency to perform the worst.
One-sidedWilcoxonsigned-ranktestswereperformedtodeterminewhether performedsignifi-
cantly better than each of the other algorithms. Specifically, the null hypothesis was that the median κ
valueof isgreaterthanthatofeachalgorithmbeingcomparedto. P-valuesareshownforeach
algorithm compared with to the right of each histogram in Figure 5(B). Over all data sets, we
foundthatp-valueswere< 0.005foreveryalgorithmcomparedwith .
5.2 IdentifyingDefaultHyperparameterSettings Whilethehyperparametersλanddof were
tuned in this comparison, default hyperparameters can be of great value to researchers who use
out of the box. This is especially true for those not familiar with the details of a particular
algorithmorthosehavinglimitedtimeandcomputationalbudget. Therefore,wesoughtsuitabledefault
valuesforλanddbasedonclassificationperformanceontheUCIdatasets. Foreachdataset,foreach
foldthehyperparametersettingsarerankedbasedonCohen’skappacomputedontheheldoutset. A
rankofnindicatesnth place(i.e. firstplaceindicateslargestkappa). Tiesintherankingprocedureare
handled by assigning all ties the same averaged rank. For example, consider the set of real numbers
{a ,a ,a } such that a > a = a . Then a would be assigned a rank of three and a and a would
1 2 3 1 2 3 1 2 3
bothbeassignedarankof(1+2)/2 = 1.5. Therankofeachhyperparameterpairwasaveragedover
the five folds. Finally, for each hyperparameter pair, the median rank is computed over the datasets.
ThemedianrankforeachhyperparametersettingisdepictedinFigure6. Theresultsheresuggestthat
d = p2 and λ = 4/p is the best default setting for Sporf with respect to classification performance.
However, we choose the setting d = p and λ = 3/p as the default values in our implementation be-
causeitrequiressubstantiallylesstrainingtimeformoderatetolargepattheexpenseofonlyaslightly
greatertendencytoperformworseontheUCIdatasets.
5.3 isRobusttoHigh-DimensionalNoise Next,weinvestigatedtheeffectofaddingavary-
ing number of noise dimensions to the UCI benchmark datasets. For each of the 105 UCI datasets
used in the previous experiment, D standard Gaussian dimensions were appended to the input
matrix, for D ∈ {10,100,1000}. Algorithm comparisons were then performed in the same way as
before.
Sporf RF XGBoost CCF
Figure 7 shows the overall classification performance of , , , and for each
value of D . Each of the points plotted represents the mean Cohen’s kappa (± SEM) over all
datasets. ForallvaluesofD , tiesforbestclassificationperformance. Notably, performs
aboutaswellas whenthereislittleornoadditionalnoise,butdegradessubstantiallywhenmany
noise dimensions are added. This suggests that using supervised linear procedures to compute splits
may lead to poor out-of-sample performance, likely because the learned features have overfit to the
noisedimensions. degradesevenmorerapidlythandoes withincreasingnumbersofnoise
dimensions. This can be explained by the fact that features derived from random rotations, which are
dense linear projections, have very low probability of being informative in the presence of many noise
dimensions.
6 ComputationalEfficiencyandScalabilityof Computationalefficiencyandscalabilityare
oftenasimportantasaccuracyinthechoiceofmachinelearningalgorithms,especiallyforbigdata. In
thissectionwedemonstratethat ,withanappropriatechoiceofhyperparametersettings,scales
similarly to with respect to sample size and number of features. Furthermore, we show that our
open source implementation is computationally competitive with leading implementations of decision
treeensemblealgorithms.
6.1 Theoretical Time Complexity The time complexity of an algorithm characterizes how the theo-
retical processing time for a given input relies on both the hyper-parameters of the algorithm and the
characteristics of the input. Let T be the number of trees, n the number of training samples, p the
number of features in the training data, and d the number of features sampled at each split node. The
5 RF better
−5 RF worse
SPORF XGBoost RR−RF CCF
Alg Compared to RF
SPORF XGBoost RR−RF CCF
Alg Compared to RF
lacirogetaC
SPORF XGBoost RR−RF CCF
Alg Compared to RF
RF p = 4.2e−11
XGBoost p = 3.4e−07
RR−RF p = 6.0e−15
CCF p = 2.5e−01
RF p = 4.6e−02
XGBoost p = 6.3e−02
RR−RF p = 4.3e−15
CCF p = 8.3e−04
RF p = 3.6e−10
XGBoost p = 9.2e−07
RR−RF p = 4.7e−29
CCF p = 1.7e−03
0.2 0.4 0.6
RF Sporf XGBoost RR-RF CCF
Figure 5: Pairwise comparisons of with , , , and on the numeric datasets (top),
categoricaldatasets(middle),andalldatasets(numericandcategoricalcombined;bottom)fromtheUCIMachine
Learning Repository (105 datasets total). (A) Beeswarm plots showing the distributions of classification perfor-
mancerelativeto forvariousdecisionforestalgorithms. Classificationperformanceismeasuredbyeffectsize,
which is defined as κ(RF)−κ(A), where κ is Cohen’s kappa and A is one of the algorithms compared to RF .
Eachpointcorrespondstoaparticulardataset. Meaneffectsizesareindicatedbyablack”x.” Anegativevalue
on the y-axis indicates performed worse than a particular algorithm. (B) Histograms of the relative ranks of
thedifferentalgorithms,wherearankof1indicatesbestrelativeclassificationperformanceand5indicatesworst.
RF XGBoost RR-RF
Colorindicatesfrequency,asfractionofdatasets. P-valuescorrespondtotestingthat , , ,and
CCF Sporf Sporf
performedworsethan ,usingone-sidedWilcoxonsigned-ranktests. Overall, tendstoperform
betterthantheotheralgorithms.
average case time complexity of constructing an RF is O(Tdnlog2n) [32]. The dnlogn accounts for
the sorting of d features at each node. The additional logn accounts for both the reduction in node
sizeatlowerlevelsofthetreeandtheaveragenumberofnodesproduced. ’snearlinearcomplexity
5 15 14.2 12.5 12.2 12
4 14.5 12.9 13 12.6 11.2
3 15 13.2 12.5 11.9 12.4
2 14.4 14 12.4 12.2 12.2
1 15.2 13.7 12.8 12.1 12.7
p1 4 p1 2 p3 4 p1 p2
No. of Projections Sampled
noitcejorP
Median Rank of Hyperparameter Pairs
Figure6: Medianrankof Sporf ’s(d,λ)hyperparameterpairsontheUCIclassificationdatasets(lowerisbetter).
Although (p2,4/p) is the best performance-wise, we select (p,3/p) as the default because of a good balance
betweenaccuracyandtrainingtime.
showsthatagoodimplementationwillscalenicelywithlargeinputsizes,makingitasuitablealgorithm
toprocessbigdata. ’saveragecasetimecomplexityissimilarto ’s,theonlydifferencebeing
thatthereisanadditionaltermrepresentingasparsematrixmultiplicationthatisrequiredineachnode.
This makes Sporf ’s complexity O(Tdnlog2n+Tdnpλ)), where λ is the fraction of nonzeros in the
p×drandomprojectionmatrix. Wegenerallyletλbecloseto1/p,givingacomplexityofO(Tdnlog2n),
whichisthesameasfor .Ofnote,in disconstrainedtobenogreaterthanp,thedimensionalityof
thedata. ,ontheotherhand,doesnothavethisrestrictionond. Therefore,ifdisselectedtobe
greaterthanp, maytakelongertotrain. However,d > poftenresultsinimprovedclassification
performance.
6.2 Theoretical Space Complexity The space complexity of an algorithm describes how the theo-
reticalmaximummemoryusageduringruntimescaleswiththenumberofinputsandhyperparameters.
Let c be the number of classes and T, p, and n be defined as in Section 6.1. Building a single tree
requires the data matrix to be kept in memory, which is O(np). During an attempt to split a node, two
c-length arrays store the counts of each class to the left and to the right of the candidate split point.
These arrays are used to evaluate the decrease in Gini impurity or entropy. Additionally, a series of
random sparse projection vectors are sequentially assessed. Each vector has less than p nonzeros.
Therefore this term is dominated by the np term. Assuming trees are fully grown, meaning each leaf
node contains a single data point, the tree has 2n nodes in total. This term gets dominated by the np
term as well. Therefore, the space complexity to build a is O(T(np+c)). This is the same as
thatof .
6.3 TheoreticalStorageComplexity Storagecomplexityisthediskspacerequiredtostoreaforest,
given the inputs and hyperparameters. Assume that trees are fully grown. For each leaf node, only
the class label of the training data point contained within the node is stored, which is O(1). For each
0 10 100 1000
# of Noise Dimensions
Figure 7: Comparison of classification performance on the UCI benchmark datasets with a varying number of
Gaussian noise dimensions added. The x-axis represents the number of noise dimensions added. The y-axis
represents the average of Cohen’s kappa value over all datasets (±SEM). Sporf is always tied for the best
performance. and aremoresensitivetoadditionalnoisedimensions.
splitnode,thesplitdimensionindexandthresholdarestored,whicharealsobothO(1). Therefore,the
storagecomplexityofa isO(Tn).
For a , the only aspect that differs is that a (sparse) vector is stored at each split node
rather than a single split dimension index. Let z denote the average number of nonzero entries in a
vector projection stored at each split node. Storage of this vector at each split node requires O(z)
memory. Therefore,thestoragecomplexityofa isO(Tnz). z isarandomvariablewhoseprior
isgovernedbyλ,whichistypicallysetto1/p. Theposteriormeanofz isdeterminedalsobythedata;
empirically it is close to z = 1. Therefore, in practice, the storage complexity of is close to that
of .
6.4 EmpiricalComputationalEfficiencyandScalability
RF Sporf F-RC
6.5 ImplementationDetails WeuseourownRimplementationforevaluationsof , , ,
and [33]. Itwasmoredifficulttomodifyoneoftheexistingpopulartreelearningimplementations
duetotheparticularwayinwhichtheyoperateontheinputdata. Inallofthepopularaxis-alignedtree
learning implementations, each feature in the input data matrix is sorted just once prior to inducing
a tree, and the tree induction procedure operates directly on this presorted data. Since trees in a
include splitting on new features consisting of linear combinations of the original features, pre-
sorting the data is not an option. Therefore our implementation is written from scratch in mostly native
R.Thecodehasbeenextensivelyprofiledandoptimizedforspeedandmemoryperformance. Profiling
revealed the primary performance bottleneck to be the portion of code responsible for finding the best
split. In order to improve speed, this portion of code was implemented in C++ and integrated into R
using the Rcpp package [34]. Further speedup is achieved through multicore parallelization of tree
constructionandbyte-compilationviatheRcompilerpackage.
XGBoost CCF
isevaluatedusingtheRimplementationavailableonCRAN[35]. isevaluatedusing
theauthors’openlyavailableMATLABimplementation[7].
Comparison of Algorithms Using the Same Implementation Figure 8(A) shows the training
RF F-RC Sporf
times of , , and on the sparse parity problem. The reported training times correspond
to the best hyperparameter settings for each algorithm. Experiments are run using an Intel Xeon E5-
2650 v3 processors clocked at 2.30GHz with 10 physical cores, 20 threads, and 250 GB DDR4-2133
F-RC RF Sporf
RAM. The operating system is Ubuntu 16.04. is the slowest, is the fastest, and is
in between. While not shown, we note that a similar trend holds for the orthant problem. Figure 8(B)
Sporf F-RC RF
showsthatwhenthehyperparameterdof and isthesameasthatfor ,trainingtimesare
Sporf F-RC
comparable. However, training time continues to increase as d exceeds p for and , which
largely accounts for the trend seen in Figure 8(A). Figure 8(C) indicates that this additional training
time comes with the benefit of substantially improved accuracy. Restricting d to be no greater than p
for in this setting would still perform noticeably better than at no additional cost in training
time. Therefore, does not trade off accuracy for time. Rather, for a fixed computational budget,
itachievesbetteraccuracy,andifallowedtousemorecomputation,furtherimprovesaccuracy.
Sparse Parity
n (in thousands)
Algorithm RF F−RC SPORF
RF Sporf F-RC
Figure8: Comparisonoftrainingtimesof , ,and onthe20-dimensionalsparseparitysetting. (A)
Dependencyoftrainingtimeusingthebestsetofhyperparameters(y-axis)onthenumberoftrainingsamples(x-
axis)forthesparseparityproblem. (B)Dependencyoftrainingtime(y-axis)onthenumberofprojectionssampled
at each split node (x-axis) for the sparse parity problem with n = 5000. (C) Dependency of error rate (y-axis)
on the number of projections sampled at each split node (x-axis) for the sparse parity problem with n = 5000.
Sporf and F-RC cansamplemanymorethanpprojections,unlike RF .Asseeninpanels(B)and(C),increasing
d above p meaningfully improves classification performance at the expense of larger training times. However,
comparingerrorratesandtrainingtimesatd=20, Sporf canclassifysubstantiallybetterthan RF evenwithno
additionalcostintrainingtime.
Comparison of Training and Prediction Times for Different Implementations We developed
and maintain an open multi-core R implementation of , which is hosted on CRAN [33]. We
compare both speed of training and strong scaling of our implementation to those of the R Ranger
[36] and [35] packages, which are currently two of the fastest, parallelized decision tree
ensemblesoftwarepackagesavailable. Strongscalingisthetimeneededtotrainaforestwithonecore
divided by the time needed to train a forest with multiple cores. Ranger offers a fast multicore version
RF XGBoost
of that has been extensively optimized for runtime performance. offers a fast multicore
version of gradient boosted trees, and computational performance is optimized for shallow trees. Both
XGBoost Sporf
Rangerand areC++implementationswithRwrappers,whereasour implementation
is almost entirely native R. Hyperparameters are chosen for each implementation so as to make the
comparisonsfair. Forallimplementations,treesaregrowntofulldepth,100treesareconstructed,and
d = p features sampled at each node. For , λ = 1/p. Experiments are run using four Intel
Xeon E7-4860 v2 processors clocked at 2.60GHz, each processor having 12 physical cores and 24
threads. Theamountofavailablememoryis1TBDDR3-1600. TheoperatingsystemisUbuntu16.04.
Comparisonsusethreeopenlyavailablelargedatasets:
MNIST The MNIST dataset [37] has 60,000 training observations and 784 (28x28) features. For a
Sporf XGBoost
small number of cores, is faster than but slower than Ranger (Figure 9(A)).
Sporf XGBoost
However,when48coresareused, isasfastasRangerandstillfasterthan .
Sporf XGBoost
and 31 features. is as fast as ranger and faster than when using 48 cores
vations and 5,409 features. Figure 9(C) shows a similar trend as for MNIST. For this dataset,
utilizing additional resources with does not provide as much benefit due to the classi-
fication task being too easy (all algorithms achieve perfect classification accuracy)—the trees
are shallow, causing the overhead cost of multithreading to outweigh the speed increase as a
resultofparallelism.
Strong scaling is the relative increase in speed of using multiple cores over that of using a single
core. In the ideal case, the use of N cores would produce a factor N speedup. has the best
strong scaling on MNIST (Figure 9(D)) and Higgs (Figure 9(E)), while it has strong scaling in between
that of Ranger and on the p53 data set (Figure 9(F)). This is due to the simplicity of the p53
dataset,asdiscussedabove.
Prediction times can be just as, or even more important than training times in certain applications.
Forexample,electronmicroscopy-basedconnectomicscanacquiremulti-petabytedatasetsthatrequire
classification of each voxel [38]. Moreover, recent automatic hyperparameter tuning suites incorporate
runtimeintheirevaluations,whichleverageout-of-samplepredictionaccuracy[39]. Thus,accelerating
predictiontimescanimprovetheeffectivenessofhyperparametersweeps.
Figure 10 compares the prediction times of the various implementations on the same three data-
sets. Inadditiontoourstandard predictionimplementation,wealsocomparea"ForestPacking"
prediction implementation [40]. Briefly, Forest Packing is a procedure performed after a forest has
been grown that reduces prediction latency by reorganizing and compacting the forest data structure.
The number of test points used for the Higgs, MNIST, and p53 datasets is 50,000, 10,000, and 6,000,
respectively. Predictions were made sequentially without batching using a single core. is sig-
nificantly faster than Ranger on the Higgs and MNIST datasets, and only marginally slower on the
XGBoost Sporf
p53 dataset. is much faster than both and Ranger, which is due to the fact that the
algorithm constructs much shallower trees than the other methods. Most notably, the Forest
Packing procedure, which "packs" the trees learned by , makes predictions roughly ten times
XGBoost Sporf
fasterthan andover100timesfasterthanthestandard onallthreedatasets.
7 Conclusion In this work we showed that existing oblique splitting extensions to forfeit some
of the nice properties of , while achieving improved performance in certain settings. We therefore
introdced which was designed to preserve the desirable properties of both and oblique
forest methods, rendering it statistically robust, computationally efficient, scalable, and interpretable.
This work only focused on classification; we also have a preliminary implementation for regression,
which seems to perform similarly to on a suite of regression benchmark data sets. Future work will
investigatethebehaviorandperformanceof onunivariateandmultivariateregressiontasks.
Onelimitationofusingsparserandomprojectionstogeneratethecandidateobliquesplitsisthatit
will never find informative splits in cases for which the signal is contained in a dense linear combina-
tion of features or nonlinear combinations of features. In such cases, supervised computation of split
directionsmaybemoresuitable. Perhapsadecisionforestmethodthatevaluatesbothsparserandom
projections and dense supervised projections at each split node could further improve performance in
suchsettings.
Onamoretheoreticalnote,wedemonstratedthat achievesempiricalstatisticalconsistency
on a classification problem for which Biau et al. [30] proved that cannot achieve better than an
MNIST (60000x784) Higgs(250000x31) p53(31159x5409)
0 10 20 30 40 0 10 20 30 40 0 10 20 30 40
Number of Threads
Parallel Execution Time
MNIST (60000x784) Higgs(250000x31) p53(31159x5409)
0 10 20 30 40 0 10 20 30 40 0 10 20 30 40
Number of Threads
ecnamrofreP
Strong Scaling
Ideal Ranger SPORF XGBoost
Figure 9: (A-C) The per-tree training time for three large real world datasets. Training was performed using
matching parameters where possible, and default parameters otherwise. ’s performance—even though
it is written mostly in native R, as compared to the other optimized C++ codes—is comparable to the highly
XGBoost XGBoost
optimized andRangerandevenoutperforms ontwoofthedatasets. (D-F):Strongscalingis
thetimeneededtotrainaforestwithonecoredividedbythetimeneededtotrainaforestwithmultiplecores. This
isameasurementofasystem’sabilitytoefficientlyutilizeadditionalresources. isabletoscalewellover
theentirerangeoftestedcores,whereas hassharpdropsinscalabilityduringwhichitisunabletouse
additionalthreadsduetocharacteristicsofthegivendatasets. Thep53dataset,despitehavingalargenumberof
dimensions,iseasilyclassifiable,whichleadstoshorttrees. Thep53strongscalingplotshowsthatwhentrees
areshort,theoverheadofmultithreadingprevents fromefficientlyusingtheadditionalresources.
error rate of 1/6, even though the Bayes optimal error rate is zero in this setting. This raises a ques-
tion as to whether it is possible to construct a problem in which is consistent and is not.
Or could it be the case that is always consistent when is? The consistency theorems in
Biau et al. [41] for in the case of additive regression models should be extendable to with
some minor modifications—their proofs rely on clever adaptations of classical consistency results for
data-independent partitioning classifiers, which are agnostic to whether the splits are axis-aligned or
not. Another factor that dictates the lower bound of error rate, as Breiman [5] proved, is the relative
balance between the strength and correlation of trees. Our investigation of strength and correlation on
the Sparse Parity, Orthant, and Trunk simulations is offered in Appendix C. The results suggest that
canoutperformotheralgorithmsbecauseofstrongertreesand/orlesscorrelatedtrees. There-
fore, perhapsoffersmoreflexiblecontroloverthebalancebetweentreestrengthandcorrelation,
1e+03 llllllllll
llll llllll
lll l llllll lllll lllll llllll llll
llll llll ll 1e+01
1e+00 l l lllll l l l ll l l lllll llllllllll
Higgs MNIST p53
noitciderP
SPORF−Pack
Figure 10: Comparison of test set prediction times. Forest Packing results show a 10x speed up in real time
predictionscenarios. Testsetsizes: Higgs,50,000observations;MNIST,10,000observations;p53,6,000obser-
vations. Predictionsweremadesequentiallywithoutbatching.
therebyallowingittoadaptbettertodifferentproblems.
Our implementation of is as computationally efficient and scalable or more so than existing
treeensembleimplementations. Additionally,ourimplementationcanrealizemanypreviouslyproposed
tree ensemble methods by allowing the user to define how random projections are generated. Open
andaC++versionwithbothRandPythonbindingsthatweareactivelydeveloping.
Acknowledgments This work is graciously supported by the Defense Advanced Research Projects
Agency(DARPA)SIMPLEXprogramthroughSPAWARcontractN66001-15-C-4041,DARPAGRAPHS
N66001-14-1-4028, and DARPA Lifelong Learning Machines program through contract FA8650-18-2-
7834.