Spin-Orbit Physics Giving Rise to Novel Phases in Correlated Systems;
Iridates and Related Materials
Je rey G. Rau
Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Waterloo, Ontario, N2L 3G1, Canada
Eric Kin-Ho Lee
Department of Physics and Center for Quantum Materials,
University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, M5S 1A7, Canada
Hae-Young Kee∗
Department of Physics and Center for Quantum Materials,
University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, M5S 1A7, Canada and
Canadian Institute for Advanced Research/Quantum
Materials Program, Toronto, Ontario, MSG 1Z8, Canada
(Dated: July24,2015)
Recently, the e ects of spin-orbit coupling (SOC) in correlated materials have become
one of the most actively studied subjects in condensed matter physics, as correlations and
SOCtogethercanleadtothediscoveryofnewphases. Amongcandidatematerials,iridium
oxides (iridates) have been an excellent playground to uncover such novel phenomena. In
this review, we discuss recent progress in iridates and related materials, focusing on the
basic concepts, relevant microscopic Hamiltonians, and unusual properties of iridates in
perovskite-andhoneycomb-basedstructures. PerspectivesonSOCandcorrelationphysics
beyondiridatesarealsodiscussed.
Keywords: Superconductivity, Magnetism, Topological, Spin liquid, Perovskite iridates, Honeycomb iri-
dates,Transitionmetal
]le-rts.tam-dnoc[
1v32360.7051:viXra
I. Introduction 2
II. Background 3
III. Magnetism,topologicalphasesandsuperconductivityinperovskiteiridates 5
A. Magnetism 6
B. Cornersharedoctahedrawithstrongspin-orbitcoupling 7
C. Distortionsandoctahedralrotations 8
D. Topologicalphases 10
E. Superconductivity 12
IV. Spinliquidsandunconventionalmagneticordersinhoneycombiridates 15
A. Spin-orbitMottinsulatorswithedge-sharedoctahedra 15
B. Distortions 16
C. Kitaevphysicsintwodimensions 17
1. Experimentalreview 18
2. Theory 19
3. α-RuCl 21
D. Kitaevphysicsinthreedimensions 22
1. Experimentalreview 23
2. Theory 23
V. Outlook 25
Acknowledgments 28
References 28
I. INTRODUCTION
Spin-orbitcoupling(SOC)isarelativistice ectthatlinkstheorbitalandspinangularmomenta
ofanelectron. Thoughsuppressedbythefinestructureconstant,theelectricfieldsnearthenuclei
of atoms with a large number of protons can render this interaction significant. The natural place
to find significant SOC is thus in atoms with high atomic numbers, moving down the rows of the
periodictableintotheheavierelements.
The e ects of SOC in materials with such heavy atoms have been studied intensively in the
context of semi-conductors. In these weakly correlated materials, SOC entangles the crystal mo-
mentum and spin of the electron, locking the kinetic and internal degrees of freedom together.
This leads to a number of intriguing phenomena, particularly in transport; examples include the
anomalous Hall e ect (AHE) and the control of spin currents being applied in the field of spin-
tronics. More recently it has been found that SOC plays an essential role in the fast growing field
of topological insulators (TI) and metals. Many, if not all, of the experimental examples of such
topologicalphaseshavebeenfoundinthesetypesofheavysemi-conductors.
While the e ects of SOC in weakly correlated materials described above has been thoroughly
considered, its importance in more strongly correlated transition metal materials remains less de-
veloped. There are several energy scales to consider in such materials: the atomic interactions
(schematically) on-site Hubbard interaction U, Hund’s coupling J , the SOC λ, the crystal field
and the electron kinetic energy described by hopping integral t. Much theoretical and experi-
mental e ort has been brought to bear on 3d transition metals such as high temperature cuprates,
manganites, and vanadium oxides. In these compounds the atomic interactions, crystal field and
kinetic terms can generally compete, though the SOC remains small. In heavy transition metals
such as those with 5d and even 4d electrons SOC is significant as well, and so all of these energy
scales can be comparable. As one moves through the di erent heavy transition metal materials,
smallchangesinthesedetailscantipthescales,revealingasurprisinglyrichfamilyofbehaviours.
This can be contrasted with 4f or 5f electrons in the lanthanides or actinides, where the electron
interactionsaredominant,followedbytheSOCandthenthecrystalfields.
While intensive studies have recently been undertaken, we are still far from complete under-
standing on the combined e ects of SOC and electronic correlation. Material examples of 4d and
5d systems can be found for a variety of two- and three-dimensional lattices with varying degrees
offrustration,coveringtherangefromweaklytostronglycorrelated. Anexcellentoverviewofthis
physicsisprovidedinarecentreview1,withafocusonexamplesfromthepyrochloreiridatesand
the 5d double-perovskite magnets. Inthis review wewill focus onmagnetism, topological phases
andsuperconductivityinducedbythecompetitionbetweenstrongSOCandelectroniccorrelation.
We illustrate these concepts with examples drawn from the perovskite and honeycomb iridium
oxides. After a basic introduction to the relevant models in Sec. II, we begin with perovskite
iridatesinSec. III.Drawinganalogiestotherelatedcupratesandruthenates,wediscussproposals
for realizing topological and superconducting phases in the materials. In Sec. IV we tackle the
burgeoning field of Kitaev magnetism. In particular, we o er a summary of the current status of
two-andthree-dimensionalhoneycombiridates. Concludingremarksandoutlookareprovidedin
Sec. V.
II. BACKGROUND
Thebuildingblocksofourdiscussionaretheatomicstatesofthepartiallyfilled4d-or5d ions.
Insolidsofinterest,thesestatesaresplitbyapredominantlyoctahedralcrystalfieldpotentialinto
a t triplet and e doublet, as shown in Fig. 1. The energy gap to the e doublet is large, so
thesestatescanbesafelyignoredwhenweconsiderelectronfillinglessthansix. Weareprimarily
interested in the d5 configuration, which can be regarded as single hole in one of the t states.
When projected into this manifold, the angular momentum of the the d electrons is mapped to a
set of e ff ective l = 1 angular momentum operators, −L. The large SOC then acts within the t
manifold as −λL · S where L is an e ff ective l = 1 angular momentum and S is the spin. Using
the rules of addition of angular momenta we see that SOC splits the t multiplet into an e ective
j = 1/2 doublet and e ff ective j = 3/2 quartet as show in Fig. 1. The j = 3/2 states are lower in
energy and separated from the j = 1/2 states by a gap of 3λ/2. Written in terms of the t states
(cid:12) (cid:43) (cid:114)
(cid:12)1 1 1
(cid:12)2 2 3
(cid:12) (cid:43) (cid:114)
(cid:12)3 3 1
(cid:12)2 2 2
(cid:12) (cid:43) (cid:114)
(cid:12)3 1 1
(cid:12)2 2 6
where |yz,±(cid:105),|xz,±(cid:105),|xy,±(cid:105) are the t states and spin up and down correspond to ±. The im-
portant role played by SOC can be seen in the entanglement of the spin and orbital degrees of
freedom in these wave-functions, as illustrated in Fig. 1. The states of this j = 1/2 doublet and
its pseudo-spin operators J will be a common thread in our discussion of the family of iridium
oxides and ruthenium materials. While strongly spin-orbit entangled, it remains isotropic, with a
g-factor of −2. Explicitly, the magnetic moment operator µ = µ (L+ 2S) becomes −2µ J when
projected into the j = 1/2 states. The anisotropy of these systems thus manifests predominantly
inthecouplingof j = 1/2moments2,notinthesingle-ionproperties.
The interactions of j = 1/2 electrons are determined by the atomic interactions of the free ion
projectedintothet manifoldandthekineticterms,orhoppingsofthet electrons. Schematically
wecanwritethegeneralmulti-orbitalmodel
(cid:34)(cid:32) (cid:33) (cid:35)
(cid:88)(cid:88)(cid:88) (cid:16) (cid:17) (cid:88) U −3J J
t αβ d † d + h.c + H (N −5)2 −2J S2 − HL2 −λL ·S , (2)
ij iασ jβσ 2 i H i 2 i i i
where N is the total number operator, S is the total spin operator and L is the total pseudo-
angular momentum operator at site r. The d † operator creates a t electron in orbital α = yz,xz
or xy with spin σ =↑,↓ at site r and t αβ are the tight-binding hopping parameters. The hopping
amplitudes t will have contributions coming from direct d-d overlap, as well as from processes
through the intermediate oxygen atoms. As these kinetic terms are strongly material dependent
in both structure and scale, we save discussion of their details for the sections devoted to each
specificclassofmaterial.
Thelocalatomicinteractionsaremoregenericandcanbeexpressedintermsoftwoparameters3:
the Coulomb repulsion U and the Hund’s coupling J . We have added a chemical potential to
favourtheN = 5staterelevantforIr4+ andRu3+ andhavefixedtheinter-orbitalrepulsionU(cid:48) tothe
freeionvalueU−2J . TypicallyoneexpectsU ∼ 2eV4, J ∼ 0.2eVand3λ/2 ∼ 0.4−0.5eV5for
ion. On the other hand for a
ion, U and J are stronger while atomic SOC is weaker
Crystal Field j =
2g Spin-Orbit 3λ/2
FIG.1: (a)Octahedralgeometryoftransitionmetalsiteillustratedforaniridiumoxide. (b)
Splittingofthe4d or5d levelsbyoctahedralcrystalfields ∆ andbySOCλinto j = 1/2and
j = 3/2levels. (c)Illustrationoftheatomic j = 1/2wave-functions. Thecompositionofthe
j = 1/2stateswiththespin-↑chargedensityisshowninredandthespin-↓chargedensityinblue.
case. Due to screening e
ects in a solid, these parameters will be renormalized, and
thefreeionrelationU(cid:48) = U−2J canbeviolated. Typically,oneexpectstheCoulombintegralU
tobemorestronglyscreenedthantheHund’scoupling J 3,4.
Thereareseverallimitingregimeswherethephysicsofthismodelisparticularlyclear. InSec.
IIIwewillconsiderthelimitwheretheinteractionsbetweenthe j = 1/2and j = 3/2electronscan
be neglected. This yields an e ff ective single-band Hubbard model for the j = 1/2 electrons. With
su ciently weak correlations, this approximation can be useful as a starting point for itinerant
single band j = 1/2 systems. In the strongly correlated regime, the j = 1/2 electrons localize
and one is left with a pseudo-spin model. By projecting into only the j = 1/2 states one loses
the j = 3/2 excited states and the e ff ects of Hund’s coupling. As we will see in Sec. IV, for the
honeycombiridates,thisleadingtermmaycancel,sothecontributionofthevirtualprocessesthat
gothrough j = 3/2statesbecomethelargestinteractions.
III. MAGNETISM,TOPOLOGICALPHASESANDSUPERCONDUCTIVITYIN
PEROVSKITEIRIDATES
Historically, the field began with the study of Sr IrO and Sr RuO as isostructural analogues
of La CuO , the parent compound of the cuprate superconductors. While Sr IrO was first syn-
thesized in 195711, early work focused mainly on chemical aspects, with variety of ternary and
quaternary oxides of iridium and ruthenium reported in the following decades.12 More serious
interest in Sr IrO was piqued when superconductivity was discovered in Sr RuO 13, but an insu-
2 4 3 2 7 3
FIG.2: CrystalstructuresoftheperovskiteiridatesfromtheRuddlesden-Popperseries
Sr n+1 Ir n O 3n+1 . Theseincludethequasi-twodimensional(a)single-layerSr 2 IrO 4 6,7. and(b)
bilayerSr Ir O 8 andthethreedimensionallimit(c)orthorhombicSrIrO 9,10.
lating state with small ferromagnetic moment was found instead6,14. Interest was renewed by the
discovery that the interplay between SOC and electronic correlations were driving the physics in
thismaterial5,15.
In this section, our primary focus will be on magnetism in Sr IrO and Sr Ir O and the pos-
sible realization of novel topological phases and superconductivity. We start with a review of the
experimentalandtheoreticalprogressinunderstandingperovskiteiridatessuchastheRuddlesden-
PopperseriesofSr n+1 Ir n O 3n+1 throughadiscussionofthecommonbuildingblockofcorner-shared
octahedra in both the itinerant and localized limits. Next, we discuss some candidate topological
phases built from iridium oxide heterostructures. Finally, we discuss the e ects of charge doping,
withaneyetowardthepossibilityofsuperconductivityinSr IrO .
A. Magnetism
In the single and bilayer perovskites Sr IrO and Sr Ir O 16 evidence from the optical gap17
to the magnetic ordering transition14,18–20 have indicated that both are Mott insulators, though
Sr Ir O being substantially weaker than Sr IrO . The modest on-site Hubbard interaction U
proves su ffi cient to localize the electrons due to the narrow, spin-orbit coupled j = 1/2 bands. In
Sr IrO the magnetic ordering is an in-plane, canted antiferromagnet15,21 following the staggered
rotation of the oxygen octahedra, as illustrated in Fig. 3a. Though the net ferromagnetic moment
of this state was observed in early studies6,7,14, the crucial role played by strong SOC was only
understood fairly recently22. The moment directions in Sr Ir O are very di ff erent, forming a
collineararrangementperpendiculartotheiridiumplanes20 asshowninFig. 3c.
Thebulktrilayerandhighercompounds(n ≥ 3)areunstableunderambientpressure23,includ-
ing the three-dimensional limit SrIrO which takes a post-perovskite structure9. An orthorhombic
perovskite SrIrO can be stabilized via the application of pressure; this is a semi-metal and shows
no evidence of magnetic ordering10,17. One can then posit17 a metal-insulator transition (MIT)
existsasafunctionoflayercountnearn ∼ 3,placingSr IrO (n = 1)andSr Ir O (n = 2)onthe
c 2 4 3 2 7
insulatingsideandorthorhombicSrIrO (n = ∞)onthemetallicside. Duetotheproximitytothis
putativeMITtherehasbeensomedebateontheapplicabilityofthestronglycoupledMottpicture
as compared to a more weakly coupled Slater picture24–26. Since the weak and strong-coupling
regimes give the same magnetic orderings ,26 this distinction may be somewhat academic at low
temperature. Near the transition the Mott and Slater regimes could be distinguishable through the
behaviourofthechargegap.
KeyquestionstoaddressinthesecompoundsconcernboththemagneticorderingandtheMIT.
Inparticular,wewishtounderstandwhatsetsthedirectionoftheorderedmomentsinSr IrO ,and
Sr Ir O . Beyondthiswewouldliketoestablishaframeworkunderstandingboththeitinerantand
localizedlimitsofthisfamilyofcompounds. Thiswillprovideusefulguidanceforourdiscussion
ofengineeredphasesconstructedfromthesamebasicbuildingblockinSec. IIID.
B. Cornersharedoctahedrawithstrongspin-orbitcoupling
The perovskite iridates are built from corner-shared octahedra as shown for Sr IrO , Sr Ir O
and orthorhombic SrIrO in Fig. 2. The observed MIT17 as a function of layer count makes
it necessary to discuss both the weak and strong correlation limits. Here, we present a brief
accountofthe j = 1/2spinmodelsatstrongcoupling,aswellasthetight-bindingmodelsatweak
coupling that is applicable to all networks of corner-shared octahedra. While the real materials
havestructuraldistortions,webeginwiththeidealized,undistortedlimit.
One simple approach to attacking the model in Eq. (2) is to assume the j = 1/2 and j = 3/2
bands to be well separated, neglecting the inter-band interactions. This projects the multi-orbital
problem of Eq. (2) into a single-band model of j = 1/2 electrons with an e ff ective hopping and
Hubbardinteraction
(cid:88)(cid:88) (cid:16) (cid:17) (cid:88)
t ij c † iα c jα + c † jα c iα + U eff n i+n i− , (3)
wherec † i± createsa j z = ±1/2electronatsiter i andU eff ∼ (U + 2U(cid:48))/3. Inversionandtime-reversal
symmetryforbidpseudo-spindependenthoppings. Thistypeofitinerantmodelisausefulstarting
point to describe the more three-dimensional compounds, such as those based on SrIrO . Due to
the increased dimensionality, the bandwidth of the j = 1/2 states is larger than the quasi-two-
dimensionalcompoundsandbecomescomparabletothee ectiveCoulombU eff.
The magnetic ordering in these models is most easily approached from the strong Mott limit
where U eff (cid:29) t. Assuming the nearest-neighbour hoppings are dominant, this yields an antiferro-
magneticHeisenbergmodelwithane ff ectiveSU(2)pseudo-spinrotationsymmetry22
4t2 (cid:88)
J ·J , (4)
(cid:104)ij(cid:105)
where J is the j = 1/2 pseudo-spin at site r and t is the nearest-neighbour j = 1/2 hopping.
Going back to Eq. (2) and including the j = 3/2 excited states or the Hund’s coupling spoils
this accidental symmetry and generates all symmetry allowed terms. For an ideal corner-shared,
180◦ bondtheseincludeafour-foldrotationaboutthebonddirection,andseveralreflections. The
symmetry allowed terms include a Heisenberg exchange J and a compass-like, pseudo-dipolar
coupling K22
(cid:88)(cid:104) (cid:105)
i j ij i ij j
(cid:104)ij(cid:105)
wherer ≡ r −r isthebonddirection. Inconcretemodels22 onefindsK/J ∝ J /U,soweexpect
theHeisenbergtermtodominant,withonlyasmallpseudo-dipolarcoupling K (cid:28) J.
The structure of this simple model provides a partial answer to the experimental questions
introduced in Sec. IIIA. Namely, the approximate SU(2) symmetry renders the final pinning
of the magnetic moments sensitive to SU(2) breaking perturbations, such as the pseudo-dipolar
coupling K. Due to this sensitivity, to understand the fate of these moments we must understand
thecompletesetofstructuraldistortionspresentintheperovskiteiridates.
C. Distortionsandoctahedralrotations
Tworelevanttypesofdistortionsintheperovskiteiridatesaretetragonaldistortionandoctahe-
dral rotations. The former arises in the layered compounds such as Sr IrO and Sr Ir O , while
octahedral rotations are present in the entire Ruddlesden-Popper series. Due to the layered struc-
ture,theoctahedrainSr IrO andSr Ir O areelongatedalongtheinter-layerdirection,[001]6–8,27.
Suchlocaldistortionscanbeencapsulatedinaresidualcrystalfieldpotentialthatsplitthe j = 3/2
levels into two Kramers doublets which remain well separated from the higher-lying doublet for
small distortion2. This highest lying doublet plays the role the j = 1/2 does in the ideal case and
defines our pseudo-spin. In their simplest form, these distortions manifest as a compression or
elongationalongsomedirectionnˆ oftheoctahedron,modeledas
where L is the orbital angular momentum projected into the t levels and ∆ > 0 corresponds to
compression and ∆ < 0 to elongation. For tetragonal distortion nˆ is along one of the cubic axes,
(a) IrO layerinSr IrO (b)Sr IrO (c)Sr Ir O
2 2 4 2 4 3 2 7
FIG.3: Illustrationofoctahedralrotationsandmagneticcantedantiferromagneticorderin
Sr IrO 15,21. (a)TheoctahedralrotationsandmomentdirectionsinasingleIrO planeofSr IrO .
(b-c)Illustrationofthestackingofplanesandtheorderingin(b)Sr IrO 15,21 and(c)Sr Ir O 20.
xˆ, yˆ or zˆ. Including the SOC, the atomic energy levels can be straightforwardly found, with the
highestlyingdoubletbeingamixtureofthe j = 1/2and j = 3/2statesas2
(cid:12) (cid:43) (cid:12) (cid:43)
(cid:12)1 1 (cid:12)3 1
|±(cid:105) = cosθ (cid:12) (cid:12) ,± ±sinθ (cid:12) (cid:12) ,± , (7)
(cid:12)2 2 (cid:12)2 2
where the mixing angle is tan(2θ) = 4 2 ∆/(2 ∆ + 9λ). Including these distortions removes the
e ff ective four-fold rotation symmetry, allowing an additional Ising-like anisotropy ∼ Γ JzJz on
eachbondintheplaneperpendiculartothedistortion22.
In addition, octahedral rotations are present and break some of the rotational and translational
symmetry of the ideal lattice, enlarging the unit cell. In Sr IrO and Sr Ir O the octahedra are
rotated about the [001] axis in a staggered fashion6–8, characterized by a deviation of the bond
angle of ∼ 11◦ ≡ θ from the ideal 180◦, as illustrated in Fig. 3a. We leave the more involved
octahedral tilting of orthorhombic SrIrO to the literature9,10. Such rotations lower the bond sym-
metry, breaking the inversion symmetry about the bond center and allow pseudo-spin dependent
hoppings and Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya (DM) exchange22,28. Schematically, a tight-binding model
forthe j = 1/2electronsinasingleIrO planethatincludessuche ff ectsis
(cid:88)(cid:16)
+ h.c.
jα(cid:48)
+ h.c.
(cid:104)ij(cid:105) α αα(cid:48)
where (−1)i = ±1 is a staggered sign, as illustrated in Fig. 3a and one expects t ∼ cos2θ and
t ∼ sin2θ . The pseudo-spin dependent term t can be removed by rotating the pseudo-spin at
each site by an angle (−1)iφ about the zˆ axis, where tan2φ = t /t28. In these rotated axes the
e ff ective spin model is once again purely Heisenberg22, with J ∼ 4(t2 + t
2)/U eff, without the DM
orsymmetricanisotropicexchangesthatwereexpectedintermsoftheoriginalpseudo-spins.
This is an accident of the strict j = 1/2 limit22; the symmetric anisotropies, such as Γ intro-
duced by tetragonal distortion, the pseudo-dipolar K or the inter-layer anisotropies in the bilayer
case will not be removed. These break the pseudo-SU(2) symmetry and thus set a preferred di-
rection or set of directions in pseudo-spin space. An appropriate choice of these terms22 can
pin the moment in a direction that is staggered following the octahedral rotations as is found in
Sr IrO . The case of Sr Ir O is less clear, though the moment orientation being very di erent is
not surprising in light of the above discussion. However, it is likely this compound lies far from
pseudo-SU(2) invariant limit given the very large gap seen in the spin-wave spectrum29. While
consensus has not yet been reached, several proposals have put forth mechanisms to explain this
collinearorderbyincludinglargeanisotropiccouplings29,30.
D. Topologicalphases
WhileintheabovesectionswestartedfromtheMottinsulatinglimit,inmovingtoorthorhom-
bic SrIrO we will start from the itinerant limit. As bulk SrIrO is a semi-metal with large SOC,
variants of this compound may be a good place to look for topological insulators or metals. A
band insulator is deemed a topological insulator (TI), if it cannot be smoothly deformed into a
decoupled, atomic insulator in such a way that preserves time-reversal symmetry31,32. In two or
three dimensions this classification into trivial and non-trivial is complete without any further
subdivisions31,32. TIs have a numberof very interesting propertiessuch as gapless edge statesand
unusualmagneto-electricresponse31,32. Asdiscussedintheintroduction,mostexamplesofTIsare
foundinweaklycorrelatedsystems. SomeproposalshavebeenputforwardtolookforTIsintran-
sition metal oxides (TMOs): these promise to not only be more robust, but provide a playground
toexplorethee ff ectsofinteractionsonsuchtopologicalphases1,33.
Among the iridates, it was suggested that Na IrO could realize a TI with the pseudo-spin
j = 1/2bandacquiringanon-trivialZ topologicalindex34. Whilethereweresomeearlyattempts
at explaining the magnetism of Na IrO within a band-type picture35, experimentally it appears
that Na IrO is a Mott insulator. In three dimensions, the pyrochlore iridates were also put forth
as candidates to realize a strong TI1. Another promising approach is to design the materials of
interest by adopting techniques developed in studies of oxide heterostructures36. These methods
allow for a wide variety of lattice geometries with a greater control over structural distortions and
impurity content than is available in bulk samples. Heterostructures built from 4d or 5d TMOs,
withtheirlargeintrinsicSOC,arethuslikelytoo ernewandinterestingphasesforstudy.
A simple example of such physics can be illustrated via bilayers of SrIrO grown along the
[111] direction37,38. In these bilayers the Ir atoms form a buckled honeycomb lattice of corner-
shared octahedra, as shown in Fig 4a. As in the proposals to realize a TI in Na IrO , we have an
(a)SrIrO [111]bilayer (b) [(SrIrO ) ,SrTiO ]
FIG.4: (a)AnidealbilayerofSrIrO showingthehoneycomblatticeformedbytheIrions. First
nearestneighboursareshownbysolidlineswhilesecondnearest-neighbourbondsaredashed.
Thearrowindicatesthehoppingdirection,whilethecolourindicateswhetherdˆ = xˆ,yˆ orzˆ. (b)
Anidealsuperlattice[(SrIrO ) ,SrTiO ]alongthe[001]direction.
itinerant j = 1/2modeloftheform
(cid:88)(cid:88)(cid:16) (cid:17) (cid:88)(cid:88)(cid:104) (cid:16) (cid:17) (cid:105) (cid:88)
−t c † c −h.c. + t(cid:48) c † σ ·dˆ c + h.c. +(cid:15) (−1)ic † c , (9)
(cid:104)ij(cid:105) α (cid:104)(cid:104)ij(cid:105)(cid:105) αβ iα
where c † is a creation operator of j = 1/2 electron with the pseudo-spin α ≡ j = ±1/2 at
siter. Thesumsover(cid:104)..(cid:105)and(cid:104)(cid:104)..(cid:105)(cid:105)denotethenearestneighbour(NN)andnextnearestneighbour
(NNN)bonds,respectively. OntheNNNbondstheabsenceofinversionsymmetryallowspseudo-
spin dependent terms to appear parametrized by dˆ = xˆ,yˆ or zˆ as illustrated in Fig. 4a. Due to
the buckling of the honeycomb lattice, there is an atomic potential (cid:15) staggered between the two
sublattices. With t(cid:48) = (cid:15) = 0, this system is a semi-metal with Dirac cones, as in graphene, while
finitet(cid:48) or(cid:15) gapsouttheseconesgivingabandinsulator. Whentheatomicpotentialissu ffi ciently
small,thismodelsupportsaTIwithanon-trivialZ indexandtheassociatedgaplessedgemodes.
The simple example presented above only begins to scratch the surface of what is possible in
these types of engineered systems. One particular class of system that has been systematically
studied is a series of artificial superlattices [(SrIrO ) , SrTiO ] where m is integer, grown along
the [001]-axis atop a substrate SrTiO .23 These superlattices consist of atomically thin slices of
SrIrO separatedbylayersofinsulatingSrTiO . WhilebulkSrIrO formsapost-perovskitestruc-
tureunderambientconditions9,whenpreparedinthinfilms39 orsuperlattices23,theSrTiO layers
stabilize the orthorhombic perovskite structure. By tuning the number of IrO layers, an insulator
was achieved for m 1 single and m 2 bilayer superlattices, and trilayer m 3 illustrated in
Fig. 4b sits at the verge of MIT driven by the layer number m23. While these m = 1 and m = 2
superlattices are topologically trivial j = 1/2 insulators, a theoretical study on single and bilayer
SrIrO interleavedwithabandinsulatorwithorthorhombicperovskitestructure(suchasGcScO ,
CaTiO ,SrZrO orSrHfO )suggestsarichphasediagramincludingtopologicalmagneticinsula-
tors,topologicalcrystallineinsulatorsandtopologicalvalleyinsulators40.
Thestabilityofsometopologicallyprotectedstateshingesthepresenceofsymmetries. Aricher
topological classification has been recently uncovered by considering the phases protected by the
spatialsymmetriesofthecrystal. Thesetopologicalcrystallineinsulatorssharemanyofthesame
features as Z TIs, such as protected gapless surface states41. In contrast, in the prototypical Weyl
semi-metal,42 the gapless surface states remain protected even in the absence of any symmetry.
Given the finer classification that exists for insulators, one can ask if there are topological met-
als that are protected by spatial symmetries. A large class of such topological metals have since
been classified33; these go beyond the Weyl semi-metal and have surface states protected by ei-
ther global symmetries or crystal lattice symmetries, or combination of the two. Depending on
the symmetry properties and the dimension of the Fermi surface, these surface states can form
Dirac cones, flat bands or Fermi arc states.43. Among the iridates, the three dimensional per-
ovskite iridates AIrO with A an alkaline earth metal have been recently proposed as an example
of topological metals protected by spatial symmetries. These topological crystalline metals are
analogous to the topological crystalline insulators, with crystal symmetry responsible for the pro-
tectedsurfacestates.44 Whilethebulkstatesshowanodalofringofgaplessexcitations,protected
by time-reversal and spatial symmetries, the associated two-dimensional surface states are flat in
onedirection,whilelinearlydispersingintheother. Ifoneaddsexternalsymmetrybreakingterms
such as those that break time-reversal, mirror, or glide symmetry, this topological metal acts as a
seedforarichfamilyoftopologicalphases,suchasaWeylsemi-metal,strongorweaktopological
insulator,ortopologicalmagneticinsulator44.
E. Superconductivity
We now return to the original motivation for the study of the iridates and Sr IrO in particular:
possible links to the physics of high-temperature superconductivity45 and the realization of exotic
superconducting pairing symmetry46 in doped spin-orbit Mott insulators. In multi-orbital systems
itisachallengetounderstandtheroleplayedbytheorbitaldegreesoffreedominthemicroscopic
mechanism of superconductivity. The superconductor Sr RuO provides a relevant example, with
all three t orbitals important in constructing Fermi surface. Even such a 4d transition metal
SCs with intermediate SOC, multi-orbital interactions such as Hunds coupling can be important.3
pd O 2 Ir 4+ 0.05
4.7 4.8 4.9 5.0 5.1 5.2 5.3
(a) Ir-Oenergylevels
holedoping electrondoping
FM-M?
p-wave? AF-M PM-M
s-wave?
(b) Schematicphasediagram
FIG.5: (a)Anillustrationoftheenergylevelsfortheiridiumandoxygenatoms. Aholeonthe
oxygenismorecostlythanoneinthe j = 3/2states. (b)SchematicphasediagramforSr IrO as
afunctionoffillingnandHund’scoupling J ,basedonRef. [47]. Avarietyofphasesappear
suchasanantiferromagneticinsulator(AF-I)andmetal(AF-M),aparamagneticmetal(PM-M),
aferromagneticmetal(FM-M)aswellaspossiblytwodistinctsuperconducting(SC)phases.
Moving to 5d transition metals, the large SOC can no longer be ignored and the system may
display a complex combination of spin-singlet and spin-triplet SC order parameters. As the SOC
and other electronic interactions such as Hund’s coupling become comparable, the determination
of the ground states in such multi-orbital systems is highly non-trivial. In particular, we will
discuss how the physics of doping in Sr IrO is both similar to, but di erent from the case of
cuprate superconductors. We then discuss some recent theoretical work that explore possible
pairingsymmetriesandmechanismsforsuperconductorsarisingfromdopedMottinsulatorswith
strong SOC. From there, we review the on-going experimental search for superconductivity in
dopediridates,focusinginparticularonprogressindopingSr IrO .
The physics of doping electrons into these j = 1/2 Mott insulators is familiar. Given the filled
2p orbitals of the neighbouring oxygens and the filled j = 3/2 states, the least costly place to put
an extra electron is in the j = 1/2 states themselves. The penalty is the Coulomb energy U; much
smaller than filling any of the higher-lying electronic states. We caution that this is purely at the
atomic level and electronic structure e ects can alter this identification. For example for Sr IrO
ithasbeenarguedthattheelectrondopingissimilartothehole-dopedcupratesduetoanopposite
sign in the next-nearest neighbour hopping integral28. However when iridates are hole-doped, the
multi-orbital nature can become active and it may not be this simple. The key distinction is in
the energy gap to the nearest 5d states, the j = 3/2 levels. In the cuprates, tetragonal distortion
separatesthegroundstatedoubletfromthenearest3dlevelsbyagapof∼ 1−2eV48. Thisislarger
or comparable to the cost of putting the hole onto the neighbouring oxygens once hybridization
e ff ectsaretakenintoaccount. Inthecaseoftheiridiumoxidesthe j = 3/2statesareonly∼ 0.5eV
away while the oxygens are ∼ 1−2 eV. It is then favourable to put the hole not on the oxygens,
but on Ir4+ itself in the j = 3/2 states. Hund’s coupling between the j = 1/2 and j = 3/2 states
can further stabilize these holes. This is schematically summarized in Fig. 5a. A single-orbital
j = 1/2 picture, enabled by the formation of a Zhang-Rice singlet, may no longer be tenable and
onemustmovebeyondat-J typemodelandincludeaspectsofthefullmulti-orbitalproblem. This
canbeseenclearlyinhowthesesame j = 3/2excitedstatesappearinthelocalizedspinmodelfor
the half-filled d5 case, where they generate bond-dependent exchanges as discussed in Sec. IIIB
andwillbeessentialinSec. IV.
The classification of pairing terms is also modified when SOC is strong; as spin is no longer a
conserved quantity spin-singlet or spin-triplet lose their meaning. However a version of this can
be recovered if the strong SOC leads to a single FS with j = 1/2 character and the multi-orbital
problemcanbereducedtoane ectivesinglebandmodel. Ifthepseudo-spindependenttermscan
be made small, one can define e ective pseudo-spin-singlet and pseudo-spin-triplet SC pairing
symmetries. This assumption is likely valid in Sr IrO , where most of FS is of j = 1/2 character
and the nearest-neighbour pseudo-spin dependent terms can be absorbed into the definition of
the j = 1/2 states5. Given the similarity in lattice structure and Mott physics between Sr IrO
and La CuO , it was proposed that a pseudo-spin-singlet d-wave high temperature SC phase like
cuprates may emerge in electron-doped iridates.28 As discussed above, the hole-doped case may
be significantly di erent due to the competition between Hund’s coupling and SOC. With finite
Hund’s coupling one may expect an e ective interaction through the exchange of ferromagnetic
pseudo-spinfluctuations. SolongastheHund’scouplingisnotsolargeastodrivethesystemintoa
ferromagneticstate,onethenwouldexpecttogenerateapseudo-spintripletpairing. Indeed,recent
large-scale dynamical mean-field theory calculations support such a picture. In these simulations
ad-wavepseudo-spin-singletSCwasfoundontheelectron-dopedside,whileatopological p ip-
wave pseudo-spin-triplet SC was found on the hole doped side47. These may be relevant for hole-
dopedSr IrO ,orpossiblyevenSr RuO . Aschematicphasediagramasafunctionofdopingand
Hund’scouplingisshowninFig. 5b.
Experimental studies on physics of doping holes or electrons into Sr IrO have been carried
out through a variety of means; these include electron doping through depleting oxygen49, La-
substitution50,51, or surface doping52 as well as hole-doping through substitution of Rh for Ir50,53.
While SC has not been discovered, in each case modest doping suppresses the magnetic and
stronglya ectstransport. DopingthebilayerSr Ir O with5%Lainducesarobustmetallicstate,
with the resistivity showing a rapid drop below 20 K. The magnetic order remains finite despite
strongsuppressionofT 54. ThisisincontrasttothecaseofLa-dopedSr IrO ,wherethemagnetic
order is completely suppressed in the metallic state.51 In addition to the transport and magnetic
properties,angleresolvedphotoemissionspectroscopy(ARPES)providesinterestinginsightsinto
physics of the doped iridates. It was reported that Rh-doped Sr IrO exhibits a pseudo gap and
Fermiarcs53 similartothedopedcuprates. SimilarFermiarcswerealsofoundinsurfaceelectron
doped Sr IrO 52 along with the anomalous waterfall-like feature in the ARPES spectra55. Though
similarFermiarc-likefeaturesobservedinLa-dopedSr Ir O ,havebeenattributedtoFermipock-
ets masked by matrix element e ff ects56, this does not explain the temperature dependence of the
FermiarcsinRef. [52],suggestingadi erentorigin.
IV. SPINLIQUIDSANDUNCONVENTIONALMAGNETICORDERSINHONEYCOMB
Despite tremendous e orts, the search for a quantum spin liquid in a real material remains
unresolved. A significant amount of attention in this search has been directed towards geometri-
cally frustrated antiferromagnets, such as those on Kagome´ or triangular lattices. Many of these
systems are described by Heisenberg-like models, possibly extended with ring exchange terms or
with small anisotropies. While some candidates exist, the combination of theoretical and experi-
mental uncertainties has made definite confirmation of the spin liquid state di cult. A promising
approachtocircumventsomeofthesetheoreticaldi cultiesisbasedonKitaev’sexactlysolvable
honeycombmodel57. Thishighlyanisotropiccompassmodel58 isfrustratednotbythegeometryof
the lattice, but by the intertwining of spatial and spin degrees of freedom. One can generalize this
approach, defining such exactly solvable models on trivalent lattices in two or three dimensions.
The presence of the solvable point present in the model then provides a controlled starting point
tostudythestabilityofthespinliquidandpossiblenearbyunusualorderedphases. Thechallenge
isthentofindmaterialsthatimplementthesemodels.
HerewediscusspossiblerealizationsoftheseKitaev-typemodelsinMottinsulatorswithstrong
SOC. In two dimensions, there are the well-studied honeycomb iridates Na IrO and α-Li IrO ,
which host magnetically ordered phases thought to be proximate to the spin liquid phase; and the
honeycombrutheniumchlorideα-RuCl ,whichhasbeenrecentlyproposedasa4danalogue. Two
three-dimensionallatticeshavealsobeensynthesizedinpolymorphsofthehoneycombα-Li IrO .
These are the hyper-honeycomb β-Li IrO and stripy-honeycomb γ-Li IrO . First, we start with
anoverviewoftheirsharedbasicphysics: edge-sharedoctahedra.
A. Spin-orbitMottinsulatorswithedge-sharedoctahedra
Finding a system that realizes Kitaev’s honeycomb model or its analogues is di cult; no sym-
metry principle prevents the introduction of other interactions, such as Heisenberg exchange59.
The best one can hope for is the dominance of Kitaev exchanges among symmetry allowed in-
teractions. One route to achieve this was introduced in the pioneering work of Jackeli and Khal-
iullin22 based on spin-orbit entangled pseudo-spins in a 90◦ bonding geometry. This provides a
natural mechanism to generate bond-dependent Ising interactions2, the building block of the Ki-
taev model. For concreteness, we discuss this in the context of iridium oxides, but translation to
relatedcompoundssuchasα-RuCl isstraightforward.
IncontrasttotheperovskiteiridatesdiscussedinSec. III,weconsidermaterialswheretheoxy-
genoctahedraofneighbouringiridiumatomsshareanedge,ratherthanacorner. Inaddition,these
materials are farther from the itinerant limit discussed for the perovskite case, lying firmly in the
Mott regime. We assume that the dominant exchange pathways between iridium 5d orbitals pro-
ceedthroughtheoxygen2porbitalswithalargegap betweenthe5dand2pstates. Integrating
out these oxygen states yields an e ff ective inter-orbital hopping t ≡ t2 /∆ with t being the
pdπ dp dpπ
Slater-Kosterπ-overlapandbetweenthe5dand2porbitals. Thepairof5dorbitalslinkeddepends
on the edge shared; d and d orbitals mix on z-links, d and d on y-links and d and d on
yz xz yz xy xz xy
x-links,asshowninFig. 6. TounderstandtheMottinsulatingphasewewillconsiderthee ective
modelinthestrongcouplinglimitwhereU,J ,λ (cid:29) t,whichcanbeexpressedentirelyintermsof
the j = 1/2 pseudo-spins. The simplest approach is to first project the multi-orbital model of Eq.
(2)intoisolated j = 1/2bandspriortotakingthestrong-couplinglimit,aswasdoneinSec. IIIB.
One finds that the inter-orbital hoppings t vanish when projected into the j = 1/2 bands, and thus
no exchange is generated. Similarly, even in the full multi-orbital problem, no exchange arises
when Hund’s coupling is absent. These results suggest that in this case the complete multi-orbital
nature of the problem must be considered to account for the interactions between the j = 1/2
spins. To include both the j = 3/2 virtual states and the e ff ects of Hund’s coupling, one must use
a more realistic limit where U,J (cid:29) λ or U,λ (cid:29) J , obtaining an e ff ective interaction of Kitaev
whereγ indicatesthetypeofedgesharedbytheneighbouring j = 1/2spinsJ andJ .
ThisHamiltonianisonlyapplicablewhentheoxygenmediatedprocessesaredominantand
isverylarge. Ifotherhoppinginteractionssuchasdirect5d-5d overlap60 orothersuper-exchange
pathways60,61 are included, then one expects all symmetry allowed terms to be generated. For a
pairofidealedge-sharedoctahedra,thebondsymmetryallowstwoadditionalterms: aHeisenberg
interaction J andasymmetrico
-diagonalexchange
Γ62.
ectiveexchangemodelforthepair
ofspinsisthen
(cid:16) (cid:17)
1 2 1 2 1 2 1 2
whereα,βindicatethetwospindirectionsnotequaltotheedge-typeγ. Ifweassumetheexchange
physics is local to the pair of octahedra, then fixing the parameters on one edge is su cient to
determine the others related by symmetry. Details of the dependence of J, K and on the atomic
interactionsfortwoofthelimitingschemesdescribedherecanbefoundinRauetal.62.
B. Distortions
The crystal structure of the honeycomb compounds Na IrO and α-Li IrO , and the three-
dimensional analogues β-Li IrO and γ-Li IrO deviate from this idealized picture due to the
presence of trigonal and monoclinic distortions. Following the discussion in Section IIIC, for
trigonaldistortion,inEq. (6)onehasnˆ ≡ (xˆ +yˆ +zˆ)/ 3oroneofitsequivalents. Intheabsence
of SOC, this splits the t levels into an a singlet and e doublet. When SOC is present, the
highest-lying Kramers doublet connects to the j = 1/2 states and can be found explicitly in Ref.
[2]. Monoclinicdistortioncannotliftthedegeneracyanyfurther,butwillcomplicatethestructure
andanalysisofthesegroundstatewave-functions. Correctionstointeractionsbetweenthe j = 1/2
spins will be introduced through these changes in the atomic wave-functions, as well as through
thekineticpartsoftheexchangeprocesseswhichdependonthegeometryoftheoxygenions.
Ratherthanattempttoconnectthedetailsofthedistortionstotheexchangeinteractionsdirectly,
weconsiderthenewinteractionsallowedbythesereductionsofsymmetry. Inthematerialsunder
consideration, there are two or more symmetry inequivalent sets of nearest-neighbour bonds, one
with higher symmetry and the rest with lower symmetry. The higher bond symmetry groups
are 222 for β-Li IrO and γ-Li IrO and 2/m for α-Li IrO and Na IrO . For a bond with 2/m
2 3 2 3 2 3 2 3
symmetry, the allowed exchanges include those in Eq. (11) but with an additional symmetric
o -diagonalexchange
(cid:16) (cid:17)
1 2 1 2 1 2 1 2
As an example, trigonal distortion of the oxygen octahedra can introduce such a term63. For a
bondwith222symmetry,suchatermisforbidden,butduetothelackofinversionaboutthebond
centerananalogousDMinteractionisallowed
(cid:16) (cid:17)
1 2 1 2 1 2 1 2
The lower symmetry bonds of α-Li IrO , β-Li IrO , and Na IrO have only inversion about the
2 3 2 3 2 3
bond center while that of γ-Li IrO has no symmetry at all. In the compounds with an inversion,
thisimpliestheabsenceofDMinteractiononthesebonds.
Furtherneighbourexchangeinteractionscanbeanalyzedinasimilarfashion,thoughthenum-
berofallowedinteractionsgrowsquickly. Thesearethoughttobeimportant64–67inNa IrO where
the Mott gap is not too large68. Some discussion of the symmetry allowed interactions in Na IrO
for second and third nearest neighbours can be found in Yamaji et al.66 and Sizyuk et al.67.
While there has been some work on further neighbour interactions in the three-dimensional
compounds69,70,theire ff ectsandimportanceremainlargelyunaddressed.
C. Kitaevphysicsintwodimensions
Withthisframeworkinhand,wefirstturntopossiblerealizationsofKitaev’stwo-dimensional
honeycomb model. Promising candidates thought to be proximate to this physics are the honey-
comb iridates Na IrO and α-Li IrO , and more recently, α-RuCl . These materials do not have a
spinliquidgroundstate,butinsteadordermagneticallyastemperatureislowered. Tounderstandif
theproximitytoKitaevphysicsisgoverningtheirbehaviourwefirststudythesemagneticphases.
(b) UnitcellofNa IrO
(a) Honeycombplane
FIG.6: CrystalstructureofthelayeredNa IrO . (a)TheunitcellofNa IrO showingthe
quasi-twodimensionallayeredstructure. (b)ThehoneycombplaneofNa IrO showingthe
labelingofthenearestneighbourbonds,withaγ = x,y,ztypebondlabeledasαβ(γ).
1. Experimentalreview
The crystal structures of these compounds (see Fig. 6) takes the form of layers of edge-shared
IrO octahedraarrangedinahoneycomblattice71,72. Theseoctahedraarecompressedinthedirec-
tionperpendiculartothehoneycombplanes,withfurthermonoclinicdistortionsalongapreferred
axis73,74. A 340 meV optical gap68 and estimates of 3λ/2 ∼ 0.5 eV75 for SOC identify Na IrO
as a candidate for a j = 1/2 spin-orbit Mott insulator. Fits of the magnetic susceptibility confirm
the e ff ective spin-1 / 2 picture, giving a magnetic moment ∼ 1.82µ with large antiferromagnetic
Curie-Weiss temperature θ ∼ −116 K71. The low temperature antiferromagnetic ordering tran-
sitionseennearT ∼ 15Ksuggestssubstantialfrustration. NeutronscatteringandresonantX-ray
scattering studies73,74,76 have unambiguously identified this ordering as having a zigzag structure.
This zigzag order consists of spins aligned ferromagnetically along one direction, with the chains
alternating antiferromagnetically as illustrated in Fig. 7. Dynamical probes, such as inelastic
neutron scattering (INS) and resonant inelastic X-ray scattering (RIXS), have provided additional
cluesviaaccesstotheirexcitations. RIXSstudieshaveshown77 thatthereisabranchofmagnetic
excitations at high-energy near ∼ 30 meV. Though some dispersion can be identified, any infor-
mation about the excitations below ∼ 10 meV is lost due to limitations in energy resolution. INS
studies o er a complementary picture, but due to the large neutron absorption cross-section of Ir,
they have been limited to powder samples74 providing a higher energy resolution but only a few
details of the distribution in wave-vector. Nonetheless, below the Ne´el temperature, two key fea-
turescanberesolved: scatteringnearthemagnitudeofthezigzagorderingwave-vectorispresent
downtoatleast2meVandthereisanabsenceofscatteringatsmallwave-vectorsandenergy. Re-
cent di ff use magnetic X-ray scattering78 in the paramagnetic phase has provided an experimental
confirmation of dominant Kitaev interactions, validating the theoretical arguments of Sec. IVA.
These measurements show a clear locking of the spatial and spin orientations characteristic of the
bond-dependentKitaevexchange. Forα-Li IrO thesituationislessclear. Experimentally,anan-
tiferromagnetic ordering transition72 is seen at ∼ 15 K, as in Na IrO , but α-Li IrO has a smaller
Curie-Weiss temperature of θ ∼ −33 K. While there have been reports of an incommensurate
orderingwavevectorlyinginthefirstBrillouinzone79,thedetailsofthemagneticorderingpattern
andthestructureofthelowenergyexcitationsremainlargelyunresolved.
A number of studies have tried to elucidate the properties of these materials more indirectly
throughelementalsubstitution. OnepromisingapproachistodopeisoelectronicallyfromNa IrO
to α-Li IrO as (Na Li ) IrO . For x (cid:46) 0.25, uniform solid solutions can be obtained, with both
2 3 1-x x 2 3
T and|θ |suppressedwithincreaseddoping80,81. Whileaquantumcriticalpointnear x ∼ 0.75
was found in Ref. [80], indications of phase separation reported for the range 0.25 (cid:46) x (cid:46) 0.681
complicate this identification. Further study is needed for x (cid:38) 0.6 near the α-Li IrO end of this
range to clarify the issue. Another approach is dilution of
with non-magnetic
Na (Ir Ti )O or Li (Ir Ti )O . As the magnetic lattice of Ir is depleted, both systems enter a
2 1-x x 3 2 1-x x 3
spin-glass phase, consistent with the high frustration indicated by T /|θ |. In both compounds
the spin glass ordering temperature T decreases roughly linearly as a function of x until to the
site-percolation threshold at x ∼ 0.3. These two cases are distinguished by the dependence of
the Curie-Weiss temperature on dilution: the Na (Ir Ti )O shows a marked decrease as x is
increased while for the Li (Ir Ti )O it is essentially constant. This has been interpreted82 as
evidenceofmoresignificantlongrangeinteractionsinα-Li IrO comparedtoNa IrO .
ThebalanceofexperimentalevidencehassuggestedthatlargeKitaevinteractionsarenecessary
to understand the physics of Na IrO and α-Li IrO . However, the low-energy physics and the
ground state selection are dependent on the details of the perturbations that take us away from
the Kitaev limit. These questions have led to a number of theoretical proposals that have been
put forth to explain the appearance of zigzag ordering in Na IrO and the nature of the magnetic
orderinginα-Li IrO .
Early work on Na IrO 60 primarily focused on the Heisenberg-Kitaev (HK) model and its ex-
tensions. In the HK model, the Kitaev exchange is supplemented by a conventional Heisenberg
interaction
(cid:88) (cid:16) (cid:17)
JJ ·J + KS γ S γ . (14)
(cid:104)ij(cid:105)∈γ
This model has since attracted much theoretical attention, not only due to its relation to the hon-
eycomb iridates, but also as a model system to study the stability of the Kitaev spin liquid and its
neighboring phases83–87. The remainder of the phase diagram of this model can be understood al-
mostcompletelywiththehelpofafour-sublatticespinrotation—theso-calledKleinduality. This
tengamorreF
Antiferromagnet
g Spin liquid
Spin liquid
FIG.7: PhasediagramoftheHeisenberg-Kitaevmodel. Themodelisparametrizedas J = cosφ,
K = sinφ,asdiscussedinthemaintext. SquaresanddiamondsshowpointsrelatedbytheKlein
dualitytransformation. PhasesoftheHeisenberg-Kitaevmodelareshowninside,thesearethe
ferromagnet(FM),antiferromagnet(AFM),stripy(ST)andzigzag(ZZ).
duality maps the HK model to itself, but with the modified parameters J(cid:48) = −J and K(cid:48) = K + 2J.
ApplyingthisdualitytotheferromagneticandantiferromagneticHeisenberglimitsyieldstwonew
well-understood limits. These are the stripy (ST) phase at K = −2J < 0 dual to the ferromagnet
(FM)andthezigzag(ZZ)phaseat K = 2J > 0dualtotheantiferromagnet(AFM).Theseordered
phases are illustrated in Fig 7. The Kitaev spin liquid is stable to finite J and maps to itself under
the Klein duality. These five phases encompass all phases present in the model. This has been
borne out using a number of theoretical methods60,83,84; the full phase diagram parametrized as
J = cosφ, K = sinφispresentedinFig. 7.
For the presumed ferromagnetic Kitaev interaction (K < 0), the neighboring magnetic phases
are a ferromagnet and a stripy phase60. It is possible to obtain a zigzag ground state with this
model, but only when the Kitaev interaction is antiferromagnetic (K > 0) and the Heisenberg
interaction is ferromagnetic (J < 0). The need for a large antiferromagnetic Kitaev interaction
is at odds with expectations from a picture of dominant oxygen-mediated super-exchange. Some
e ff orts have been made to justify61 this parameter regime, while others64,72,74 have added addi-
tionalcouplingstotheferromagneticKitaevlimitinanattempttoresolvethediscrepancy. Recent
ab-initio calculations65,66 have supported the view that ferromagnetic Kitaev interactions are the
proper starting point. Starting from this Kitaev limit, theoretical studies have considered the ef-
fects of the symmetry allowed nearest-neighbour interactions62,63,65, such as the Γ from Eq. (11)
and Γ(cid:48) from Eq. (12), as well as further neighbour interactions66,67. While the details di ff er, in all
of the above works a zigzag phase can be stabilized near the ferromagnetic Kitaev limit by some
combinationoffurtherneighbourandanisotropicinteractions.
Even with the scarcity of experimental information, several theories have been put forth to
explain the possibility of incommensurate ordering in α-Li IrO . A common approach is to move
away from some of the limiting regimes studied for Na IrO . For example, in Ref. [84], the
HK model was extended to include second nearest-neighbour Heisenberg and Kitaev exchange
interactions. In this regime one can find an incommensurate spiral phase with wave-vector lying
in the first Brillouin zone, as has been reported in α-Li IrO . In Refs. [63] and [88], one perturbs
away from the zigzag phase stabilized by anisotropic exchanges
Γ(cid:48),
which is relevant for
Na IrO ,tofindsimilarincommensuratephases. Otherapproachesbeginfromamoremonoclinic
limit, considering quasi-one-dimensional chains70 or strengthening Kitaev interactions on one set
ofbonds89. Thelackofdetailsonthereportedincommensuratespiralphasecoupledwiththesame
largeparameterspacethatplaguesNa IrO leavesmanyquestionsopenforα-Li IrO .
The 4d compound α-RuCl has recently attracted attention as another possible system to ex-
plore Kitaev physics. As in honeycomb iridates, the Ru3+ ion has a d5 configuration but with an
octahedral cage of Cl− rather than O2−. These octahedra are then arranged in a layered, edge-
sharedhoneycombnetworkwithspacegroup P3 1290. Whilefirstidentifiedasabandinsulator91,
spectroscopic studies92,93 have since converged to a picture of α-RuCl as a Mott insulator. In-
deed,thisissupportedbymeasurementsofthemagneticsusceptibility,whichtakesaCurie-Weiss
form with an average moment ∼ 2.0 − 2.3 µ , not too far from what would be expected for a
spin-1 / 294,95. Goingtolowertemperatures,antiferromagneticorderappearsnear∼ 7K,asseenin
specific heat and magnetic susceptibility measurements96–98. Neutron scattering experiments97,99
have identified this order as being zigzag97,99 as seen in Na IrO . Further, a broad specific heat
featureseennear∼ 15K96,97 maybeanindicationofamulti-steptransitionprocess.
While strongly suggestive of the same physics seen in the honeycomb iridates, one may be
concerned with the applicability of the j = 1/2 picture itself. Given the considerably smaller
SOC in the 4d orbitals of Ru3+100, strong overlap of the j = 1/2 and j = 3/2 bands is possible
and would require a more complicated description of the Mott insulating phase. One proposed
resolution101, motivated by ab-initio calculations, invokes the enhancement of SOC by electronic
correlation e ff ects. This SOC enhancement cleanly separates the j = 1/2 states from the j = 3/2
andincreasesthetendencytowardsaMottphase. Severaltheoreticaldescriptions96,99,101havebeen
put forth to explain the appropriate low-energy physics, as well as the nature of the ordered phase
thatappearsatlowtemperature.
Some of the key di ff erences between α-RuCl and the honeycomb iridates may render it a
FIG.8: Crystalstructuresofthe(a)hyper-honeycombβ-Li IrO andthe(b)stripy-honeycomb
γ-Li IrO . Eachstructureisformedfromanetworkofapproximatelyedge-sharedIrO
octahedra,withbondsoftypeγ = x,y,zlabeledasαβ(γ).
muchbettersystemtostudyKitaevmagnetism. Indeed,geometricallythelocalenvironmentofthe
Ru ion is nearly distortion-free93,97, lacking the significant trigonal or monoclinic distortions that
havebeenreported71,72 inNa IrO andα-Li IrO . Accesstothedetailsof themagneticexcitation
spectrum,duetotheabsenceofneutronabsorbingIratoms99,shouldfurtherilluminatethephysics
of this material. Aside from pinning down the theoretical description, with more information and
fewerparametersitmaybeeasiertoperturbthesystemtowardthesought-afterKitaevspinliquid
phase99.
D. Kitaevphysicsinthreedimensions
The search for spin liquids in three dimensional materials has focused on a handful of frus-
trated lattices, for example on the pyrochlore102,103 or the hyper-kagome, realized in the iridate
Na Ir O 104,105. As in the two-dimensional cases discussed in Section IV have been put forth,
the definite confirmation of the spin liquid state remains very challenging both theoretically and
experimentally. While further work is warranted, following our discussion in two-dimensions, an
alternative route to a three-dimensional spin liquid might lie through an extension of the Kitaev’s
honeycombmodel.
TheexactsolvabilityofKitaev’s2Dhoneycombmodeldependsonthethree-foldcoordination
of each site and the appropriate assignment of Ising components among the bonds, i.e. the Ising
interactionsarealongthe x,y,orzdirectionswhilebondswiththesameIsingcomponentsdonot
share the same site. These properties can be realized on many lattices, hence Kitaev’s 2D honey-
comb model can be generalized to three-dimensions. One such example is a spin-1/2 model de-
finedona3Ddeleted-cubiclattice,whoseexactspinliquidsolutionandexcitationswerestudiedin
Ref. [106]. Fortuitously,aniridatematerialwiththeIrionsresidingonatopologically-equivalent
lattice was synthesized several years later: the hyper-honeycomb β-Li IrO .107 Almost simultane-
ously, another polymorph—the stripy-honeycomb γ-Li IrO —was discovered independently.108
Both polymorphs contain the correct trivalent lattice structure, bond geometry, and large SOC
to possibly realize a Kitaev model, thereby providing a new avenue toward the discovery of a
3D spin liquid. However, magnetic orders were experimentally observed in both β-Li IrO and
γ-Li IrO .109,110 Similar to the two-dimensional case, both theoretical and experimental work has
focusedonthemagneticphasesinordertounderstandtheroleplayedbyKitaevphysics. Addition-
ally, theoretical investigations have been undertaken to explore this new 3D spin liquid appearing
intheKitaevlimit.
1. Experimentalreview
The hyper- and stripy-honeycomb iridates are built from networks of edge-shared octahedra
muchlikethe2Dhoneycombiridates,butthesenetworksareintrinsicallythree-dimensional. Both
of these materials are insulating, with the magnetic susceptibility indicating a moment size close
to that of a spin-1 / 2 degree of freedom. As in the case of Na IrO and α-Li IrO , this is con-
sistent with a picture of localized j = 1/2 moments. An antiferromagnetic ordering transition
is seen at ∼ 38 K in both materials through a kink in the magnetic susceptibility and a peak in
the specific heat, though Curie-Weiss fits demonstrate predominant ferromagnetic exchanges in
both compounds.107,108 In the case of γ-Li IrO , these exchanges are believed to be anisotropic
as torque magnetometry measurements have revealed a temperature dependence in the anisotropy
ofthemagneticsusceptibility.108 Furtherstudiesoftheseorderingsusingmagneticresonantx-ray
scatteringhaveidentifiedthemagneticstatesinboththeβ-Li IrO andγ-Li IrO asincommensu-
rate,non-coplanar,counter-rotatingspirals,asillustratedinFig. 9. Particularlystrikingistheclose
agreement of the incommensurate propagation vectors Q ∼ [0.57,0,0] in both compounds.109,110
While closely related, these two ordering patterns have subtle di ff erences: In β-Li IrO , the mo-
ments projected along each of the three orthorhombic directions, aˆ, bˆ , and cˆ transform under the
sameirreduciblerepresentationforamagneticstructurewithwave-vector[q,0,0]. Incontrast,the
aˆ and cˆ components of the spiral phase of γ-Li IrO transform under a di ff erent irreducible repre-
sentation from that of the
component. The similarity of the orderings, ordering temperature, as
wellaslocalgeometryofthesecrystalssuggestthatacommonunderstandingmightbepossible.
These experimental discoveries have motivated a number of theoretical proposals to explain
andexplorethese3Dhoneycombmaterials.70,111–116 Severalworksattackβ-Li IrO andγ-Li IrO
directly,startingfromaferromagneticKitaevlimitandconsideringthee ectsoffurtherperturba-
tions. These include the allowed nearest-neighbour exchanges discussed in Section IVA, as well
as those between further neighbours and those induced by the monoclinic nature of the lattice.
(a) Orderinginβ-Li IrO
(b) Orderinginγ-Li IrO
FIG.9: Illustrationoftheincommensurate,non-coplanar,counter-rotatingspiralsin(a)
β-Li IrO 109 and(b)γ-Li IrO 110. Forboththesematerials,theorderingwave-vectorisalignedto
theorthorhombicaˆ directionandthreeunitcellsalongthatdirectionaredepicted. The
non-coplanarnatureisreadilyseenintheperspectiveillustrationsontheleftwhilethe
counter-rotatingnatureofthesespiralordersareevidentintheprojectedillustrationontheright.
Colorindicateswhetherthebˆ
componentofthespinispositive(red),negative(blue)orzero
(black). Duetothedi
ff erenceincrystalsymmetryofthetwolattices,thebˆ
componentofthe
momentsinγ-Li IrO transformsdi ff erentlyfromtheaˆ andcˆ components.
Usingtheseinteractions,severalrouteshavebeenidentifiedtostabilizeanincommensuratespiral
ordering near the ferromagnetic Kitaev limit70,115,116. Though capable of stabilizing the ground
state, these theories have not been tested against current experimental findings such as magneti-
zation, torque magnetometry, and thermodynamic measurements. Moreover, experiments such as
inelastic scattering that probe low-energy dynamics of these systems have yet to be conducted.
Thesecomparisonsandresultsshouldprovideamorecomprehensiveunderstandingoftheroleof
Kitaevphysicsintheunconventionalmagnetismencounteredinthese3Dhoneycombiridates.
In addition to work related to the experimental magnetic phase, theoretical work has also
focused on the spin liquids that would be relevant if the Kitaev limit is stabilized on these
lattices.106,111,112,117–119 Identical to the 2D honeycomb case, the exact solution takes the form
of free Majorana fermions in the presence of a static background Z gauge field, and both gapped
and gapless phases can be accessed by tuning the bond anisotropy away from the isotropic limit.
Unlike the 2D case, the lack of mirror symmetry implies that the background flux generated by
thegaugefieldinthegroundstatemaynotbeuniform.118 Further,duetotheadditionalconstraints
of the three-dimensional geometry, flux excitations of the Z gauge field are restricted to take
the form of loops. These loops play a key role in the finite temperature properties of the model,
driving a phase transition that separates the low temperature spin liquid and high temperature
paramagnet117. Near the isotropic limit where the phase is gapless, the spin liquid possesses un-
usualnodallines(co-dimension2)ofgaplessMajoranamodes. Thesenodallinesaretopologically
stable and, due to the bulk-boundary correspondence, induce gapless modes on the surface.118 In
thepresenceoftime-reversalsymmetrybreaking,theselinenodesbecometopologicallyprotected
WeylpointswithassociatedsurfaceFermiarcs.119
Aside from the hyper- and stripy-honeycomb lattices, a number of other hypothetical triva-
lent lattices in three-dimensions have also been considered. The family of lattices termed the
harmonic-honeycombs is a generalization of the hyper- and stripy-honeycomb lattices. These
lattices are constructed by exploiting the fact that the hyper- and stripy-honeycombs can be con-
sidered as rows of honeycomb lattices stacked in an alternating fashion. By varying the number
of complete honeycomb rows in such a construction, the harmonic-honeycomb series of lattices
is generated. Each lattice of the series is denoted as H(cid:104)N(cid:105), where N is an integer that refers
to the number of complete honeycomb rows used in the construction.108 The hyper- and stripy-
honeycomb lattices are H(cid:104)0(cid:105) and H(cid:104)1(cid:105) respectively in this notation. Like the hyper- and stripy-
honeycomb lattices, the Kitaev spin liquids in all finite-N harmonic-honeycomb lattices possess
topologically protected line nodes of gapless Majorana fermions and surface gapless modes.118 In
contrast,another3Dtrivalentlattice—thehyper-octagonlattice—possessesagaplessphasewitha
2DMajoranaFermisurface.120 Allofthesetheoreticallatticescanbeembeddedinstructurescon-
taining edge-shared IrO octahedra, hinting at the possibility of realizing a 3D Kitaev spin liquid
inayet-to-be-discoveredmaterial.
V. OUTLOOK
The wide variety of phenomena observed and predicted in iridates and related materials has
generated immense activity in the field. Our objective in this review was not to be exhaustive but
rather to instill a sense of breadth by highlighting a few specific directions recent studies have
pursued. In particular, we examined the Ruddlesden-Popper series of iridates and their related
heterostructures where unconventionalmagnetism, topological band structures, and superconduc-
tivityhavebeenseenorpredicted. Wealsoexaminedhoneycombmaterials,bothintwoandthree
dimensions, where the joined e ects of SOC, electron correlation, and lattice geometry give rise
to Kitaev physics and its associated magnetism. These topics merely scratch the surface of possi-
bilitiesinthestudyoftheinterplayofSOCandelectroniccorrelations;relatedresearchdirections,
both theoretical and experimental, further illustrate the richness of this field. With this rapid de-
velopment,however,thereremainseveralobstaclesthatifresolved,cansubstantiallyenhanceour
understandingofSOCe ectsandpropelthecommunityforward.
One issue that has hindered the study of iridate materials is the large neutron absorption cross-
section of Ir. This property has restricted neutron scattering experiments to powder samples or
large single crystals, where the former studies lack wave-vector details while the latter studies
may require years of growth technique refinement. Although great headway has been achieved
usingresonantX-rayscatteringasanalternativeprobe,higherenergyresolutionandtheabilityto
perturb the measured system in situ would enable these techniques to be a true alternative to neu-
tron techniques. Sample quality is also in need of continual refinement in many of the considered
compounds, especially the honeycomb iridates where Na and Li readily oxidizes, as discussed in
Sec. IVC1. Homogeneous solutions of single crystal of (Na Li ) IrO over a wide range of x
(and especially x 1) would greatly enhance our understanding of Kitaev physics and its con-
nectionwithmicroscopicdetailsofmaterials. Inadditiontoelementalsubstitution,othermethods
to perturb these systems toward the Kitaev regime or MIT, for example with applied pressure,
could also provide ample insight. Even with the well-studied perovskites iridates, there are still
opportunities for major breakthroughs. Direct evidence of superconductivity in Sr IrO or other
iridiumoxidesisstillintenselypursued,asisevidenceandexamplesoftopologicalphases. Aside
from strontium iridates, other avenues to realize topological phases have also been sought. As
mentioned in Sec. IIID, engineered phases like superlattices or thin films of 4d or 5d TMOs
play a special role in this area of exploration due to their tunability of SOC, correlation, and
lattice distortions. In this regard, materials like thin film pyrochlore iridates121–123 and epitaxial
perovskites39,124–126 have received considerable attention. On the theoretical front, extending our
understandingoftopologicalphasesofSec. IIIDbeyondthenon-interactinglimitisanimportant
goal. A large e ort has focused on the consequences of interactions and disorder in Weyl semi-
metals, especially in relation to its characterization127, transport properties128,129, and instabilities
towards exotic phases130–132. Related is the study of Coulomb interaction on the quadratic band
touching in pyrochlore iridates, which can induce a quantum critical non-Fermi liquid, a Weyl
semi-metal, or a topological insulator depending on the preserved symmetries.133 These are but
some examples where theoretical predictions of interacting topological phases may find realiza-
tionsiniridatematerials,andcontinualsearchforthesesystemswillbeacentralfocusintheyears
coming.
In addition to addressing outstanding issues, the discovery of new compounds has also driven
promisinglinesofinvestigation. Thesenewmaterialsprovideawonderfularenabothtotesttheo-
reticalpredictionsandtodiscovernewphenomenarelatedtostrongSOC.Arecentexampleisthe
Mott-insulating Ba IrTi O that does not order magnetically.134 It has been argued to realize the
HK model on a triangular lattice, leading to frustration in both geometry and exchanges, which
canleadtoavarietyofexoticphases.2,135 Anotherrecentlysynthesizedcompoundthoughttohost
theHKmodelisthehoneycombLi RhO ,whichiscloselyrelatedtothe2Dhoneycombmaterials
discussed in Sec. IVC. This 4d5 material does not magnetically order but shows spin-glass be-
haviorthatmayberelatedtodisorderorstackingfaults. Withthisreportedrhodate,alluringideas
likethesynthesisof3Dhoneycombrhodatesorisoelectronicsubstitutionofhoneycombmaterials
will allow the tuning between 4d and 5d materials to tilt the balance between SOC, crystal field,
andcorrelatione ects.
Intimately related to lattice geometry is how the IrO octahedra are inter-connected; the ma-
nipulation of this connectivity has also been an interesting approach to generate new compounds.
Our review has focused on corner- and edge-shared octahedra, but there are a variety of com-
pounds with face-sharing octahedra where SOC plays an important role in the behavior of the
material.136,137 The Mott insulating and magnetically ordered double perovskites La ZnIrO and
La MgIrO serveasyetanotherexample138,139: theIrO octahedrainthesedoubleperovskitesare
spatially separated because they do not share corners, edges, nor faces. The resulting reduction
in orbital overlaps between nearest neighbor 5d Ir orbitals leads to a decrease in bandwidth or,
equivalently, a relative enhancement of SOC and correlation e ects. By further spatially isolating
the IrO octahedra, the validity of the localized picture of j = 1/2 orbitals can be probed. The
magneticallyorderedcompoundCa IrO isonesuchexample.136,140 Thelargeseparationbetween
octahedra in this compound and near-ideal IrO geometry has led to one of the first detections of
distortion-free j = 1/2orbitalsinthiscompound.140 ThecompoundSr La Ir O hasalsobeen
x 11−x 4 24
used to test the j = 1/2 states but o ff ers an additional twist: with the tuning of 1 < x < 5, the
valence of the iridium ions can be changed between Ir4+ (d5) and Ir5+ (d4).141 In the strong SOC
limit, the d4 filling yields a non-magnetic state since the atomic j = 3/2 states are completely oc-
cupied and the j = 1/2 orbitals remain unfilled. Measurements of the magnetic properties of this
seriesofmaterialsindeedshowatransitionbetweenthe j = 1/2andnon-magneticstate,indicating
that strong SOC is essential in the description of spatially isolated IrO octahedra. However, this
strong SOC limit may not apply to other compounds with the d4 configuration: examples include
the layered perovskite Ca RuO 142, the honeycomb materials A RuO (A = Li, Na)143, and yet an-
other variety of double perovskites, Sr YIrO 144 and La MRuO (M = Mg and Zn)145. Magnetic
transitions have been observed in these compounds and the origin of such magnetism is under ac-
tive investigation. Proposals such as Van Vleck-type Mott insulators146, strong non-cubic crystal
fielde ff ects144,andcompetitionbetweensuper-exchangeandSOC147 havebeeninvestigatedinthe
contextofthesemagneticd4 systems.
Beyond integer fillings, systems with partial filling have also received attention and the multi-
orbital nature of these transition metal compounds may play an elevated role. In the recently
synthesized Ba AlIr O , dimers of face-shared IrO octahedra have an average valence of
yet the material is a Mott insulator.137 In the thiospinel CuIr S , where sulphur plays the role of
oxygen in the octahedral cages, the average valence is Ir3.5+ .148 Several recent studies have shown
thatSOC,whichhavebeenneglectedinearlierworks,149 maybeimportantinthenewlyobserved
low temperature paramagnetic state.148 Its cousin, CuIr Se , is a metal, but when doped with Pt,
shows evidence of superconductivity:150 an exciting opportunity considering the local structural
similarities between IrSe and the IrO octahedra discussed throughout this article. Another ex-
ample is the hyper-kagome, Na Ir O , which has an average valence of
and thus can be
consideredasa1 3-dopedversionofthespin-liquidcandidateNa Ir O mentionedbrieflyinSec.
IVD.151 Unlike the Mott-insulating Na Ir O , this new material is semi-metallic, which was ar-
gued to stem from the presence of strong SOC and distortion-induced molecular orbitals.151 With
a combination of its chiral crystal structure and frustrated lattice, it was suggested that this semi-
metallic material may harbour a unique platform to study non-trivial electronic transport due to
topologicale ff ectsarisingfromstrongSOC.151
As we have seen in these brief examples, the study of the combined e ects of strong SOC and
correlationshasgrowntoencompassawiderangeofmaterialsandphenomena. Thisbreadthisan
indication of the rapid development of this field, which boosts the prospects of discovering novel
and exciting physics. With the eventual advancement in experimental, numerical, and theoretical
techniques,manyobstaclescurrentlyfacedcanbetackled,andperhapsevenresolved,thuspaving
wayfornewandexcitingresearchdirectionsinthenearfuture.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank G. K. Khaliullin, Y. J. Kim, Y. B. Kim, B. J. Kim, P. Gegenwart, J. Matsuno and R.
Coldea for useful comments and discussions. This work is supported by NSERC of Canada (JR,
EL,andHYK).
∗ ElectronicAddress: hykee@physics.utoronto.ca
1 W.Witczak-Krempa,G.Chen,Y.B.Kim, andL.Balents,AnnualReviewofCondensedMatterPhysics
5,57(2014).
2 G.Khaliullin,ProgressofTheoreticalPhysicsSupplement160,155(2005).
3 A.Georges,L.de’Medici, andJ.Mravlje,AnnualReviewofCondensedMatterPhysics4,137(2013).
4 D.vanderMarelandG.A.Sawatzky,PhysicalReviewB37,10674(1988).
5 B. J. Kim, H. Jin, S. J. Moon, J.-Y. Kim, B.-G. Park, C. Leem, J. Yu, T. Noh, C. Kim, S.-J. Oh, J.-H.
Park,V.Durairaj,G.Cao, andE.Rotenberg,PhysicalReviewLetters101,076402(2008).
6 M. K. Crawford, M. A. Subramanian, R. L. Harlow, J. A. Fernandez-Baca, Z. R. Wang, and D. C.
Johnston,PhysicalReviewB49,9198(1994).
7 Q.Huang,J.Soubeyroux,O.Chmaissem,I.N.Sora,A.Santoro,R.Cava,J.Krajewski, andW.Peck,
JournalofSolidStateChemistry112,355(1994).
8 G. Cao, Y. Xin, C. Alexander, J. Crow, P. Schlottmann, M. Crawford, R. Harlow, and W. Marshall,
PhysicalReviewB66,214412(2002).
9 J.Longo,J.Kafalas, andR.Arnott,JournalofSolidStateChemistry3,174(1971).
10 J. Zhao, L. Yang, Y. Yu, F. Li, R. Yu, Z. Fang, L. Chen, and C. Jin, Journal of Applied Physics 103,
103706(2008).
11 J.J.RandallJr,L.Katz, andR.Ward,JournaloftheAmericanChemicalSociety79,266(1957).
12 W.KomerandD.Machin,JournaloftheLessCommonMetals61,91(1978).
13 Y. Maeno, H. Hashimoto, K. Yoshida, S. Nishizaki, T. Fujita, J. Bednorz, and F. Lichtenberg, Nature
372,532(1994).
14 G.Cao,J.Bolivar,S.McCall,J.E.Crow, andR.P.Guertin,PhysicalReviewB57,R11039(1998).
15 B. Kim, H. Ohsumi, T. Komesu, S. Sakai, T. Morita, H. Takagi, and T. Arima, Science 323, 1329
(2009).
16 J.KafalasandJ.Longo,JournalofSolidStateChemistry4,55(1972).
17 S.Moon,H.Jin,K.W.Kim,W.Choi,Y.Lee,J.Yu,G.Cao,A.Sumi,H.Funakubo,C.Bernhard, and
T.Noh,PhysicalReviewLetters101,226402(2008).
18 I.Nagai,Y.Yoshida,S.Ikeda,H.Matsuhata,H.Kito, andM.Kosaka,JournalofPhysics: Condensed
Matter19,136214(2007).
19 J. Kim, Y. Choi, J. Kim, J. Mitchell, G. Jackeli, M. Daghofer, J. van den Brink, G. Khaliullin, and
B.Kim,PhysicalReviewLetters109,037204(2012).
20 S.Fujiyama,K.Ohashi,H.Ohsumi,K.Sugimoto,T.Takayama,T.Komesu,M.Takata,T.Arima, and
H.Takagi,PhysicalReviewB86,174414(2012).
21 F. Ye, S. Chi, B. C. Chakoumakos, J. A. Fernandez-Baca, T. Qi, and G. Cao, Physical Review B 87,
140406(2013).
22 G.JackeliandG.Khaliullin,PhysicalReviewLetters102,017205(2009).
23 J.Matsuno,K.Ihara,S.Yamamura,H.Wadati,K.Ishii,V.V.Shankar,H.-Y.Kee, andH.Takagi,arXiv
preprintarXiv:1401.1066 (2014).
24 R.Arita, J.Kunesˇ, A.Kozhevnikov, A.Eguiluz, andM.Imada,PhysicalReviewLetters108,086403
(2012).
25 D.Hsieh,F.Mahmood,D.Torchinsky,G.Cao, andN.Gedik,PhysicalReviewB86,035128(2012).
26 J.-M.Carter,V.V.Shankar, andH.-Y.Kee,PhysicalReviewB88,035111(2013).
27 M.Subramanian,M.Crawford, andR.Harlow,Materialsresearchbulletin29,645(1994).
28 F.WangandT.Senthil,PhysicalReviewLetters106,136402(2011).
29 J.Kim,A.Said,D.Casa,M.Upton,T.Gog,M.Daghofer,G.Jackeli,J.vandenBrink,G.Khaliullin,
andB.Kim,PhysicalReviewLetters109,157402(2012).
30 J.-M.CarterandH.-Y.Kee,PhysicalReviewB87,014433(2013).
31 X.-L.QiandS.-C.Zhang,ReviewsofModernPhysics83,1057(2011).
32 M.Z.HasanandJ.E.Moore,AnnualReviewofCondensedMatterPhysics2,55(2011).
33 A.M.TurnerandA.Vishwanath,ContemporaryConceptsofCondensedMatterScience: Topological
Insulators6,293(2013).
34 A.Shitade,H.Katsura,J.Kunesˇ,X.-L.Qi,S.-C.Zhang, andN.Nagaosa,PhysicalReviewLetters102,
256403(2009).
35 I. Mazin, H. O. Jeschke, K. Foyevtsova, R. Valent´ı, and D. Khomskii, Physical Review Letters 109,
197201(2012).
36 H. Hwang, Y. Iwasa, M. Kawasaki, B. Keimer, N. Nagaosa, and Y. Tokura, Nature materials 11, 103
(2012).
37 D.Xiao,W.Zhu,Y.Ran,N.Nagaosa, andS.Okamoto,Naturecommunications2,596(2011).
38 J.Lado,V.Pardo, andD.Baldomir,PhysicalReviewB88,155119(2013).
39 S.Jang,H.Kim,S.Moon,W.Choi,B.Jeon,J.Yu, andT.Noh,JournalofPhysics: CondensedMatter
22,485602(2010).
40 Y.ChenandH.-Y.Kee,PhysicalReviewB90,195145(2014).
41 L.Fu,PhysicalReviewLetters106,106802(2011).
42 X.Wan,A.M.Turner,A.Vishwanath, andS.Y.Savrasov,PhysicalReviewB83,205101(2011).
43 S.Matsuura,P.-Y.Chang,A.P.Schnyder, andS.Ryu,NewJournalofPhysics15,065001(2013).
44 Y.Chen,Y.-M.Lu, andH.-Y.Kee,Naturecommunications6,6593(2015).
45 J.Kim,D.Casa,M.Upton,T.Gog,Y.-J.Kim,J.Mitchell,M.VanVeenendaal,M.Daghofer,J.vanden
Brink,G.Khaliullin, andB.J.Kim,PhysicalReviewLetters108,177003(2012).
46 G.Khaliullin,W.Koshibae, andS.Maekawa,PhysicalReviewLetters93,176401(2004).
47 Z.Y.Meng,Y.B.Kim, andH.-Y.Kee,PhysicalReviewLetters113,177003(2014).
48 P.A.Lee,N.Nagaosa, andX.-G.Wen,ReviewsofModernPhysics78,17(2006).
49 O.Korneta,T.Qi,S.Chikara,S.Parkin,L.DeLong,P.Schlottmann, andG.Cao,PhysicalReviewB
82,115117(2010).
50 Y.KleinandI.Terasaki,JournalofPhysics: CondensedMatter20,295201(2008).
51 M.Ge,T.Qi,O.Korneta,D.DeLong,P.Schlottmann,W.Crummett, andG.Cao,PhysicalReviewB
84,100402(2011).
52 Y.Kim,O.Krupin,J.Denlinger,A.Bostwick,E.Rotenberg,Q.Zhao,J.Mitchell,J.Allen, andB.Kim,
Science345,187(2014).
53 Y. Cao, Q. Wang, J. A. Waugh, T. J. Reber, H. Li, X. Zhou, S. Parham, N. C. Plumb, E. Roten-
berg, A. Bostwick, J. D. Denlinger, T. Qi, M. A. Hermele, G. Cao, and D. S. Dessau, arXiv preprint
arXiv:1406.4978 (2014).
54 L.Li,P.Kong,T.Qi,C.Jin,S.Yuan,L.DeLong,P.Schlottmann, andG.Cao,PhysicalReviewB87,
235127(2013).
55 Y.Liu,L.Yu,X.Jia,J.Zhao,H.Weng,Y.Peng,C.Chen,Z.Xie,D.Mou,J.He,X.Liu,Y.Feng,H.Yi,
L. Zho, G. Liu, S. He, X. Dong, J. Zhang, Z. Xu, C. Chen, G. Cao, X. Dai, Z. Fang, and X. J. Zhou,
arXivpreprintarXiv:1501.04687 (2015).
56 J. He, H. Hafiz, T. R. Mion, T. Hogan, C. Dhital, X. Chen, Q. Lin, M. Hashimoto, D. Lu, Y. Zhang,
R.S.Markiewicz,A.Bansil,S.D.Wilson, andR.-H.He,Scientificreports5,8533(2015).
57 A.Kitaev,AnnalsofPhysics321,2(2006).
58 Z.NussinovandJ.vandenBrink,ReviewsofModernPhysics87,1(2015).
59 ImposingthelocalplaquettesymmetriesoftheKitaevmodeldoesachievethis,butthesearenotpresent
inthemicroscopicphysics.
60 J.Chaloupka,G.Jackeli, andG.Khaliullin,PhysicalReviewLetters105,027204(2010).
61 J.Chaloupka,G.Jackeli, andG.Khaliullin,PhysicalReviewLetters110,097204(2013).
62 J.G.Rau,E.K.-H.Lee, andH.-Y.Kee,PhysicalReviewLetters112,077204(2014).
63 J.G.RauandH.-Y.Kee,arXivpreprintarXiv:1408.4811 (2014).
64 I.KimchiandY.-Z.You,PhysicalReviewB84,180407(2011).
65 V. M. Katukuri, S. Nishimoto, V. Yushankhai, A. Stoyanova, H. Kandpal, S. Choi, R. Coldea,
I.Rousochatzakis,L.Hozoi, andJ.vandenBrink,NewJournalofPhysics16,013056(2014).
66 Y.Yamaji,Y.Nomura,M.Kurita,R.Arita, andM.Imada,PhysicalReviewLetters113,107201(2014).
67 Y.Sizyuk,C.Price,P.Wo¨lfle, andN.B.Perkins,PhysicalReviewB90,155126(2014).
68 R.Comin,G.Levy,B.Ludbrook,Z.-H.Zhu,C.Veenstra,J.Rosen,Y.Singh,P.Gegenwart,D.Stricker,
J.N.Hancock,D.vanderMarel,I.S.Elfimov, andA.Damascelli,PhysicalReviewLetters109,266406
(2012).
69 S.Lee,J.-S.Jeong,K.Hwang, andY.B.Kim,PhysicalReviewB90,134425(2014).
70 I.Kimchi,R.Coldea, andA.Vishwanath,arXivpreprintarXiv:1408.3640 (2014).
71 Y.SinghandP.Gegenwart,PhysicalReviewB82,064412(2010).
72 Y. Singh, S. Manni, J. Reuther, T. Berlijn, R. Thomale, W. Ku, S. Trebst, and P. Gegenwart, Physical
ReviewLetters108,127203(2012).
73 F. Ye, S. Chi, H. Cao, B. C. Chakoumakos, J. A. Fernandez-Baca, R. Custelcean, T. Qi, O. Korneta,
andG.Cao,PhysicalReviewB85,180403(2012).
74 S.Choi,R.Coldea,A.Kolmogorov,T.Lancaster,I.Mazin,S.Blundell,P.Radaelli,Y.Singh,P.Gegen-
wart,K.Choi,S.-W.Cheong,P.J.Baker,C.Stock, andJ.Taylor,PhysicalReviewLetters108,127204
(2012).
75 H.Gretarsson,J.P.Clancy,X.Liu,J.P.Hill,E.Bozin,Y.Singh,S.Manni,P.Gegenwart,J.Kim,A.H.
Said,D.Casa,T.Gog,M.H.Upton,H.-S.Kim,J.Yu,V.M.Katukuri,L.Hozoi,J.vandenBrink, and
Y.-J.Kim,PhysicalReviewLetters110,076402(2013).
76 X. Liu, T. Berlijn, W.-G. Yin, W. Ku, A. Tsvelik, Y.-J. Kim, H. Gretarsson, Y. Singh, P. Gegenwart,
andJ.Hill,PhysicalReviewB83,220403(2011).
77 H.Gretarsson, J.Clancy, Y.Singh, P.Gegenwart, J.Hill, J.Kim, M.Upton, A.Said, D.Casa, T.Gog,
andY.-J.Kim,PhysicalReviewB87,220407(2013).
78 S. H. Chun, J.-W. Kim, J. Kim, H. Zheng, C. C. Stoumpos, C. Malliakas, J. Mitchell, K. Mehlawat,
Y.Singh,Y.Choi,T.Gog,A.Al-Zein,M.MorettiSala,M.Krisch,J.Chaloupka,G.Jackeli,G.Khali-
ullin, andB.J.Kim,NaturePhysics (2015),10.1038nphys3322.
79 R.Coldea,TalkattheSPORE13conferenceheldatMPIPKS,Dresden(2013);S.Choi,TalkattheAPS
Marchmeeting,Denver,CO(2014).
80 G.Cao,T.F.Qi,L.Li,J.Terzic,V.S.Cao,S.J.Yuan,M.Tovar,G.Murthy, andR.K.Kaul,Physical
ReviewB88,220414(2013).
81 S. Manni, S. Choi, I. Mazin, R. Coldea, M. Altmeyer, H. O. Jeschke, R. Valenti, and P. Gegenwart,
PhysicalReviewB89,245113(2014).
82 S.Manni,Y.Tokiwa, andP.Gegenwart,PhysicalReviewB89,241102(2014).
83 H.-C.Jiang,Z.-C.Gu,X.-L.Qi, andS.Trebst,PhysicalReviewB83,245104(2011).
84 J.Reuther,R.Thomale, andS.Trebst,PhysicalReviewB84,100406(2011).
85 C.C.PriceandN.B.Perkins,PhysicalReviewLetters109,187201(2012).
86 Y.-Z.You,I.Kimchi, andA.Vishwanath,PhysicalReviewB86,085145(2012).
87 R.Scha ff er,S.Bhattacharjee, andY.B.Kim,PhysicalReviewB86,224417(2012).
88 J.ChaloupkaandG.Khaliullin,arXivpreprintarXiv:1502.02587 (2015).
89 S. Nishimoto, V. M. Katukuri, V. Yushankhai, H. Stoll, U. K. Roessler, L. Hozoi, I. Rousochatzakis,
andJ.vandenBrink,arXivpreprintarXiv:1403.6698 (2014).
90 E.StroganovandK.Ovchinnikov,Vestnik.Leningrad.Univ.,Ser.Fiz.iKhim.12,152.
91 L.Binotto,I.Pollini, andG.Spinolo,physicastatussolidi(b)44,245(1971).
92 I.Pollini,PhysicalReviewB53,12769(1996).
93 K.Plumb,J.Clancy,L.Sandilands,V.V.Shankar,Y.Hu,K.Burch,H.-Y.Kee, andY.-J.Kim,Physical
ReviewB90,041112(2014).
94 J.Fletcher,W.Gardner,A.Fox, andG.Topping,JournaloftheChemicalSocietyA:Inorganic,Physi-
cal,Theoretical,1038(1967).
95 Y. Kobayashi, T. Okada, K. Asai, M. Katada, H. Sano, and F. Ambe, Inorganic Chemistry 31, 4570
(1992).
96 Y.Kubota,H.Tanaka,T.Ono,Y.Narumi, andK.Kindo,PhysicalReviewB91,094422(2015).
97 J. A. Sears, M. Songvilay, K. W. Plumb, J. P. Clancy, Y. Qiu, Y. Zhao, D. Parshall, and Y.-J. Kim,
PhysicalReviewB91,144420(2015).
98 M.Majumder,M.Schmidt,H.Rosner,A.A.Tsirlin,H.Yasuoka, andM.Baenitz,PhysicalReviewB
91,180401(2015).
99 A.Banerjee,C.Bridges,J.Yan,A.Aczel,L.Li,M.Stone,G.Granroth,M.Lumsden,Y.Yiu,J.Knolle,
D.Kovrizhin,S.Bhattacharjee,R.Moessner,D.Tennant,D.Mandrus, andS.E.Nagler,arXivpreprint
arXiv:1504.08037 (2015).
100 L. J. Sandilands, Y. Tian, A. A. Reijnders, H.-S. Kim, K. W. Plumb, H.-Y. Kee, Y.-J. Kim, and K. S.
Burch,arXivpreprintarXiv:1503.07593 (2015).
101 V.V.Shankar,H.-S.Kim, andH.-Y.Kee,arXivpreprintarXiv:1411.6623 (2014).
102 B.CanalsandC.Lacroix,PhysicalReviewLetters80,2933(1998).
103 M.J.GingrasandP.A.McClarty,ReportsonProgressinPhysics77,056501(2014).
104 Y.Okamoto,M.Nohara,H.Aruga-Katori, andH.Takagi,PhysicalReviewLetters99,137207(2007).
105 Y.Singh,Y.Tokiwa,J.Dong, andP.Gegenwart,PhysicalReviewB88,220413(2013).
106 S.MandalandN.Surendran,PhysicalReviewB79,024426(2009).
107 T. Takayama, A. Kato, R. Dinnebier, J. Nuss, H. Kono, L. S. I. Veiga, G. Fabbris, D. Haskel, and
H.Takagi,PhysicalReviewLetters114,077202(2015).
108 K. Modic, T. E. Smidt, I. Kimchi, N. P. Breznay, A. Bi ffi n, S. Choi, R. D. Johnson, R. Coldea,
P. Watkins-Curry, G. T. McCandless, J. Y. Chan, F. Gandara, Z. Islam, A. Vishwanath, A. Shekhter,
R.D.McDonald, andJ.G.Analytis,Naturecommunications5,4203(2014).
109 A. Bi ffi n, R. Johnson, S. Choi, F. Freund, S. Manni, A. Bombardi, P. Manuel, P. Gegenwart, and
R.Coldea,PhysicalReviewB90,205116(2014).
110 A.Bi ffi n,R.Johnson,I.Kimchi,R.Morris,A.Bombardi,J.Analytis,A.Vishwanath, andR.Coldea,
PhysicalReviewLetters113,197201(2014).
111 E.K.-H.Lee,R.Scha ff er,S.Bhattacharjee, andY.B.Kim,PhysicalReviewB89,045117(2014).
112 I.Kimchi,J.G.Analytis, andA.Vishwanath,PhysicalReviewB90,205126(2014).
113 E. K.-H. Lee, S. Bhattacharjee, K. Hwang, H.-S. Kim, H. Jin, and Y. B. Kim, Physical Review B 89,
205132(2014).
114 S.Lee,E.K.-H.Lee,A.Paramekanti, andY.B.Kim,PhysicalReviewB89,014424(2014).
115 E.K.-H.LeeandY.B.Kim,PhysicalReviewB91,064407(2015).
116 H.-S.Kim,E.K.-H.Lee, andY.B.Kim,arXivpreprintarXiv:1502.00006 (2015).
117 J.Nasu,M.Udagawa, andY.Motome,PhysicalReviewLetters113,197205(2014).
118 R.Scha ff er,E.K.-H.Lee,Y.-M.Lu, andY.B.Kim,PhysicalReviewLetters114,116803(2015).
119 M.Hermanns,K.O’Brien, andS.Trebst,PhysicalReviewLetters114,157202(2015).
120 M.HermannsandS.Trebst,PhysicalReviewB89,235102(2014).
121 X.Hu,A.Ru¨egg, andG.A.Fiete,PhysicalReviewB86,235141(2012).
122 B.-J.YangandN.Nagaosa,PhysicalReviewLetters112,246402(2014).
123 E.Bergholtz,Z.Liu,M.Trescher,R.Moessner, andM.Udagawa,PhysicalReviewLetters114,016806
(2015).
124 J. Nichols, J. Terzic, E. Bittle, O. Korneta, L. De Long, J. Brill, G. Cao, and S. Seo, Applied Physics
Letters102,141908(2013).
125 D.Hirai,J.Matsuno, andH.Takagi,arXivpreprintarXiv:1501.01433 (2015).
126 A.BiswasandY.H.Jeong,JournalofAppliedPhysics117,195305(2015).
127 W.Witczak-Krempa,M.Knap, andD.Abanin,PhysicalReviewLetters113,136402(2014).
128 A.Burkov,M.Hook, andL.Balents,PhysicalReviewB84,235126(2011).
129 P.Hosur,S.Parameswaran, andA.Vishwanath,PhysicalReviewLetters108,046602(2012).
130 Z.WangandS.-C.Zhang,PhysicalReviewB87,161107(2013).
131 J.MaciejkoandR.Nandkishore,PhysicalReviewB90,035126(2014).
132 A.SekineandK.Nomura,JournalofthePhysicalSocietyofJapan83,094710(2014).
133 E.-G.Moon,C.Xu,Y.B.Kim, andL.Balents,PhysicalReviewLetters111,206401(2013).
134 T. Dey, A. Mahajan, P. Khuntia, M. Baenitz, B. Koteswararao, and F. Chou, Physical Review B 86,
140405(2012).
135 M.Becker,M.Hermanns,B.Bauer,M.Garst, andS.Trebst,PhysicalReviewB91,155135(2015).
136 G.Cao,V.Durairaj,S.Chikara,S.Parkin, andP.Schlottmann,PhysicalReviewB75,134402(2007).
137 J.Terzic,J.Wang,F.Ye,W.Song,S.Yuan,S.Aswartham,L.DeLong,S.Streltsov,D.Khomskii, and
G.Cao,arXivpreprintarXiv:1505.01436 (2015).
138 G. Cao, A. Subedi, S. Calder, J.-Q. Yan, J. Yi, Z. Gai, L. Poudel, D. J. Singh, M. D. Lumsden, A. D.
Christianson,B.C.Sales, andD.Mandrus,PhysicalReviewB87,155136(2013).
139 A.M.Cook,S.Matern,C.Hickey,A.A.Aczel, andA.Paramekanti,arXivpreprintarXiv:1502.01031
(2015).
140 S. Calder, G.-X. Cao, S. Okamoto, J.-W. Kim, V. R. Cooper, Z. Gai, B. C. Sales, M. D. Lumsden,
D.Mandrus, andA.D.Christianson,PhysicalReviewB89,081104(2014).
141 B.F.Phelan,J.Krizan,W.Xie,Q.Gibson, andR.Cava,PhysicalReviewB91,155117(2015).
142 T. Mizokawa, L. Tjeng, G. Sawatzky, G. Ghiringhelli, O. Tjernberg, N. Brookes, H. Fukazawa,
S.Nakatsuji, andY.Maeno,PhysicalReviewLetters87,077202(2001).
143 J.Wang,J.Terzic,T.Qi,F.Ye,S.Yuan,S.Aswartham,S.Streltsov,D.Khomskii,R.Kaul, andG.Cao,
PhysicalReviewB90,161110(2014).
144 G. Cao, T. Qi, L. Li, J. Terzic, S. Yuan, L. E. DeLong, G. Murthy, and R. K. Kaul, Physical Review
Letters112,056402(2014).
145 R.Dass,J.-Q.Yan, andJ.Goodenough,PhysicalReviewB69,094416(2004).
146 G.Khaliullin,PhysicalReviewLetters111,197201(2013).
147 O.N.Meetei,W.S.Cole,M.Randeria, andN.Trivedi,PhysicalReviewB91,054412(2015).
148 K.Kojima,R.Kadono,M.Miyazaki,M.Hiraishi,I.Yamauchi,A.Koda,Y.Tsuchiya,H.Suzuki, and
H.Kitazawa,PhysicalReviewLetters112,087203(2014).
149 D.KhomskiiandT.Mizokawa,PhysicalReviewLetters94,156402(2005).
150 H. Luo, T. Klimczuk, L. Mu¨chler, L. Schoop, D. Hirai, M. Fuccillo, C. Felser, and R. Cava, Physical
ReviewB87,214510(2013).
151 T. Takayama, A. Yaresko, A. Matsumoto, J. Nuss, K. Ishii, M. Yoshida, J. Mizuki, and H. Takagi,
Scientificreports4,6818(2014).