]RS.hp-ortsa[
2v2471.1111:viXra
Comparative Magnetic Minima
Proceedings IAU Symposium No. 286, 2011 (cid:13)c 2011International AstronomicalUnion
Spontaneous chiral symmetry breaking in
the Tayler instability
Fabio Del Sordo
, Alfio Bonanno
, Axel Brandenburg
Dhrubaditya Mitra
1Nordita, Roslagstullsbacken 23, SE-10691 Stockholm, Sweden,email: fabio@nordita.org
2Department of Astronomy, Stockholm University,SE10691 Stockholm, Sweden
3INAF-Catania Astrophysical Observatory,Via S.Sofia 78, 95123 Catania ITALY
Abstract. The chiral symmetry breaking properties of the Tayler instability are discussed.
Effectiveamplitudeequationsaredeterminedinonecase.Thismodelhasthreefreeparameters
thataredeterminednumerically.Comparison withchiralsymmetrybreakinginbiochemistryis
made.
Keywords. Sun:magnetic fields, dynamo, magnetic helicity
1. Introduction
Animportantingredientto the solardynamois the α effect.Mathematically speaking
αisapseudoscalarthatcanbe constructedusinggravityg (apolarvector)andangular
velocity Ω (an axial vector): g·Ω is thus a pseudo scalar and is proportional to cosθ,
whereθisthecolatitude.Thispseudoscalarchangessignattheequator.Thisexplanation
for large-scale astrophysical dynamos works well and therefore one used to think that
the existence of the α effect in dynamo theory requires always the existence of a pseudo
scalarin the problem.This has indeed been generalwisdom,althoughit has rarely been
emphasized in the literature. That this is actually not the case has only recently been
emphasized and demonstrated. One example is the magnetic buoyancy instability in
the absence of rotation, but with a horizontal magnetic field B and vertical gravity g
being perpendicular to each other, so the pseudo scalar g·B vanishes (Chatterjee et al.
2011). Another example is the Tayler instability of a purely toroidal field in a cylinder
(Gellert et al.2011).Thus,themagneticfieldisagainperpendiculartoallpossiblepolar
vectorsthatcanbeconstructed,forexamplethegradientofthemagneticenergydensity
which points in the radial direction. In both cases, kinetic helicity and a finite α, both
of either sign, emerge in the nonlinear stage of the instability. In the former case, the
α tensor has been computed using the test-field method. In the latter, the components
of the α tensor have been computed using the imposed-field method (see Hubbard et al.
2009, for a discussion of possible pitfalls in the nonlinear case).
The purpose of the present paper is to examine spontaneous chiral symmetry break-
ing in the Tayler instability and to estimate numerically the coefficients governing the
underlying amplitude equations. This allows us then to make contact with a model sys-
tem of chemical reactions that can give rise to the same type of spontaneous symmetry
breaking.
The connection with chemical systems is of interest because the question of sponta-
neous symmetry breaking has a long history ever since Pasteur (1853) discovered the
preferential handedness of certain organic molecules. The preferential handedness of
biomolecules is believed to be the result of a bifurcation event that took place at the
origin of life itself (Kondepudi & Nelson 1984; Sandars 2003; Brandenburg et al. 2005).
Symmetry breaking in the Tayler instability 465
Figure 1. Evolution of magnetic helicity fortwoinitial conditions. differingonly in theparity
of their initial perturbations. After the exponential growth magnetic helicity levels off. In the
inset a detail of theexponential growth phase. Here, R≡sin is used.
2. Numerical simulations
Our setup consists of an isothermal cylinder with a radial extent from sin to sout and
verticalsizeh.WesolvethetimedependentidealMHDequationswithperiodicboundary
conditions in z, reflection in s and periodic in ϕ and a resolution ranging from 643 to
128 in the three directions.
The azimuthal field in the basic state is taken of the form
withb0beinganormalizationconstant;theaxialfieldB
ischosentobezero.Inthebasic
state,theLorentzforceisbalancedwithagradientofpressure,andwehavecheckedthat
our setup was numerically stable if no perturbation was introduced in the system. For
theactualcalculationswehavechosenh=2,sin =1,sout =3,s0 =2andσ2 =0.2.The
sound speed is assumed to be much larger than the Alf´en speed (≈ ten times), similar
to what happens in stellar interiors.
At the beginning of the simulation we perturb the magnetic field. We add a pertur-
bation of amplitude 10
that of the background field. The perturbing field has a given
helicity that is either positive or negative. During the development of the instability we
observe a net increase of the helicity, as shown in Fig. 1 where we plot time series of
the normalizedmagnetic helicity, whichexhibits aninitialexponentialgrowth,reachesa
peak and then levels off.
3. Amplitude equations
The linear stability analysis of this instability shows that there exists helical growing
modes. But the left handed and right handed modes have exactly the same growth
rate independent of their helicity. Hence the growth of helical perturbations cannot be
described by a linear theory. However a weakly nonlinear theory is able to describe it as
we show below. Let us begin by considering two helical modes of right handed and left
handedvarietyrespectivelyeachofwhichsatisfythe Beltramirelation∇×R=ΛRand
∇×L=−ΛL . We can deal with the Fourier transform of these modes, given by
For the left helical mode, total helicity and energy are given by
E = L 2 (x)ddx= Lˆ ·Lˆ∗ ddq and H = L ·∇×L ddx=−2ΛE , (3.2)
L 2Z 2Z L Z L
466 Del Sordo et al.
where∗denotescomplexconjugation.WethenhaveE =E +E beingthetotalenergy
and H = H +H the total helicity. An analogous relation holds for the right-handed
helical mode too.
In the weakly nonlinear regime the evolution of these modes can be described by
general equations of the form:
= and = , (3.3)
where the Lagrangian L can often by written down from symmetry considerations. In
the present case one has to consider the fact that under parity transformation L can
R interchanges into each other. With this additional symmetry the simplest Lagrangian
takes the following form (Fauve et al. 1991)
The coefficients γ, µ and µ∗ cannot be found from symmetry considerations. Note that
in order to show the simplest form, in writing down the Lagrangian we have ignored
dissipation. This gives rise to the following set of amplitude equations,
∂t (cid:16) (cid:17) ∂t (cid:16) (cid:17)
For certain range of parameters these coupled equations allow the growth of one mode
at the expense of the other (Fauve et al. 1991), a phenomenon known to biologists by
the name “mutual antagonism” (Frank 1953).
Using Eqs. (3.2) and (3.5) and defining H =H/2Λ we can obtain evolution equations
for E and H as
Hence, by calculating the total energy and helicity from direct numerical simulations
(DNS) we can determine the unknown coefficients γ,µ and µ∗.
To determine the coefficients γ, µ, and µ∗, we define the instantaneous logarithmic
time derivatives of E and H, γ = dlnE/dt and γ = dlnH/dt, so we have
The result is shown in Fig. 2, where we can identify first the value of γ ≈14 during the
initial linear growth phase of the instability, and then the values µ ≈ 10 and µ∗ ≈ 7
during the nonlinear stage.
4. Conclusions
The present work has demonstrated that the Tayler instability can produce parity-
breaking and that it is possible to determine empirical fit parameters that reproduce
the nonlinear evolution of energy and helicity. So far, no rigorous derivation of the am-
plitude equations exists, so this would be an important next step. Comparing with the
chiralsymmetrybreakinginstabilities in biochemistry,animportantdifferenceis that in
the present equations the nonlinearity is always cubic, while in biochemistry the domi-
nant nonlinearity tends to be quadratic. In this light, it would be useful to assess more
Symmetry breaking in the Tayler instability 467
Figure 2. Time dependenceof γ, µ, and µ8, normalized in terms innerradius and sound
speed. The red lines give thefit results γ ≈14, µ≈10, and µ∗ ≈7 in theappropriate units.
closely the possible differences between biochemical and magnetohydrodynamical sym-
metry breaking.