Statistical laws in linguistics
Eduardo G. Altmann1 and Martin Gerlach1
1Max Planck Institute for the Physics of Complex Systems, 01187 Dresden, Germany
Zipf’s law is just one out of many universal laws proposed to describe statistical regularities in
language. Here we review and critically discuss how these laws can be statistically interpreted,
fitted, and tested (falsified). The modern availability of large databases of written text allows for
testswithanunprecedentstatisticalaccuracyandalsoacharacterizationofthefluctuationsaround
thetypicalbehavior. Wefindthatfluctuationsareusuallymuchlargerthanexpectedbasedonsim-
plifying statistical assumptions (e.g., independence and lack of correlations between observations).
These simplifications appear also in usual statistical tests so that the large fluctuations can be er-
roneously interpreted as a falsification of the law. Instead, here we argue that linguistic laws are
onlymeaningful(falsifiable)ifaccompaniedbyamodelforwhichthefluctuationscanbecomputed
(e.g., a generative model of the text). The large fluctuations we report show that the constraints
imposedbylinguisticlawsonthecreativityprocessoftextgenerationarenotastightasonecould
expect.
ProceedingsoftheFlow Machines Workshop: Creativity and Universality in Language, Paris,June
18 to 20, 2014.
Contents in applications of statistical natural language processing
(e.g., information retrieval). Both the generative and
I. Introduction 1 data-analysisviewsoflinguisticlawsareincreasinglyim-
portantinmodernapplications. Data-miningalgorithms
II. Examples and Observations 2 profit from accurate estimations of the vocabulary size
A. Zipf’s law 2 of a collection of texts (corpus), e.g., through Heaps’
B. Menzerath-Altmann law 2 law discussed in the next section. Methods for the au-
C. Heaps’ law 3 tomatic generation of natural language can profit from
knowing the linguistic laws underlying usual texts. For
III. Interpretation of Linguistic Laws 3 instance, linguistic laws may be included as (additional)
constraints in the space of possible (Markov generated)
IV. Statistical Analysis 4 texts [9] and can thus be considered as constrains to the
A. Graphical approaches 4 creativity of authors.
B. Likelihood methods 4
C. Critical discussion 5
V. Relation between laws 8
VI. Discussion 9 Besides giving an overview on various examples of lin-
guistic laws (Sec. II), in this paper we focus on their
Appendix 10 probabilistic interpretation (Sec. III), we discuss differ-
ent statistical methods of data analysis (Sec. IV), and
References 10 thepossibilitiesofconnectingdifferentlaws(Sec.V).The
modern availability of large text databases allows for an
improved view on linguistic laws that requires a careful
I. INTRODUCTION discussion of their interpretation. Typically, more data
confirms the observations motivating the laws – mostly
“...’languageinuse’cannotbestudiedwithout based on visual inspection – but makes increasingly dif-
statistics” Gustav Herdan (1964) [1] ficult for the laws to pass statistical tests designed to
evaluate their validity. This leads to a seemingly contra-
In the past 100 years regularities in the frequency of dictory situation: while the laws allow for an estimation
text constituents have been summarized in the form of of the general behavior (e.g., they are much better than
linguistic laws. For instance, Zipf’s law states that the alternative descriptions), they are strictly-speaking falsi-
frequency f of the r-th most frequent word in a text is fied. Theaimofthiscontributionistopresentthisprob-
inversely proportional to its rank: f 1/r [2]. This lemanddiscussalternativeinterpretationsoftheresults.
and other less famous linguistic laws are one of the main We argue that the statistical analysis of linguistic laws
objects of study of quantitative linguistics [3–8]. often shows long-range correlations and large (topical)
Linguisticlawshaveboththeoreticalandpracticalim- fluctuations. We conclude that null models accounting
portance. They provide insights on the mechanisms of fortheseobservationsareoftenignoredyetcrucialinthe
text (language, thought) production and are also crucial tests of the validity of linguistic laws.
]hp-cos.scisyhp[
1v69230.2051:viXra
100 102 104 106
)r(f:ycneuqerf
∼ r− 1 104
Singlebook
100 101 102 103 104 105 106
textlength:N
V:yralubacov
3.5 N0.8 ∼ 3.0
0 2 4 6 8 10
numberofsyllables:x
y:elballysrepsemenohpgva
Menzerath-Altmann
FIG.1: Examplesoflinguisticlaws: (a)Zipf, (b)Menzerath-Altmann,and(c)Heapslaws. Datafromonebook(green,Moby
DickbyH.Melville)andfortheEnglishWikipedia(red)areshown. Dotted(black)linesarethelinguisticlawswitharbitrary
parameter, chosen for visual comparison (see Appendix for details).
II. EXAMPLES AND OBSERVATIONS rank as
An insightful introduction to Linguistic Laws is given f(r)= , (1)
in Ref. [5] by K¨ohler, who distinguishes between three
kinds of laws as follows: where f(1) is the frequency of the most frequent word.
Theaboveexpressioncannotholdforlarger becausefor
1. “Thefirstkindtakestheformofprobabilitydistri- any f(1)>0, there is an r∗ such that (cid:80)r∗ f(1)/r >1.
butions,i.e. itmakespredictionsaboutthenumber Taking also into account that f(1) may not be the best
of units of a given property.” proportionality factor, a modern version of Zipf’s law is
2. “The second kind of law is called the functional β
type, because these laws link two (or more) vari- rαZ
ables, i.e. properties.”
with α 1, see Fig. 1(a). The analogy with other
3. “The third kind of law is the developmental one. processes showing fat-tailed distribution motivates the
Here, a property is related to time.” (time may be alternative formulation
measured in terms of text length)
We use the term linguistic law to denote quantitative fα†Z
relationships between measurements obtained in a writ-
where P(f) is the fraction of the total number of words
ten text or corpus, in contrast to syntactic rules and to
(probability) that have frequency f. Formulations (2)
phonetic and language-change laws (e.g., Grimm’s law).
and (3) can be mapped to each other with α† = 1 +
Weassumethatthelawsmakestatementsaboutindivid-
1/α [11, 12, 36].
ual texts (corpus) and are exact in an appropriate limit
(e.g., large corpus)[65]. Each law contains parameters
which we denote by Greek letters α,β,γ, and often refer
B. Menzerath-Altmann law
to the frequency f(q) of a quantity q in the text (with
f(q)=1). Probabilities are denoted by P(q).
Next we discuss in detail one representative example TheMenzerath-Altmannlawreceivedconsiderableat-
ofeachof thethreetypes oflawsmentioned above: Zipf, tention after the works of Gabriel Altmann [4–6, 16].
Menzerath-Altmann, and Heaps laws, respectively, see Menzerath’s general (qualitative) statement originat-
Fig. 1. ing from his observations about phonemes is that “the
greater the whole the smaller its parts”. The quantita-
tive law intended to describe this observation is [16]
A. Zipf’s law y =α xβMe−γMx, (4)
Zipf’s law is the best known linguistic law (see, e.g., wherexmeasuresthelengthofthewholeandythe(aver-
Ref.[11]forhistoricalreferences). Inanearlyandsimple age)sizeoftheparts. Oneexample[16]isobtainedcom-
formulation,itstatesthatifwords(types)arerankedac- puting for each word w the number of syllables x and
cording to their frequency of appearance r =1,2,...,V, thenumberofphonemesz . Thelengthoftheword(the
thefrequencyf(r)ofther-thword(type)scaleswiththe whole) is measured by the number of syllables x , while
TABLE I: List of linguistic laws.
Name of the law Observables Functional form References
Zipf f: freq. of word w; r: rank of w in f f(r)=β
Menzerath-Altmann x: length of the whole; y: size of the parts y=α
γMx [16, 17]
Heaps V : number of words; N : database size V ∼NαH [1, 18–23]
Recurrence τ : distance between words P(τ)∼exp(ατ)β [2, 24, 25]
Long-range correlation C(τ): autocorrelation at lag τ C(τ)∼τ α [26–28]
Entropy Scaling H : Entropy of text with blocks of size n H ∼αnβ+γn [29, 30]
Information content I(l): Information of word with length l I(l)=α+βl [2, 31]
Taylor’s law σ: standard deviation around the mean µ σ∼µα [23]
Networks Topology of lexical/semantic networks various [32–35]
the length of the parts is measured for each word as the III. INTERPRETATION OF LINGUISTIC LAWS
average number of phonemes per syllable y = z /x .
The comparison to the law is made by averaging y w over InChap.26TextLawsofRef.[3],Hˇrebiˇcekarguesthat
all words w with x = x, see Fig. 1(b). The ideas of
Menzerath-AltmannlawandEq.(4)havebeenextended “...the notion law (in the narrower sense
and applied to a variety of problems, see Ref. [17] and scientific law) in linguistics and especially in
references therein. quantitative linguistics ... need not obtain
somespecialcomprehensiondifferentfromits
validity in other sciences. Probably, the best
delimitation of this concept can be found
C. Heaps’ law
in the works by the philosopher of scientific
knowledge Karl Raimund Popper...”
Heaps’lawstatesthatthenumberofdifferentwordsV
This view is also emphasized by K¨ohler in Ref. [5], who
(i.e., word types) scales with database size N measured
distinguishes laws from rules and states that a “ signifi-
inthetotalnumberofwords(i.e.,wordtokens)as[1,18]
cant difference is that rules can be violated - laws (in the
scientific sense) cannot.”.
V NαH. (5)
∼ Such a straight-forward identification between linguis-
tic and scientific laws masks the central role played by
In Fig. 1(c) this relationship is shown in two different
statistics (and probability theory) in the interpretation
representations. For a single book, the value of N is
of linguistic laws. To see this, first notice that these
increased from the first word (token) until the end of
laws do not directly affect the production of (grammat-
the book so that V(N) draws a curve. For the English
ically and semantically) meaningful sentences because
Wikipedia, each article is considered as a separate doc-
they typically involve scales much larger or shorter than
ument for which V and N are computed and shown as
a sentence. It is thus not difficult to be convinced that a
dots.
creative and persistent daemon [66], trained in the tech-
niques of constrained writing [37], can generate under-
Thenon-trivialregularitiesandthesimilaritybetween standable and arbitrary long texts which deliberately vi-
thetwodisparatedatabasesfoundforthethreecasesan- olate any single law mentioned above. In a strict Poppe-
alyzedinFig.1stronglysuggestthatthethreelinguistic rian sense, a single of such demonic texts would be suf-
laws summarized above capture important properties of ficient to falsify the proposed laws. Linguistic laws are
the structure of texts. Additional examples of linguistic thusdifferentfromsyntacticrulesandrequireadifferent
laws are listed in Tab. I, see also the vast literature in interpretation than, e.g., the laws of classical Physics.
quantitative linguistics [3–6]. The (qualitative) observa- ThecentralroleofstatisticsinQuantitativeLinguistics
tions reported above motivate us to search for quantita- was emphasized by its founding father Gustav Herdan:
tiveanalysisthatmatchtherequirementsofapplications
“Thedistinctionbetweenlanguagelawsin
and the accuracy made possible through the use of large
the conventional sense and statistical laws of
corpora. The natural questions that we would like to
languagecorrespondscloselytothatbetween
address here are: Are these laws true (compatible with
the classical laws of nature, or the physical
the observations)? How to determine their parameters?
universe, and the statistical laws of modern
How much fluctuations around them should be expected
physics.” [1]
(allowed)? Are these laws related to each other? Before
addressingthesequestionswediscusshow should one in- Altmann, when discussing Menzerath law [16], also em-
terpret linguistic laws. phasizesthat“thislawisastochasticone”,andK¨ohler[3]
refers to the concept of stochastic hypothesis. There are specific law. Below we discuss in more details how each
atleasttwoinstancesinwhichastatisticalinterpretation of the three points listed above has been and can be ad-
should be included: dressed in the case of linguistic laws.
1. In the statement of the law, e.g., in Zipf’s law the
probability of finding a word with frequency f de-
A. Graphical approaches
cays as P(f) f−α†z.
2. In the interpretation of the law as being typical in Visual inspection and graphical approaches were the
a collection of texts, e.g., in Heaps’ law the vocab- firsttypeofanalysisoflinguisticlawsandarestillwidely
ulary V of a (typical) text of size N is V Nα. used. One simple and still very popular fitting approach
∼ H is least squares (minimize the squared distance between
Thedemonictextsmentionedabovewouldbeconsidered dataandmodels). Oftenthisisdoneincombinationwith
untypical (or highly unlikely). Statistical laws in at least a transformation of variables that maps the law into a
one of these senses are characteristic not only of modern straight line (e.g., using logarithmic scales in the axis or
Physics, as pointed out by Herdan, but also of different taking the logarithm of the independent and dependent
areas of natural and social sciences: Benford’s law pre- variable in the Zipf’s and Heaps’ laws). These transfor-
dictsthefrequencyofthefirstdigitofnumbersappearing mationsareimportanttovisuallydetectpatternsandare
in a corpus and the Gutenberg-Richter law determines valuablepartofanydataanalysis. However,theyarenot
the frequency of earthquakes of a given magnitude. The appropriate for a quantitative analysis of the data. The
analysisoftheselaws,includingpossiblerefutations,have problem of fitting straight lines in log-log scale is that
tobedonethroughrigorousstatisticalmethods,thesub- least-square fitting assumes an uncertainty (fluctuation)
ject of the next section. Important aspects of linguistic on each point that is independent, Gaussian distributed,
laws not discussed in detail in this Chapter include: (i) and equal in size for all fitted points. These assump-
theuniversalityandvariabilityofparametersoflinguistic tions are usually not justified (see, e.g., Refs. [48, 49]
laws (e.g., across different languages [20, 21, 35, 38, 40], for the case of fitting power-law distributions), while at
as a function of size [39] and degree of mixture of the thesametimetheuncertaintiesaremodifiedthroughthe
corpus[41], styles[27], andageofspeakers[42]); and(ii) transformation of variables (such as using the log scale).
the relevance and origins of the laws. This second point Furthermore,quantifyingthegoodness-of-fitbyusingthe
was intensively debated for Zipf’s law [8, 14, 43], with correlation-coefficient R2 in these scales is insufficient to
quantitative approaches based on stochastic processes – evaluatethevalidityofagivenlaw. Ahighqualityofthe
e.g., the Monkey typewriter model [12]), rich-get-richer fit indicates a high correlation between data and model,
mechanisms [10–12, 15, 21] – and on optimization prin- butisunabletoassignaprobabilityforobservationsand
ciples – e.g., between speaker and hearer [2, 44, 45] or thus it is not suited for a rigorous test of the law.
entropy maximization [46, 47].
B. Likelihood methods
IV. STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
A central quantity in the statistical analysis of data is
InSecIIwearguedinfavoroflinguisticlawsbyshow- the likelihood (x;α(cid:126)) that the data x was generated by
ing a graphical representation of the data (Fig. 1). The L
the model (with a set of parameters α).
widespread availability of large databases and the appli- (1) Fitting When fitting a model (law) to data the
cations of linguistic laws require and allow for a more
approachistotacitlyassumeitsvalidityandthensearch
rigorousstatisticalanalysisoftheresults. Tothisendwe
forthebestparameterstoaccountforthedata. Itcorre-
assume the linguistic law can be translated in a precise
sponds to a search in the (multidimensional) parameter
mathematical statement about a curve or distribution.
space α of the law for the value αˆ that maximize .
This distribution has a set of parameters and observa- L
In laws of the first kind – as listed in Sec. II – the
tions. Legitimate questions to be addressed are:
quantity to be estimated from data is a probability dis-
tributionP(x;α). Theprobabilityofanobservationx is
(1) Fitting. What are the best parameters of the law j
thusgivenbyP(x ;α). AssumingthatallJ observations
to describe a given data? j
are independent, the best parameter estimates αˆ are the
(2) Model Comparison. Is the law better than an values of α that maximize the log-likelihood
alternative one?
(3) Validity. Is the law compatible with the observa- log =logP(x ,x ,...x ;α)= logP˜(x ;α), (6)
eL 1 2 J j
tions? j=1
Thesepointsarerepresentativeofstatisticalanalysisper- The need for Maximum Likelihood (ML) methods when
formedmoregenerallyandshouldpreceedanymorefun- fitting power-law distributions (such as Zipf’s law) has
damental discussion on the origin and importance of a been emphasized in many recent publications. We refer
to the review article Ref. [50] and references therein for isthe(empirical)standarddeviationoverthewordswith
more details, and to Ref. [51] for fitting truncated distri- x-syllables and N(x) is the number of such words.
butions (e.g., due to cut-offs). InFig.2andTab.IIwereportthefitting,modelcom-
In laws of the second and third kind – as listed in parison,andvalidityanalysisfortheMenzerath-Altmann
Sec. II – the quantity to be described y is a function law – Eq. (4) – and three alternative functions with the
y =y (x;α(cid:126)). Fitting requires assumptions regarding the same number of parameters. The results show that two
possiblefluctuationsiny(x). Onepossibilityistoassume of the three alternative functions (shifted power law and
Gaussian fluctuations with a standard deviation σ(x). stretched exponential) provide a better description than
In this case, assuming again that the observations x are the proposed law, which we can safely consider to be in-
independent [52] compatible with the data (p-value< 10−5). Considering
thetwodatabases,thestretchedexponentialdistribution
y(x j ) y g (x j )
provides the best description and is not refuted. These
log − , (7)
eL∼− σ(x ) resultsdependstronglyontheprocedureusedtoidentify
phonemes and syllables (see Appendix).
where the sum is over all observations j. The best es-
timated parameters α(cid:126)ˆ are obtained minimizing χ2 =
(cid:80) (y(xj)−yg(xj))2, which maximizes (7). Least-squares C. Critical discussion
fitting is equivalent to Maximum-Likelihood fitting only
in the case of constant σ (independent of x) [52]. In the next paragraphs we critically discuss the likeli-
(2) Model Comparison The comparison between two hood approach considering the example of Zipf’s law.
different functional forms of the law (m1 and m2) Fitting as model comparison. Inthebeginningofthis
is done comparing their likelihoods, e.g., through section we started with the distinction between fitting
the log-likelihood ratio log / [53]. A value (i.e., fixing free parameters) and model comparison (i.e.
eL m1 L m2
log / = 1 ( 1) means it is e1 = 2.718... times choosing between different models). This division is di-
eL m1 L m2 −
more (less) likely that the data was generated by func- dactic [50], but from a formal point of view both proce-
tion m1 than by function m2. If the two models have dures correspond to hypothesis testing because the free
a different number of parameters, one can penalize the parameters of one fitting model can be thought as a
model with higher number of parameters using, e.g. the continuous parameterization of different models which
Akaike information criterion [54], or calculate the Bayes should be compared and selected according to their like-
factorbyaveraging(inthespaceofparameters)overthe lihood[56]. Thismeansthatthepointsmentionedbelow
full posterior distribution [55]. apply equally well to both fitting and hypothesis test-
(3) Validity The probabilistic nature of linguistic ing (and, in most cases, also to test the validity of the
laws requires statistical tests. One possible approach is models).
to compute the probability (p-value) of having observa- Fitting ranks. Power-law fitting recipes [50]– em-
tions similar to the data from a null model compatible ployed for linguistic [43] and non-linguistic problems –
with the linguistic law (which is assumed to be true). A suggesttofitZipf’slawusingthedistributionoffrequen-
low p-value is a strong indication that the null model is ciesP(f)giveninEq.(3). However, itisalsopossibleto
violated and may be used to refute the law (e.g., if p- use the rank formulation (2) [21] because the frequency
value<0.01). Defining a measure of distance D between of ranks f(r) is normalized f(r) = 1 and can thus
the data and the model, the p-value can be computed as be interpreted as a probability distribution. However, a
the fraction of finite-size realizations of the model (as- drawback in fitting f(r) is that the process of ranking
suming it is true) that show a distance D(cid:48) > D. In the introduces a bias in the estimator [57, 58]. For instance,
case of probability distributions – linguistic laws of the considerafinitesamplefromatrueZipfdistributioncon-
first kind in Sec. II – the distance D is usually taken taining ranks r =1,..., . Because of statistical fluctu-
to be the Kolmogorov-Smirnov distance (the largest dis- ations, some of the rankings will be inverted (or absent)
tancebetweentheempiricalandfittedcumulativedistri- so that when we rank the words according to the obser-
butions). In the case of simple function – linguistic laws vationsobtainranksdifferentfromtheonesdrawn. This
ofthesecondandthirdkindinSec.II–onecanconsider effectintroducesbiasinourestimationoftheparameters
D =χ2. (overestimatingthequalityofthefit). Thewordsaffected
Application: Menzerath-Altmann law. We applied by this bias are the ones with largest ranks, which con-
the likelihood analysis summarized above to the case of tribute very little to the estimation of the parameters of
the Menzerath-Altmann law introduced in Sec. II. Our Zipf’s law (as discussed below). Therefore, we expect
critical assumption here is that the law is intended to that this bias to become negligible for sufficiently large
describetheaveragenumberofphonemespersyllable,y, sample sizes.
computed over many words w with the same number of Representation matters. Equivalent formulations of
syllablesx. Assumingthewordsareindependentofeach thelinguisticlawsleadtodifferentstatisticalanalysisand
other,theuncertaintyiny(x)isthusthestandarderrorof conclusions[57,58]. Oneexampleofthispointistheuse
the mean given by σ (x)=σ (x)/ N(x), where σ (x) oftransformationsbeforethefittingisperformed,suchas
FIG.2: ModelcomparisonfortheMenzerath-Altmannlaw. Datapointsaretheaverageoverallword(types)inabook(Moby
DickbyH.Melville,asinFig.1). Thecurvesshowthebestfitsofthefouralternativecurves,asreportedinTab.II.Leftplot:
the data in the original scales, as in Fig. 1. Right plot: the distance between the curves and the points (yˆ−y)/σ , where the
uncertainty σ is the standard error of the mean.
TABLE II: Likelihood analysis of the Menzerath-Altmann law and three alternative functions. The parameters (αˆ,βˆ,γˆ) that
maximizethelikelihoodL ofmodelmwerecomputedusingthedownhillsimplexalgorithm(usingthePythonlibraryscipy).
The reported p-value corresponds to the fraction of random realizations with a χ2 larger than the observed χ2. In each
realization,onepointy (x)wasgeneratedateachxfromaGaussiandistributioncenteredatthemodelpredictiony (x)with
a standard deviation σ (x) given by the data. The best models and the results with p>0.01 are shown in bold face.
Menzerath-Altmann (MA) Shifted power law Stretched exp. Polynom
Results for one book (Moby Dick by H. Melville)
(αˆ,βˆ,γˆ) (3.3,−0.12,−0.051) (2.8,−0.65,−0.19) (1.5,1.4,−0.51) (3.9,−0.69,0.066)
log L /L 0 33 25 -475
p-value <10 5 0.611 0.064 <10 5
Results for English Wikipedia
(αˆ,βˆ,γˆ) (3.2,−0.45,−0.064) (2.8,−0.70,−0.18) (1.6,1.5,−0.60) (3.8,−0.64,0.061)
log L /L 0 11 49 −1898
p-value <10 5 2×10 5 0.93 <10 5
the linear fit of Zipf’s law in logarithmic scale discussed a straight line in log-log scale using logarithmic binning
in Sec. IVA. The variables used to represent the linguis- gives the same value for words across the full spectrum
ticlawarealsocrucialwhenlikelihoodmethodsareused, (in a logarithmic scale), the statistical rigorous methods
as discussed above for the case of Zipf’s law represented of Maximum Likelihood will be dominated either by the
inf(r)orP(f). Whileasymptoticallytheseformulations mostfrequent(incaseoffittinginf(r))orleastfrequent
are equivalent, the likelihood computed in both cases is (in case of fitting in P(f)) words.
different. InthelikelihoodofP(f),anobservationcorre- Beyond Zipf’s law, the reasoning above shows that
sponds to the frequency of a word type. This means that even if asymptotically (i.e. infinite data) different for-
the most frequent words in the database count the same mulations of a law are equivalent, the representation in
aswordsappearingonlyonce(thehapax-legomenan). In whichwetestthelawmattersbecauseitassumesasam-
practice, the part of the distribution that matters the pling process of the data. This in turn leads to different
most in the fitting (and in the likelihood) are the words results when applied to finite and often noisy data and
with very few counts, which contribute very little to the has to be taken into account when interpreting the re-
total text. In the likelihood of f(r) the observational sults.
quantity is the rank r of each occurrence of the word Application: FittingZipf’slaw. InFig.3andTab.III
meaning that each word token counts the same. This
we compare the different fitting methods described
means that the frequent words contribute more and the
above. Thevisualagreementbetweendataandthefitted
fitting of f(r) is robust against rare words. Linear re-
curves reflects the different weights given by the meth-
gression in log-log plot counts every point in the plot
ods to different regions of the distribution as discussed
the same and, since there are more points for large r,
above (high-frequency words for f(r) and low-frequency
low-frequency words dominate the fit. Using logarithmic
wordsfortheothertwocases). Notsurprisingly,Tab.III
binning, as suggested in Ref. [48], equalize the impor-
showsthattheestimatedexponentαvariesfrommethod
tance of words across log(r). In summary, while fitting
to method. This variation is larger than the variation
10− 1 10− 2 10− 3
100 101 102 103 104 105
10− 1 10−1 10− 2 10−2 10− 3 101 103 105 10− 4
10− 5 10− 6
d fit ata 10− 7
100 101 102 103 104 105
1 1 1 0 0 0 − − − 3 2 1 − − 4 2 101 103 105 − 6
data 12 fit −
− 0 2 4 6 8 10
LS:logf(logr)
data (a) (b) fit (c)
100 102 104 106
10−1 10− 2
102 104 106
data 10− 8
100 102 104 106 108
100 102 104 106 108
− 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16
LS:logf(logr)
FIG. 3: Comparison of the Zipf’s law obtained using three different fitting methods. Results are shown for one book (Moby
DickbyH.Melville,toprow)andforthecompleteEnglishWikipedia(bottomrow). DataisfittedusingMaximumLikelihood
(ML)inthefrequencyrankf(r)(left),MLinthefrequencydistributionP(f)∼p(k)(center),andleastsquare(LS)inthelogf
vs. logr representation (right). Insets show the cumulative distributions. See Tab. III for the parameter αˆ and significance
testofthefits. Intheplotinthecenter,insteadofP(f)weusethedistributiontheunnormalizedfrequencyp(k)(i.e.,k isthe
number of occurrences ofa word inthe database). For ML fits, we useda discretepowerlawin f(r) andp(k) withsupportin
[1,∞) (exponents were obtained using the downhill simplex algorithm of the Python library scipy). For the LS fit, we used a
continuous straight line in logf(logr) [52].
TABLE III: Zipf’s law exponent obtained using different fitting methods, see Fig. 3. In the fit of P(f) (frequency) we obtain
αˆ Z† and calculate αˆ Z =1/(1−αˆ Z†), see Eqs. (2)-(3). English version of the books were obtained from the Project Gutenberg,
see Appendix.
Rank: f(r) Frequency: P(f) Linear: logf(logr)
Book αˆ p-value αˆ p-value αˆ R2
Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland (L. Carroll) 1.22 <10 4 1.46 <10 4 1.21 0.97
The Voyage Of The Beagle (C. Darwin) 1.20 <10 4 1.59 <10 4 1.29 0.97
The Jungle (U. Sinclair) 1.21 <10 4 1.45 <10 4 1.22 0.98
Life On The Mississippi (M. Twain) 1.20 <10 4 1.38 <10 4 1.16 0.98
Moby Dick; or The Whale (H. Melville) 1.19 <10 4 1.38 <10 4 1.15 0.98
Pride and Prejudice (J. Austen) 1.21 <10 4 1.66 <10 4 1.35 0.98
Don Quixote (M. Cervantes) 1.21 <10 4 1.70 <10 4 1.38 0.98
The Adventures of Tom Sawyer (M. Twain) 1.21 <10 4 1.29 <10 4 1.12 0.98
Ulysses (J. Joyce) 1.18 <10 4 1.15 <10 4 1.03 0.97
War and Peace (L. Tolstoy) 1.20 <10 4 1.84 <10 4 1.44 0.97
English Wikipedia 1.17 <10 4 1.60 <10 4 1.58 0.99
across different databases. Large values of R2 computed analysisisthatpower-lawdistributionsarenotaswidely
in the linear fit, usually interpreted as an indication of valid as previously claimed (see also Refs. [50, 59]), but
good fitting, are observed also when the p-value are very often are better than alternative (simple) descriptions
low. (see our previous publication Ref. [21] in which we con-
Correlatedsamples Thefailureofpassingsignificance sider two-parameter generalizations of Zipf’s law). The
testsforincreasingdatasizeisnotsurprisingbecauseany main criticism we have on this widely used framework
smalldeviationfromthenullmodelbecomesstatistically of analysis is that it ignores the presence of correlations
significant. A possible conclusion emerging from these in the data: the computation of the likelihood in Eq. (6)
102 103 104 105
f=0.00087 0.015
102 103 104 105
FIG.4: Estimationofthefrequencyofawordinthefirstnwordtokensofabook(MobyDickbyH.Melville). Theredcurve
correspondstotheactualobservation(word“water”intheleftandword“whale”intheright)andthebluecurvetothecurve
measured in a version of the book in which all word tokens were randomly shuffled. The shaded regions show the expected
fluctuations (±2σ) assuming that the probability of using the word is given by the frequency of the word in the whole book
(f(n=N)andthat: (i)usageisrandom(blueregion)–seealsoRef.[7]or(ii)thetimebetweensuccessiveusagesoftheword
is drawn randomly from a stretched exponential distribution with exponent β =0.5, as proposed in Ref. [24].
assumesindependentobservations. Furthermore,thisas- basedonindependentsampling. Theproblemaffectsalso
sumption leads to an underestimation of the expected modelcomparisonandfittingbecausetheseproblemsare
fluctuations (e.g. KS-distance) in the calculation of the also based on the likelihood (in these cases, correlation
p-value when assessing the validity of the law. It is thus affects all models and therefore it is unclear the extent
unclear in which extent a negative result in the valid- in which it impacts the choice of the best model).
ity test (e.g., p-value 0.01) is due to a failure of the
proposed law or, instead, is due to the violation of the
hypothesis of independent sampling. This hypothesis is
V. RELATION BETWEEN LAWS
known to be violated in texts [7, 25]: the sequence of
words and letters are obviously related to each other. In
In view of the different laws proposed to describe text
Fig. 4 we show that these correlations affect the estima-
properties,anaturalquestionistherelationshipbetween
tion of the frequency of individual words, which show
them (e.g., whether one law can be derived from an-
fluctuations much larger than those expected not only
other or whether there are generative processes that ac-
based on the independent random usage of words (Pois-
count for more than one law simultaneously). For in-
son or bag of word models) but also in a null model in
stance, Ref. [28] clarifies how the long-range correlation
which burstiness is included [24, 25]. Altogether, this
of texts is related to the skewed distribution of recur-
shows that the independence assumption – used to write
rence time between words [2, 24, 25] (a consequence of
the likelihood (6) – is strongly violated and affects both
burstiness [8, 62]). Another well-known relation is the
the analysis based on f(r) (correlation throughout a
connection between Heaps’ law and Zipf’s law [19, 21–
book) and P(f) (f can be thought as a finite size es-
23, 39] (see Refs. [23, 29, 30, 62] for other examples).
timation as the ones shown in Fig. 4).
Here again the importance of fluctuations and an under-
One approach to take into account correlations is to lying null model is often neglected.
estimate a time for which two observations are indepen- The need for a null model is evident if we consider a
dent, and then consider observations only after this time text in which all possible words appear once in the very
(a smaller effective sample size). Alternative approaches beginning of the text, violating Heaps’ law, even though
considered statistical tests for specific classes of stochas- their frequency over the full text is still compatible with
tic processes (correlated in time) [60] or based on es- Zipf’s law. A typical null model is to consider that ev-
timations of the correlation coming from the data [61]. ery word is used independently from the others with a
The application of these methods to linguistic laws is probability equal to its global frequency. This probabil-
not straightforward because these methods fail in cases ity is usually taken to be constant throughout the text
in which no characteristic correlation time exist. Books (Poisson process), but alternative formulations consid-
show such long-range correlations [27], also in the posi- ering time-dependent frequencies lead to similar results.
tion of individual words in books [26, 28], in agreement Forthisgenerativemodel,Zipf’slaw(2)leadstoaHeaps’
with the observations reported in Fig. 4. More gener- law (5) with parameters α H = 1/α Z [21]. Similar null
ally, correlations lead to a slower convergence to asymp- models are implicitly or explicitly assumed in different
totic values and it is thus possible to create processes of derivations [19, 21–23, 39].
textgenerationthatcomplytoalinguisticlawasymptot- Figure5showsthattheconnectionbetweenZipf’sand
ically but that (in finite samples) violate statistical tests Heaps’ law using the independent usage of words fails to
100 102 104 106
:ycneuqerf
100 101 102 103 104 105
textlength: N
:yralubacov
100 101 102 103 104
mean: µ V(N)
FIG. 5: Relation between Zipf’s law and Heaps’ law in the English Wikipedia. Fixing the rank-frequency distribution of
the complete English Wikipedia – shown in panel (a) – and assuming each word to follow a Poisson process (i.e., to be used
randomly) with fixedfrequency f(r), one obtains the blue curve for the Heaps’law in (b). Consideringeach Wikipedia article
separately – as shown by black dots in (b) – we estimate in a moving window centered in N the average µ and standard
deviationσ overallarticlesinthewindow. Thedependenceofµ (N)onN isshownin(b)byasolidline. Thedependence
ofσ (N)onµ (N)isshownin(c)andrevealsadifferentscalingthantheonepredictedbythePoissonmodel. Figureadapted
from Ref. [23].
reproduce the fluctuations observed in data. In particu- theexistenceofadditionalprocessesignoredbythelaw).
lar, the fluctuations around the average vocabulary size
The mainlimitation ofthe methods wedescribed, and
V predicted from Heaps’ law scales linearly with N, and
thus of the conclusions summarized above, is that they
notas√N aspredictedbytheindependenceassumption
werebasednotonlyonthestatementofthelawbutalso
(throughthecentrallimittheorem). InRef.[23]wehave
onthehypothesisthatobservationsareindependentand
shown that this scaling – also known as Taylor’s law [63]
identically distributed. This hypothesis is known to be
– is a result of correlations in the usage among differ-
violated in almost all observations of written language.
ent words induced by the existence of topical structures
Itisthusunclearinwhichextenttherejectionofthenull
inside and across books.
model(smallp-value)canbeconsideredafalsificationof
thelinguisticlaw. Ontheonehand,thisreasoningshows
the limitation of the statistical methods and the neces-
VI. DISCUSSION sity to apply and develop tests able to deal with (long-
range)correlateddata. Ontheotherhand,itshowsthat
theusualstatementsoflinguisticlawsareincompletebe-
Itiscommontofindclaimsthataparticularlinguistic
cause they cannot be properly tested. A meaningful for-
law is valid in a language or corpus. A closer inspec-
mulation of a linguistic law allows for the computation
tion for the statistical support of these claims is often
of the likelihood of the observations, e.g., it should be
disappointing. In this Chapter we performed a critical
accompanied by a prediction of the fluctuations, a gen-
discussion of linguistic laws, the sense in which they can
erative model for the relevant variables, or, ultimately,
beconsideredvalid,andtheextentinwhichtheevidence
a model for the generation of texts. Such models are
support its validity. We argued that linguistic laws have
usually interpreted as an explanation of the origin of the
to be interpreted in a statistical sense. Therefore, model
laws [11, 12, 14] and are absent from the statement of
selection(alsofitting)andthecompatibilitytodatahave
the linguistic laws, despite the fact that Herdan already
to be performed computing statistical tests based on the
drew attention to this point [1]: “The quantities which
likelihood(plausibility)oftheobservations. Thestatisti-
we call statistical laws being only expectations, they are
calanalysisisfarfrombeingfreeofchoices,bothinterms
subject to random fluctuations whose extent must be re-
of the methods employed and also about additional as-
garded as part of the statistical law.” In the same sense
sumptionsnotcontainedintheoriginallaw,asdiscussed
that a scientific law cannot be judged separated from a
below. The analysis we presented above is intended to
theory,linguisticlawsareonlyfullydefinedonceagener-
show that these choices matter and should be carefully
ative process is given. The existence of long-range corre-
discussed. The picture that emerges from the straight
lations, burstiness, and topical variations lead to strong
applications of the statistical tests above is that: (i) the
fluctuations in the estimations of observables in texts,
linguistic laws are often the best simple description of
including the quantities described by linguistic laws.
the data, but (ii) the data is not generated according to
it so that in a strict sense the validity of the law is fal- Our findings have consequences to applications in in-
sified. This interpretation suggests that linguistic laws formation retrieval and text generation. For instance,
are useful and capture some of the ingredients seen in our results show that strong fluctuations around specific
language, but are unable to describe observations in full lawsareobservedandthatresultsobtainedusingthein-
detaileveninthelimitoflargetexts(possiblybecauseof dependenceassumption(e.g., bag-of-wordsmodels)have
a limited applicability. Therefore, statistical laws should between two consecutive blank spaces was considered to
not be imposed too strictly in the generation of artifi- be a word.
cialtextsorintheanalysisofunknowndatabases. Large The English Wikipedia data was obtained from Wiki-
the laws themselves and therefore the creativity in the filtering was the same as the one used in Ref. [23], in
generation of texts is much larger than the one obtained which we removed capitalization and kept only those
if laws are imposed as strict constraints. words (i.e. sequences of symbols separated by blank
Finally we would like to mention that our conclusions space)whichconsistedexclusivelyoftheletters“a-z”and
apply also to other statistical laws beyond linguistic. In- the apostrophe.
variably, the increase of data size leads to a rejection The computation of Menzerath-Altmann law appear-
of null-models, e.g. many recent works emphasize that ing in Figs. 1, 2, and Tab. II was done starting from the
claimsofpower-lawdistributionsdonotsurviverigorous unique words (word type) in the database discussed in
statisticaltests[13,50,59]. However,thestatisticaltests the previous paragraphs. For each word w we applied
employed in these references, and in most likelihood- the following steps:
based analysis, rely on the independence assumption of
the observations (known to be violated in many of the
treated cases). Nevertheless, we are not aware that this
//wordnet.princeton.edu in the NLTK Python
point has been critically discussed in the large number
of publications on power-law fitting. The crucial role of
mechanistic models in the fitting and statistical analysis
of scaling laws was emphasized in Ref. [64] for urban- 2. Count the number of syllables x w based on the
economic data. Moby Hyphenation List by Grady Ward, available
Francesc Font-Clos, and Anna Deluca for insightful dis- 3. Count the number of phonemes z w based on
cussions. The CMU Pronouncing Dictionary, version 0.7b
available at www.speech.cs.cmu.edu/cgi-bin/
For the book Moby Dick by H. Melville, this procedure
ThebookslistedinTab.IIIwereobtainedfromProject allowed to compute x and z for 11,595 words, 66% of
and data filtering are the same as the ones used in theWikipedia,weobtain60,749words,1.7%ofthetotal
Ref. [28] (see the Supplementary information of that pa- number. The low success in Wikipedia is due to the size
per for further details). We removed capitalization and of the database (large number of rare words) and the
all symbols except the letters “a-z”, the number “0-9”, resultsdependmorestronglyontheproceduredescribed
theapostrophe,andtheblankspace. Astringofsymbols above than on the database itself.
[1] G.Herdan,QuantitativeLinguistics(ButterworthPress, arXiv:1412.3336 (2014).
Oxford, 1964) [9] G. Barbieri, F. Pachet, P. Roy, and M. Degli Esposti,
[2] G.K.Zipf,ThePsycho-BiologyofLanguage(Routledge, Markov Constraints for Generating Lyrics with Style,
London,1936).Id.,Humanbehaviorandtheprincipleof 20th European Conference on Artificial Inteligence –
least effort ( Addison-Wesley Press, Oxford, 1949). ECAI (IOS Press, Amsterdam, 2012)
[3] R. Ko¨hler, G. Altmann, and R. G. Piotrowski (Eds.) [10] H.A.Simon,OnaClassofSkewDistributionFunctions,
Quantitative Linguistik. Ein internationales Handbuch. Biometrika 42, 425 (1955).
Quantitative Linguistics. An international Handbook. [11] M. Mitzenmacher, A Brief History of Generative Mod-
(=HSK27) (de Gruyter, Berlin, 2005). elsforPowerLawandLognormalDistributions,Internet
[4] R. Ko¨hler, G. Altmann, and P. Grzybek (Eds), Quanti- Mathematics 1, 226 (2004).
tative Linguistics, De Gruyer Mouton, www.degruyter. [12] M.E.J. Newman, Power Laws, Pareto Distributions and
com/view/serial/35295 Cited 6 Feb 2015. Zipfs law, Contemp. Phys. 46, 323 (2005).
//www.glottopedia.org/index.php/Laws Cited 17 Dec (2002).
2014. [14] S.T.Piantadosi,Zipfswordfrequencylawinnaturallan-
[6] Enciclopedia entry: Laws in Quantitative linguistics, guage: A critical review and future directions. Psycho-
[7] R. Harald Baayen, Word Frequency Distributions, [15] D.ZanetteandM.Montemurro,DynamicsofTextGen-
Kluwer Academic Pub., Dordrecht (2001). erationwithRealisticZipf’sDistribution,J.Quant.Lin-
[8] D.H.Zanette,StatisticalPatternsinWrittenLanguage, guist. 12, 29 (2005).
[16] G. Altmann, Prolegomena to Menzerath’s law, Glot- wikipedia.org/wiki/Constrained_writing Cited
tometrika 2, 1 (1980). 3 Dec 2014.
[17] I. Cramer. The Parameters of the Altmann-Menzerath [38] D.R.Amancio,E.G.Altmann,D.Rybski,O.N.Oliveira
Law. J. Quant. Linguist. 12, 41 (2005). Jr, LdF Costa, Probing the Statistical Properties of Un-
[18] L. Egghe, Untangling Herdan’s Law and Heaps’ Law : known Texts: Application to the Voynich Manuscript,
Mathematical and Informetric Arguments, J. Am. Soc. PLOS ONE 8, e67310 (2013).
Inf. Sci. Tec. 58,702 (2007). [39] S.Bernhardsson,L.E.C.daRocha,P.Minnhagen,Size-
[19] L.Lu¨,Z.-K.Zhang,T.Zhou,Zipf’sLawleadstoHeaps’ dependent word frequencies and translational invariance
law: Analyzing Their Relation in Finite-Size Systems, of books, Physica A 389, 330 (2010).
PLOS ONE 5, e14139 (2010). [40] G.Febres,K.Jaff´e,andC.Gershenson,ComplexityMea-
[20] A.M.Petersen,J.N.Tenenbaum,S.Havlin,H.E.Stan- surementofNaturalandArtificialLanguages,Complex-
lometric scaling and the decreasing need for new words, [41] J.R. Williams, J.P. Bagrow, C.M. Danforth, and P.S.
Scientific Reports 2, 943 (2012) Dodds, Text mixing shapes the anatomy of rank-
[21] M.GerlachandE.G.Altmann,Stochasticmodelforthe frequency distributions: a modern zipfian mechanics for
vocabularygrowthinnaturallanguages,PhysicalReview natural language, arXiv:1409.3870 (2014)
X 3, 021006 (2013) [42] J. Baixeries, B. Elvevag, R. Ferrer-i-Cancho, The Evo-
[22] F.Font-Clos,G.Boleda,A.Corral,Ascalinglawbeyond lution of the Exponent of Zipf’s Law in Language On-
Zipf’slawanditsrelationtoHeaps’law,NewJournalof togeny, PLOS ONE 8, e53227 (2013).
Physics, 2013. [43] G. Ja¨ger, Power Laws and other heavy-tailed distribu-
[23] M Gerlach and EG Altmann, Scaling laws and fluctua- tioninlinguistictypology,Adv.Comp.Syst.15,1150019
tions in the statistics of word frequencies, New Journal (2012).
of Physics 16, 113010 (2014) [44] B. Corominas-Murtra, J. Fortuny, and R.V. Sol, Emer-
[24] E. G. Altmann, J. B. Pierrehumbert, and A. E. Mot- gence of Zipfs Law in the Evolution of Communication,
ter. Beyond word frequency: bursts, lulls, and scaling in Phys. Rev. E 83, 036115 (2011).
the temporal distributions of words. PlosOne. 4, e7678 [45] R.Ferrer-i-Cancho,Optimizationmodelsofnaturalcom-
(2009). munication, arXiv:1412.2486 (2014).
[25] J.Lijffijt,P.Papapetrou,K.Puolama¨ki,H.Mannila,An- [46] M.Marsili,I.Mastromatteo,andY.Roudi,Onsampling
alyzing Word Frequencies in Large Text Corpora Using and modeling complex systems, J. of Stat. Mech. 2013,
Inter-arrival Times and Bootstrapping, Chapter in Ma- P09003 (2013).
chine Learning and Knowledge Discovery in Databases, [47] J.Peterson,P.D.Dixit,andK.Dill,Amaximumentropy
Lecture Notes in Computer Science 6912, 341 (2011). frameworkfornonexponentialdistributions,PNAS,110,
[26] F.J.Damerau,B.Mandelbrot,Testsofthedegreeofword 20380 (2013)
clusteringinsamplesofwrittenEnglish,Linguistics102, [48] M. L. Goldstein, S. A. Morris, and G. G. Yen. Prob-
pp. 58-72 (1973). lemswithfittingtothepower-lawdistribution.European
[27] A. Schenkel, J. Zhang, and Y. Zhang, Long range corre- Journal of Physics B. 41, 255-258 (2004).
lation in human writings, Fract. 1, 47 (1993). [49] H. Bauke. Parameter estimation for power-law distribu-
[28] E.G.Altmann,G.Cristadoro,andM.DegliEsposti.On tionsbymaximumlikelihoodmethods.EuropeanJournal
theoriginoflong-rangecorrelationsintexts.PNAS.109, of Physics B. 58, 167-173 (2007).
11582 (2012). [50] A. Clauset, C. R.Shalizi, and M. E. J. Newman. Power-
[29] W. Ebeling and T. Pschel Europhys. Lett. 26 24 (1994). LawDistributionsinEmpiricalData.SIAMReview.51,
[30] L. Debowski. On Hilberg’s law and its links with 661703 (2009).
Guiraud’s law. J. Quant. Linguist.. 13, 81-109 (2006). [51] A.DelucaandA.Corral.Fittingandgoodness-of-fittest
[31] S. T. Piantadosi, H. Tily, and E. Gibson, Word lengths ofnon-truncatedandtruncatedpower-lawdistributions.
are optimized for efficient communication, PNAS 108, Acta Geophysica. 61, 1351-1394 (2013).
3526 (2011). [52] T.Hastie,R.Tibshirani,andJ.Friedman.Theelements
[32] R. V. Sol´e, B. Corominas-Murtra, S. Valverde, and L. of statistical learning (Springer, New York, 2009).
Steels,LanguageNetworks: theirstructure,functionand [53] K.P.BurnhamandD.R.Anderson.Modelselectionand
evolution, Complexity 15, 20 (2009) multimodal inference: a practical information-theoretic
[33] M. Choudhury and A. Mukherjee: The Structure and approach. Spinger, New York (2002).
Dynamics of Linguistic Networks, in Dynamics On and [54] H. Akaike. A new look at the statistical model identi-
Of Complex Networks (Springer 2009) pp 145-166. fication. IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control. 19,
[34] A. Baronchelli, R. Ferrer-i-Cancho, R. Pastor-Satorras, 716-723 (1974).
N. Chater, M. H. Christiansen, Networks in Cognitive [55] R. E. Kass and A. E. Raftery. Bayes Factors. Journal of
Science, Trends in Cognitive Sciences 17, 348 (2013). theAmericanStatisticalAssociation.90,773-795(1995).
[35] J. Cong and H. Liu, Approaching human language with [56] E. T. Jaynes, Probability Theory: The Logic of Science
complex networks, Physics of Life Reviews 11, 598 (Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2003).
(2014). [57] R. Gu¨nther, L. Levitin, B. Schapiro, P. Wagner, Zipf ’s
[36] B.Mandelbrot,1961OntheTheoryofWordFrequencies lawandtheeffectofrankingonprobabilitydistributions,
andonRelatedMarkovianModelsofDiscourseStructure Int. J. Theor. Phys. 35, 395 (1996).
of Language and Its Mathematical Aspects: Proceedings [58] M. Cristelli, M. Batty, and L. Pietronero, There is more
of Symposia in Applied Mathematics Vol. XII (Provi- thanapowerlawinZipf,Scientificreports2,812.(2015).
dence, RI: American Mathematical Society) [59] M.P.H.StumpfandM.A.Porter.CriticalTruthsAbout
[60] M.S. Weiss. Modification of the Kolmogorov-Smirnov in Physics. 57, 89-142 (2008).
Statistic for Use with Correlated Data. Journal of the [64] R. Louf and M. Barthelemy, Scaling: lost in the smog,
American Statistical Association. 73, 872-875 (1978). Environment and Planning B: Planning and Design 41,
[61] R. Chicheportiche and J.-P. Bouchaud. Goodness-of-Fit 767 (2014).
testswithDependentObservations.JournalofStatistical [65] While some of the laws clearly intend to speak about
Mechanics: Theory and Experiment. P09003 (2011). the language as whole, in practice they are tested and
[62] M.A. Serrano, A. Flammini, and F. Menczer, Modeling motivatedbyobservationsinspecifictextswhicharethus
statisticalpropertiesofwrittentext.,PlOSONE4,e5372 implicitlyorexplicitlyassumedtoreflectthelanguageas
(2009). a whole.
[63] Z. Eisler, I. Bartos, and J. Kert´esz. Fluctuation scaling [66] ArelativeofMaxwell’sDaemonknownfromThermody-
in complex systems: Taylor’s law and beyond. Advances namics.