State Estimation for Tensegrity Robots
Ken Caluwaerts1,∗, Jonathan Bruce2,∗, Jeffrey M. Friesen3, and Vytas SunSpiral4
Abstract—Tensegrity robots are a class of compliant robots
that have many desirable traits when designing mass efficient
systems that must interact with uncertain environments. Var-
ious promising control approaches have been proposed for
tensegritysystemsinsimulation.Unfortunately,stateestimation
methods for tensegrity robots have not yet been thoroughly
studied. In this paper, we present the design and evaluation
of a state estimator for tensegrity robots. This state estimator
will enable existing and future control algorithms to transfer
from simulation to hardware. Our approach is based on the
unscentedKalmanfilter(UKF)andcombinesinertialmeasure-
ments, ultra wideband time-of-flight ranging measurements,
and actuator state information. We evaluate the effectiveness
ofourmethodontheSUPERball,atensegritybasedplanetary
exploration robotic prototype. In particular, we conduct tests
for evaluating both the robot’s success in estimating global
positioninrelationtofixedrangingbasestationsduringrolling
maneuvers as well as local behavior due to small-amplitude Fig.1:TheSUPERballprototype,asixstruttensegrityrobot
deformations induced by cable actuation.
with 12 actuated cables and 12 passive cables. Our state
estimation algorithm is evaluated on this platform.
I. INTRODUCTION
Tensegrity robotics is a relatively young field of research
wherein a robot is structured according to tensegrity princi-
We focus on the use of low-cost ranging modules and
ples.Wedefineatensegrityasastructurewithdiscontinuous
inertial measurement units mounted to the rods of a tenseg-
compression elements suspended within a web of tension
rity robot as the sensor inputs to an unscented Kalman
elements. In this class of robots, motion is often achieved
filter (UKF). These ranging sensors can be purchased off-
throughactuationofthetensileelementswithinthestructure.
the-shelf and do not rely on any user-designed mechanical
Tensegrity robots have highly coupled dynamics due to
infrastructure to operate. We also use motor encoders to
their interconnected network of compliant tensile elements.
sense change in cable rest length as control inputs into
As such, an external force exerted at a single point will
the dynamic model utilized by the UKF. For testing our
cause a global displacement in all nodal positions of the
approach, we use the SUPERball prototype, a six strut
system.Thispropertyisbeneficialinthatitallowsthesystem
tensegrity robot designed to explore tensegrity systems for
to passively adapt to external forces and redistribute loads
planetary exploration [5][6]. SUPERball is shown in Fig. 1.
effectively through the tension network. However, it also
This paper is organized as follows. We first present a
causes difficulties in determining the state of the system
detailed overview of the system’s sensors, ranging method
when only limited sensor information is available.
andcalibrationroutine.Wethendescribetheimplementation
Variouscontrolapproacheshavebeenproposedfortenseg-
oftheunscentedKalmanfilterandthedynamicsmodel.This
rity systems in simulation. However, these algorithms often
is followed by our experimental results. We end this paper
relyonfullstateortrajectoryinformation[1][2][3][4].Inthis
with our conclusions and future outlook.
paper, we present the design and evaluation of a state esti-
mator for this class of robot which will allow the transfer of II. SUPERBALLOVERVIEW
these existing and future control algorithms from simulation TheSphericalUnderactuatedPlanetaryExplorationRobot
to hardware. (SUPERball) is a preliminary tensegrity robot prototype
developedattheNASAAmesResearchCenter.Thepurpose
*Theseauthorscontributedequallytothiswork.
This work was performed while all authors were at the the SUPERball project is to develop technologies for a new
NASAAmesResearchCenter, Moffett Field CA, USA, with funding class of planetary exploration robot which is able to deploy
fromNASAsNSTRF,NIACandGCDPrograms. from a compact launch volume, land at high speeds without
1Oak Ridge Associated Universities (ORAU), Oak Ridge TN, USA
ken.caluwaerts@nasa.gov the use of air-bags, and provide robust surface mobility.
2University of California Santa Cruz, Santa Cruz CA, USA This broad set of functions can be enabled by utilizing the
jebruce@ucsc.edu
efficiency and structural compliance of tensegrity robots.
3University of California San Diego, San Diego CA, USA
jfriesen@ucsd.edu Passive-structure drop tests have confirmed the analysis
4SGTInc.,GreenbeltMD,USAvytas.sunspiral@nasa.gov supporting the high-speed landing concept, and the current
2v04210.0151:viXra
prototype of SUPERball is intended to develop the foun- Inthismode,themodulesexchange3packetstoestimatethe
dational engineering approaches required to support surface time-of-flightbetweeneachother.Whilethetime-of-flightof
locomotion by tensegrity robots. A full system overview is unsynchronizedmodulescanbeestimatedwiththeexchange
out of the scope of this paper, but the relevant details of the of only 2 packets, the employed mode can significantly
systemwillbediscussed.PleaserefertoBruceet.al.[5]and reduce measurement noise [8].
Sabelhaus and Bruce [6] for system details. ThebasicrangingpacketexchangeisshowninFig.2.One
Relevant to this work are the sensors, actuators, and module sends out a poll message containing an emission
the ROS network implemented on SUPERball. SUPERball timestamp (t ) using its local clock. A second module
consistsof6identicalrodsheldtogetherby24cablesin-line receives this message and timestamps the time of arrival
with springs. As described in [5], each rod of SUPERball is using its local clock (t ). The second module then sends
comprised of two modular tensegrity robotic platforms (end out a response packet at time t (module 2’s clock). The
caps). Each platform is equipped with inertial measurement first module receives this packet at time t (module 1’s
units, a motor with encoders, and a fully enabled Robot clock). Module 1 now sends out a final message containing
Operating System (ROS) node which communicates to our t and the emission time of the final message (t ,
ROS network via WiFi. SUPERball is underactuated and clock of module 1). Module 2 receives this information and
only 12 out of the 24 cables can be actuated (shortened) timestamps it (t ).
by spooling cable around a spindle (one per end cap). This
allowstherobottorollthroughdeformation.Sinceeachmod- module 1 module 2
ulartensegrityplatformcanbeoutfittedwithsensors,ranging TOF tSP poll (tSP) tRP a b
sensors were added for this paper to enable positioning. The c
ranging sensors are discussed in detail in Section III. TOF'tRR response tSR d
III. RANGINGSETUPANDCALIBRATION TOF''
tSF final (tRR, tSF)
This section introduces the hardware and software setup Fig.2:Basicsymmetricdouble-sidetwo-wayrangingpacket
forasetofwirelessrangingmodulestoenablepositiontrack- exchange. Modules 1 and 2 exchange 3 packets (poll, re-
ingoftherobotbothasanasinternaldistancemeasurements sponse, and final). Module 2 then estimates the distance
(end cap to end cap) an in an external (world) reference between the modules based on the local timestamps.
frame.
WeequippedallendcapsofSUPERballwithaDWM1000 Module 2 can now estimate the time-of-flight and the
ranging module from DecaWave Ltd. By employing ultra distance between itself and module 1 based on the 6 times-
wideband technology, the low-cost DWM1000 modules pro- tampes.Thebasicequationstoestimatethedistancebetween
vide wireless data transfer and highly accurate timestamps module i and module j (module i initiates the ranging and
oftransmittedandreceivedpackets.Thisallowsthedistance module j computes the distance) are given by:
between two DWM1000 modules to be estimated by com-
puting the time-of-flight of exchanged messages without the a i = ti SF −ti SP (1)
need for synchronized clocks. We opted for this technology b = tj,i −tj,i (2)
because it allows proprioceptive state estimation (distances c = tj,i −tj (3)
between end caps), which cannot be easily tracked directly j,i RF SR
d = ti −ti,j (4)
via motor encoders. [7] Furthermore, we placed eight more i,j SF RR
DWM1000 modules as ”fixed anchors” around our testing
(cid:18) (cid:19)
area to provide a world reference frame for ground truth TOF ≈ 1 c −d b j,i −δ (5)
and generation of a reward signal for the machine learning j,i 2 j,i i,j a j,i
algorithmsthatwewillusetodeveloplocomotioncontrollers 1 (cid:18) b (cid:19)
(cid:107)N −N (cid:107) ≈ c −d j,i −o (6)
for the robot. Our intention is that the fixed anchors will not j i 2c j,i i,j a j,i
be required in the final deployed version of the robot, and .
are primarily for use during algorithm development.
We first introduce the basic sensor operation and our The variables a, b, c, and d are also visualized in Fig. 2.
approach to efficiently estimate distances between a large The time-of-flight calculation between two modules i and j
number of sensor modules. This is followed by a discussion (TOF = TOF ) is hindered by a fixed measurement
of our ranging software and hardware setup. Finally, we offset (δ = δ ). This offset is due to antenna delays
provide a calibration routine similar to a common motion and other discrepancies between the timestamps and actual
capture system that allows for quick set up of the sensor packetreceptionoremission.Whereasthisoffsetisexpected
network. tobeuniquetoeachmodule,wefoundthatitisnecessaryto
estimatethisoffsetpairwiseforcloselylocatedmodules.Our
A. Sensor Operation
hypothesisisthattheproximityoftherobot’smotorsandthe
1) Bidirectional Ranging: We operate the DWM1000 in sensor’spositionneartheendcap’smetalstructureinfluence
theso-calledsymmetricdouble-sidedtwo-wayrangingmode. the antenna characteristics between pairs of modules.
Eq. 6 estimates the distances between the modules based
on the time-of-flight calculation (c is the speed of light).
We rewrite the time offset δ as a distance offset o (with
o =o ). Here N and N refer to the positions of nodes
j,i i,j i j
i and j respectively (see Section IV). The variables m
represent the uncorrected distance estimates.
The DWM1000 requires careful configuration for optimal
performance. We provide our main configuration settings in
Table I. The ranging modules tend to measure non line-
of-sight paths near reflective surfaces (e.g. floor, computer
monitors), which may cause filter instability. Using the
DWM1000’s built-in signal power estimator, we reject such
suspicious packets. In practice, between 30% and 70% of
packets are rejected in our indoor test environment.
TABLE I: DWM1000 configuration
bitrate channel preamble PRF preamblecode
6.8Mbits−1 7 256 64MHz 17
2) Broadcast Ranging: Due to the large number of ex-
changed packets (3 per pair) bidirectional ranging between
pairsofmodulesquicklybecomesinefficientwhenthenum-
ber of modules grows. We propose a simple approach using
timed broadcast messages that scales linearly in the number
ofmodules(3packetspermodule).Inthissetuponemodule
periodicallyinitiatesameasurementsequencebysendingout
a poll message. When another module receives this message
itemitsitsown poll messageafterafixeddelaybased onits
ID,followedbyresponseandfinalmessagesafteradditional
delays. Broadcast ranging is illustrated in Fig. 3.
B. Ranging Setup
Each end cap of SUPERball was fitted with a DWM1000
module located approximately 0.1m from the end of the
strut.Tosimplifythenotation,wedonotdistinguishbetween
end cap positions (ends of the struts) and the positions
ranging sensor locations. In practice, we take this offset into
account in the output function of our filter (see Section IV).
The broadcasting algorithm runs at 15Hz and packet
transmissions are spaced 1ms apart. This allows for over 20
modules to range. After one ranging iteration, each end cap
transmits its measurements over WiFi to the ROS network.
AROSnodethencombinesmeasurementsfromallendcaps
into a single ROS message at 10Hz.
The fixed anchors operate in a similar way to the end
caps, but are not connected to a ROS node and can not
directly transmit data to the ROS network. This means that
weobtaintwomeasurements(oneineachdirection)foreach
pairofmodulesontherobot, butonlyasinglemeasurement
between the fixed anchors and the modules on the robot.
C. Calibration
One of the design goals of our state estimation method
is quick deployment in new environments without signifi-
cant manual calibration. To achieve this, we implemented
an automatic calibration procedure to jointly estimate the
constellation of fixed modules (anchors, defining an external
reference frame) and the pairwise sensor offsets (o ). Cal-
ibration is performed - similar to common motion capture
systems - by moving the robot around, while recording the
uncorrected distance measurements (m ).
After recording a dataset, we minimize the reconstruction
Δt error L by optimizing over the offsets o (o rearranged
as a vector), the estimated anchor locations Nest, and the
estimated moving module locations Nfloat[1...n ]
(i.e. the module on the robot’s end caps):
event L(i,j,t)= (cid:16) (cid:107)Nanchor−Nfloat[t](cid:107)−o −m [t] (cid:17)2 (8)
i j j,i i,j
L (cid:0) o,Nanchor,Nfloat[1...n ] (cid:1) =(cid:80) α L(i,j,t). (9) samples i,j,t j,t
The brackets in Nfloat[1...n ] indicate the mov- samples
ing module locations (end cap positions) at a specific
timestep. For example Nfloat[5] contains the estimated end
cap positions at timestep 5 in the recorded dataset. In Eq. 9,
Fig.3:Packetexchangebetween4modulesforbidirectional i iterates over anchors, j iterates over moving nodes and t
pairwise and broadcast ranging. Timed broadcast messages iterates over samples. The indicator variables α are equal
allow for efficient ranging with a large number of modules. to1whenforsampletthereareatleast4validmeasurements
to the fixed module for moving module j (i.e. the number
One disadvantage of the broadcasting approach is that the of DOFs reduces).
total measurement time between a pair of modules takes In practice we also add constraints on the bar lengths,
longer (up to 60ms in our experimental setup) than a single which take the same form as Eq. 8 with the offsets set
pairwisebidirectionalmeasurement(approx.3ms).However, to 0. We used BFGS to minimize Eq. 9 with a dataset
broadcast ranging provides two measurements for each pair containing approximately 400 timesteps selected randomly
of modules per measurement iteration. from a few minutes of movement of the robot. Although the
Notethateachmodulenowneedstokeeptrackofthepoll algorithm works without prior knowledge, we noticed that
and final packet reception times of all other modules. The providing the relative positions of 3 fixed nodes (3 manual
finalpacketbecomeslongeraseachmoduleneedstotransmit measurements) significantly improves the success rate as
the response reception time (t ) of all other modules. there are no guarantees on global convergence.
Oncetheexternaloffsets(betweentheanchorsandmoving N −N , where we use the notation U to denote the kth
nodes)andthemodulepositionsareknown,wecanestimate row of matrix U. If we then compute V = CdN with the
the offsets between moving nodes in a straightforward way same method as U, we obtain a matrix of relative member
by computing the difference between the estimated internal velocities. The matrices U and V are used to calculate
distances and the uncorrected distance measurements. member lengths as L = |U | and member velocities as
IV. FILTERDESIGN dt k Lk
We can then use these values to calculate member force
Tensegrity systems are nonlinear and exhibit hybrid dy- densities, q, using Hooke’s law and viscous damping as:
namicsduetocableslackconditionsandinteractionswiththe
environmentthatinvolvecollisionandfriction.Thiswarrants q =K (1− 0k)− k (L ).
k k L L dt k
a robust filter design to track the robot’s behavior. k k
The commonly used Extended Kalman Filter (EKF) does Here K k and c k denote the kth member’s stiffness and
not perform well on highly nonlinear systems where first- damping constants, respectively. Note that cables require
order approximations offer poor representations of the prop- some additional case handling to ensure unilateral forcing.
agationofuncertainties.AdditionallytheEKFrequirescom- Scaling each U k by q k yields a matrix whose rows
putation of time-derivatives through system dynamics and correspond to vector forces of the members. We denote this
output functions which is challenging for a model with matrixasUq ∈Rm×3,andwenotethatUq =diag(q)CN.
complex hybrid dynamics. Thus this matrix of member forces can be easily applied to
ThesigmapointUKFdoesnotrequirederivativesthrough the nodes using:
the system dynamics and is third order accurate when F m =CTUq.
propagating Gaussian Random Variables through nonlinear
We now have a method for computing nodal forces exerted
dynamics [9]. The computational cost of the UKF is com-
by the members and need only compute ground interaction
parable to that of the EKF, but for tensegrity systems which
forces, which we will denote as F . We computed ground
commonly have a large range of stiffnesses and a high g
interaction forces using the numerical approach in [11]. The
numberofstatevariablesthetime-updateofthesigmapoints
nodal accelerations can then be written as:
dominates computational cost. As such we first describe
the methods used to reduce computational cost of dynamic =M−1(F +F )−G,
simulation, then in the following section we outline the dt2 m g
specific implementation of the UKF for the SUPERball where M ∈ Rn×n is a diagonal matrix whose diagonal
prototype. entriesarethemassesofeachnodeandG∈Rn×3 ismatrix
with identical rows equal to the vector acceleration due to
A. Dynamic Modelling
gravity. It is then straightforward to simulate this second
TheUKFrequiresadynamicmodelwhichbalancesmodel order ODE using traditional numerical methods.
fidelityand computationalefficiency sinceit requiresa large Note also that it is possible to propagate many parallel
number of simulations to be run in parallel. We model a simulationsefficientlybyconcatenatingmultipleN matrices
tensegritysystemasaspring-massnetandusedthefollowing column wise to produce N ∈ Rn×3l for l parallel simula-
incomplete list of simplifying assumptions: tions. The resultant vectorization of many of the operations
• Only point masses located at each node point yields significant gains in computational speed with some
• All internal and external forces are applied at nodes careful handling of matrix dimensions.
• Members exert only linear stiffness and damping
B. UKF Implementation
• Unilateral forcing in cables
• Flat ground at a known height with Coulomb friction We implement a traditional UKF as outlined in [9] with
• No bar or string collision modelling additiveGaussiannoiseforstatevariablesandmeasurements.
Several parameters are defined for tuning the behavior
Foratensegritywithnnodesandmmembers,themember
force densities, q ∈ Rm, can be transformed into nodal of the UKF, namely α, β and κ, where α determines
forces, F ∈ Rn×3, by using the current Cartesian nodal the spread of the sigma points generated by the unscented
positions, N ∈ Rn×3, and the connectivity matrix, C ∈ transformation, β is used to incorporate prior knowledge of
Rm×n, as described in [10]. This operation is described by distribution,andκisasecondaryscalingparameter.Wehand
tuned these parameters to the values α=0.0139, β =2 for
the equation:
F =CTdiag(q)CN, Gaussian distributions and κ=0 and found this to yield an
adequately stable filter.
where diag(·) represents the creation of a diagonal matrix We define our state variables as N and dN stacked in
with the vector argument along its main diagonal. We first a vector y ∈ RL where L = 6n is the number of state
notethatCN producesamatrixU ∈Rm×3 whereeachrow variables. We assume independent state noise with variance
corresponds to a vector that points between the ith and jth λ =0.4 thus with covariance R=λ I .
nodes spanned by each member. Therefore, this first matrix Formeasurementswetakeestimatedorientationdatafrom
multiplicationcanbereplacedwithvectorindexingasU = our IMUs using a gradient descent AHRS algorithm based
on[12],θ ∈Rb wherebisthenumberofbaranglesavailable
at the given time step and all ranging measures, r ∈ Ra,
where a is the number of ranging measures available at a
given time step. We again assume independent noise with
λ =0.1andλ =0.029themeasurementcovariancematrix
is then defined as:
(cid:20) (cid:21)
Q= θ b .
These user defined variables are then used within the frame-
work of our UKF to forward propagate both the current
expected value of the state as well as its covariance. Fig. 4
shows an overview of our complete state estimation setup.
Control State
This information was sent over ROS along with IMU data
(yaw,pitch,roll) and cable rest lengths to the UKF. The
base stations were placed in a pattern to cover an area of
approximately91m2.Eachbasestation’srelativelocationto
each other may be seen in Fig. 5. SUPERball and the base
stations were then used to show the UKF tracking a local
trajectory of end caps and a global trajectory of the robotic
system. In each of these experiments, the UKF was allowed
time to settle from initial conditions upon starting the filter.
This ensured that any erroneous states due to poor initial
conditioning did not affect the filter’s overall performance.
B. Local Trajectory Tracking
In order to track a local trajectory, SUPERball remained
stationary while two of its actuators tracked phase shifted
stepwise sinusoidal patterns. During the period of actuation,
two end cap trajectories were tracked on SUPERball and
compared to the trajectory outputs of the UKF. One end
cap was directly connected to an actuated cable (end cap
2), while the other end cap had no actuated cables affixed
to it (end cap 1). To obtain a ground truth for the position
trajectory, a camera that measured the position of each end
cap was positioned next to the robot. Both end caps started
Anchor 2 at the same relative height and the majority of movement
of both fell within the plane parallel to the camera. Fig. 6
shows the measured and UKF global positions of the two
end caps through time.
Fig. 4: Block diagram of data flow within the system.
Red signals are passed as ROS messages and blue signals 0.1
are passed using the ranging modules. Note that each rod 0.0
contains two ranging sensors located at each end of the rod. 0.1
The gray control strategy block represents a to-be-designed 0.2
state-feedback control strategy.
V. FILTEREVALUATION 0 10 20 30 40 50 60
A. Experimental Setup
Fig. 5: Visualization of the UKF output. SUPERball sits in
themiddleoftheplotsurroundedby8rangingbasestations.
Lines between the robot and the base stations indicate valid
ranging measures during this timestep.
ToevaluatetheperformanceoftheUKF,weusedtheeight
”fixed anchor” ranging base stations calibrated as detailed
in Section III-C. Each end cap of SUPERball was then
able to get a distance measurement to each base station.
End Cap 1 0.5
0 10 20 30 40 50 60
Measured X UKF Y
Measured Y
Fig. 6: Position plotted through time for both end cap 1
and end cap 2. The thin line represents the position output
measured by the camera tracking system, and the bold
line represents the position output from the UKF filter. As
expected, there is a time domain lag between the measured
and estimated positions.
C. Global Trajectory Tracking
Forglobaltrajectorytracking,SUPERballwasactuatedto
induce a transition from one base triangle rolling through to
another base triangle as presented in [6]. Ground truth for
this experiment was ascertained by marking and measuring
thepositionsofeachbasetriangle’sendcapsbeforeandafter
afacetransition.Weevaluate4settingsofthestateestimator.
Full: The state estimator as described in Section IV with all
IMUandrangingsensors.noIMU:Onlytherangingsensors
are enabled. full w. cst. offset: Same as full, but the offsets
o are set to a constant instead of optimized individually.
4 base station ranging sensors: 50% of the base station
ranging sensors are disabled. The results of this experiment Most of the current control approaches for tensegrity
are presented in Fig. 7 and 8. robotsrelyonpositiontrackingforeithermotionplanningor
performance evaluation. Hence, our main contribution to the
fieldoftensegrityroboticsisthatthisworkwillfinallyallow
various proposed control algorithms for tensegrity robots to
be transferred from the simulation domain to hardware.
We believe that - in this context - our setup is a viable
alternative to more established external solutions, such as
motion capture systems. In particular, our approach is low-
cost,self-calibratingandonlyreliesonautonomousanchors.
These last two qualities are particularly attractive for future
spacemissions.Wedonotyetachievetheaccuracyprovided
by commercial motion capture systems. However, this is not
a priority at this point as we mainly are focused on large
displacements by rolling of SUPERball.
1 2 3 The logical next step is to test our state estimator when
Fig. 7: Top down view of the triangular faces to which SUPERball is moving around in a larger space. The Rover-
the robot transitions during the global trajectory tracking Scape at NASA Ames - a football field sized outdoor rover
experiment for various setting of the state estimator. The testbed - is the ideal candidate test area for this.
small inset illustrates the movement of the robot. The line A related future goal is to add support for an incremental
shows the estimated center of mass (CoM) using the full number of ranging anchors. This will allow SUPERball to
settings. Finding the initial position (origin) is hard for all explore uncharted terrain by dropping beacons when the
settings, and without the IMUs the estimator does not find uncertainty of its current position increases.
the correct initial face. After a first roll, tracking becomes
more accurate. The offsets o have a minimal impact, which
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
indicates that our calibration routine is sufficiently accurate. We appreciate the support, ideas, and feedback from members
of the Dynamic Tensegrity Robotics Lab. We are also grateful to
Terry Fong and the NASA Ames Intelligent Robotics Group.