1v4007030/sc:viXra
STATE COMPLEXES FOR METAMORPHIC ROBOTS∗
A. ABRAMS† AND R. GHRIST‡
Abstract. A metamorphic robotic system is an aggregate of homogeneous robot units which can
individually and selectively locomote in such a way as to change the global shape of the system. We
introduce a mathematical framework for defining and analyzing general metamorphic robots. This formal
structure,combinedwithideasfromgeometricgrouptheory,leadstoanaturalextensionofaconfiguration
spaceformetamorphicrobots—thestate complex—whichisespeciallyadaptedtoparallelization. We
present an algorithm for optimizing reconfiguration sequences with respect to elapsed time. A universal
geometricpropertyofstatecomplexes—non-positivecurvature—isthekeytoprovingconvergenceto
thegloballytime-optimalsolution.
1. Introduction. Inrecentyears,severalgroupsintheroboticscommunityhavebeen
modeling and building reconfigurable or, more specifically, metamorphic robots (e.g.,
[7,13,15,22,23]). Suchasystemconsistsofmultipleidenticalroboticcellsinanunderlying
lattice structure which can disconnect/reconnect with adjacent neighbors, and slide, pivot,
or otherwise locomote to neighboring lattice points following prescribed rules: see Fig. 1.1.
There are as many models for such robots as there are researchers in the sub-field: 2-d
and 3-d lattices; hexagonal,square,and dodecahedralcells; pivoting or sliding motion: see,
e.g., [7, 13, 14, 15, 16, 6, 17, 22, 23] and the references therein. The common feature of
these robots is an aggregate of lattice-based cells having prescribed local transitions from
one shape to another.
Fig. 1.1. Metamorphic systems may be built on a variety of lattice structures with sliding or pivoting
motion.
The primary challenge for such systems is shape-planning: how to move from one shape
toanothervialegalmoves. Onecentralizedapproach[8,19]istobuildatransition graph
whose verticesarethe variousshapes and whoseedges areelementary legalmovesfromone
shape to the next. It is easily demonstratedthat the size ofthis graphis exponentialin the
number of cells.
We propose to extend the notion of a configurationspace to metamorphic robots in a novel
manner. The idea: consider the transition graph described above as a one-dimensional
skeletonofa higher-dimensionalcubicalcomplex,the state complex. Assume that froma
givenstatetherearetwolegalmoveswhicharephysicallyindependent(or,moresuggestively,
“commutative”): i.e., these movescanbe executedsimultaneously. Inthe transitiongraph,
∗AA SUPPORTED BY NATIONAL SCIENCE FOUNDATION GRANT DMS-0089927. RG SUP-
PORTEDBYNATIONALSCIENCEFOUNDATIONGRANTDMS-0134408.
† DepartmentofMathematics,UniversityofGeorgia,Athens,GA30602,USA
‡ DepartmentofMathematics,UniversityofIllinois,Urbana,IL61801, USA
2 AARONABRAMS&ROBERTGHRIST
this corresponds to the four edges of a square. For any pair of commutative moves, fill in
the four edges of the graph with an abstract square 2-cell. Continue inductively adding k-
dimensional cubes correspondingto k-tuples of physically independent motions. The result
is a cubical complex which has several advantages over the transition graph:
1. Simplicity. The state complex is often simpler than the transition graph: e.g.,
the 1-d graph of an n-dimensional cube has n2n−1 edges. This figure belies the
simplicity of the single cube.
2. Speed. Geodesics on this complex cut across the diagonals of cubes whenever
possible. One performs all possible commutative motions simultaneously, maxi-
mizing parallelization and yielding a speed-up by a factor equal to the number of
coordinated motions.
3. Shape. The global geometry/topology of the state complex carries information
about the metamorphic system. For certain examples, the topology of the state
complex “converges”upon refining the lattice. In addition, only special geometries
canbe realizedasthe statecomplexofalocalmetamorphicsystem: commutativity
inreconfigurationleadstoanabhorrenceofpositivecurvatureinthestatecomplex.
Sections 2 through 4 give definitions and examples of [abstract] metamorphic systems and
theirstatecomplexes. Thenexttwosections(Sections5-6)detailtopologicalandgeometric
features of the state complex.
For large systems, the problem of computing the state complex and designing geodesics in
order to perform shape planning is computationally infeasible, primarily because the size
of the complex is often exponential in the number of robot cells. In addition, any control
schemeinducedbygeodesicconstructionis necessarilycentralized. Severalresearchershave
begun building decentralizedcontrolalgorithmsfor shape planning [5, 21, 20, 24, 25]. Such
algorithms have the advantage of speed and scalability; however, the reconfiguration paths
are typically not optimal.
As an application of our techniques, we present in Sections 7-8 an algorithm for trajectory
optimization which takes as its argument an arbitrary edge path in the transition graph.
Algorithm8.2thenperformsatypeofcurve shorteningwithinthestatecomplex. Adeep
theoremaboutthecurvatureofallstatecomplexes(Theorem6.2)isthenusedtoprovethat
this algorithmreturnsa shape trajectorywhichis the globalminimum obtainablefromthis
path with respect to elapsed time.
Our definitions and theorems are phrased for systems involving “discrete” reconfiguration.
More general types of robots which employ continuous reconfigurationfor locomotive gaits
(such as the Polybot developed by M. Yim’s lab at Xerox PARC) are not covered by our
definitions. Wenote,however,thatcertainlocomotivereconfigurablerobotscanbethought
of as lattice-based tiles by amalgamating subsystems [14]. In addition, our definitions can
easily be extended to more general non-lattice reconfigurable systems [3].
2. A mathematical definition. While it is easy to generate examples of what is
meant by a metamorphic robot, it is more challenging to write a clean mathematical defi-
nition. We propose a set of definitions which is broad enough to include some non-obvious
examples. The paper [6] suggests a similar type of structure using cellular automata rule
sets.
Alocalmetamorphicsystemisacollectionofstatesonalattice,whereeachstateisthought
ofas anindicator function for the aggregate. Any state canbe modified by localrearrange-
COMPLEXESFORMETAMORPHICROBOTS 3
ments, these local changes being coordinated by a catalogue of models realized under the
actions of isometries into the workspace. The adjective “local” refers to legality criteria:
anywhere in the workspace at which a local change from the catalogue can be applied, it
is legal to do so. To incorporate obstacles and basepoints into our systems, we distinguish
betweenthe amountofinformationneeded to determine the legalityofanelementarymove
(the “support” of the move) and the precise place in which modules are actually in motion
(the “trace” of the move).
Definition 2.1. Let L denote a lattice in Rk and let W ⊂ L be some workspace. The
catalogue C for a local metamorphic system on W is a collection of generators. Each
generator φ ∈ C consists of (1) the support, sup(φ) ⊂ L; (2) the trace of the move,
tr(φ)⊂sup(φ); and (3) an unordered pair of local states Uˆ :sup(φ)→{0,1} satisfying1
(cid:12) (cid:12)
(cid:12) (cid:12)
Otherwise said, the local states are equal on sup(φ)−tr(φ).
Definition 2.2. An action of a generator φ∈C is a rigid translation Φ:sup(φ)֒→W.
Given a state U : W → {0,1}, an action Φ is said to be admissible at U if Uˆ = U ◦Φ.
In this case, we write
φ[U]:= .
(Note that Φ is left out of the notation.)
Definition 2.3. A local metamorphic system on W is a collection of finite states
{U :W →{0,1}}closedunderall possible admissible actions ofgenerators in thecatalogue
C. (A state is finite if U =1 at only finitely many points of W.)
Torepeat,thecatalogueandtheworkspacearethe“seeds”foralocalmetamorphicsystem.
From this pair, all possible translations of the supports into W yield the actions. Then, a
collection of states on the workspace is a local metamorphic system if, whenever an action
Φ of a generator φ on a state U is admissible, then the corresponding state φ[U] is also
included.
A metamorphic system with obstacles O ⊂W satisfies in addition
for each φ ∈ C. Obstacle sets count as legal positions for determining the admissibility of
a move (the support of an action may intersect O), but no motion of metamorphic agents
may incorporate the obstacle sites (the trace of an action must not intersect O).
3. Examples. Some of the following examples are inspired by metamorphic robots
already developed; other examples are more abstract.
Example 3.1. [2-dhexwith pivots]We presenttwoslightly differentcatalogues,eachwith
sixgenerators(orone,uptodiscreterotations),inFig.3.1. Bothofthesesystems,modeled
after that of [7], have local moves which pivot a planar hexagon about a neighbor. For all
generators presented, the trace is equal to the two central hexagons. In the first system,
1AllgeneratorsareassumedtobenondegenerateinthesensethatUˆ 06=Uˆ 1.
4 AARONABRAMS&ROBERTGHRIST
the supportis chosensothatthe aggregatedoes notchangeits topologybut onlyits shape.
The slightly smaller support of the second catalogue allows for local topology changes. To
modelafixed“base”cell(whichis, say,affixedto apowersourceasin[17]), oneestablishes
this cell as an obstacle O.
Fig. 3.1. Two different catalogues for a 2-d hexagonal lattice system with pivots. Black cells are
occupied, white are unoccupied. The local statesUˆ 0 and Uˆ 1 are shown for each generator.
Example 3.2. [2-d square lattice] In Fig. 3.2, we display a generator for a planar system
in which rows [as pictured] and columns [not pictured] of an aggregate of square cells can
slide. There are in fact several generators represented in “shorthand,” one for each k ≥ 0.
A dot inside a cell indicates that it can be either occupied or unoccupied, but if occupied,
thenitsneighbor(indicatedbyanarrow)mustalsobeturnedon. Thisconditionguarantees
that the aggregate does not disconnect (even locally) under slides. The trace of this set of
generators is the entire middle row except the two endpoints. To keep the catalogue finite,
one would include only those generators with k ≤ N, where N is the number of occupied
cells in any state.
PSfragreplacements
Fig. 3.2. The row-sliding generators for a sliding-squares system.
Example 3.3. [2-d articulated planar arm] Consider as a workspace W the set of edges
in the planar integer lattice. The catalogue consists of two generators,pictured in Fig. 3.3.
Beginning with a state having N vertical edges end-to-end, the metamorphic system thus
generated models the position of an articulated robotic arm with fixed base which can (1)
rotate at the top end and (2) flip corners as per the diagram.
Fig. 3.3. A positive articulated robot arm [left]. One generator [center] flips corners and has as its
trace the central four edges. The other generator [right] rotates the end of the arm, and has trace equal to
the two activated edges.
Ifoneincludesrotationsofthesegenerators,moreintricatetypesofconfigurationsarepossi-
COMPLEXESFORMETAMORPHICROBOTS 5
ble, including deadlocked configurations. Highly self-reconfigurable examples with multiple
interacting arms can be realized by adding new generators: an “attach-detach” generator
which allows endpoints of arms to merge (thus yielding a “marked point” at the attach-
ment); and a “sliding” generator which allows this marked point to slide, having the effect
of allowing the attached arms to trade segments. These generators are pictured (up to
Euclidean symmetries) in Figure 3.4.
Fig. 3.4. Additional generators allow for attachment and detachment of arm endpoints [left, center]
and sliding of the coupling points [right].
One of the benefits of writing down a rigorous definition of a metamorphic system is the
discovery of systems which have little resemblance to the systems of, say, Fig. 1.1. In
particular,ourdefinitionseasilyextendtometamorphicsystemswhicharenotlattice-based;
the following example is especially interesting.
Example 3.4. Consider a finite graph Γ in which every edge is assigned a length of one.
(Every graph can be embedded in some Rk so as to have this property.) The catalogue
consists of a single generator whose support and trace are precisely the closure of a single
“abstract edge.” The local states of this generator consist of the pair Uˆ and Uˆ which
evaluate to 1 on one of the endpoints and 0 on the other. The actions in this case are
length-preserving maps from the abstract edge into Γ. The metamorphic system generated
from a state U on Γ with N vertices evaluating to 1 mimics an ensemble of N unlabeled
non-colliding Automated Guided Vehicles on Γ, cf. [11].
More abstract examples of metamorphic examples include spaces of triangulations of poly-
gons with edge-flipping as the generator, examples arising from word representations in
group theory, and certain multi-step assembly processes [3].
4. The state complex. In the robotics literature, one often models a configuration
spaceforametamorphicsystemwithatransitiongraphwhichrepresentsactionsofelemen-
tary moves on states. That is, the vertex set is the collection of all states {U }, and the
edges are unoriented pairs of states which differ by the action of one generator. Transition
graphs are discussed for shape-planning in several particular cases in the literature (planar
hex case: [8, 19]). Our departure is to make the transition graph the 1-skeleton of a cubi-
cal complex (an analogue of a simplicial complex, but made out of abstract cubes) which
coordinates parallel or “commutative” motions.
Definition 4.1. In a local metamorphic system, a collection of actions of (not necessarily
distinct) generators {(φ ,Φ )} is said to commute if
6 AARONABRAMS&ROBERTGHRIST
Example 4.2. Two simple examples suffice to illustrate the difference betweencommuting
and noncommuting actions. First, consider the pair of commuting moves for a planar
hexagonal pivoting system, as represented in Fig. 4.1 [left]. Compare this with a planar
Fig.4.1. Examples of commuting [left] and noncommuting [right] actions inplanar systems.
slidingblockexampleasillustratedinFig.4.1[right]. Althoughthepairofmovesillustrated
forms a square2 in the transition graph, this particular pair of actions does not commute.
Physically,it is obviouswhy these moves are notindependent: sliding the column part-way
obstructs sliding a transverse row. Mathematically, this is captured by the traces of the
actions intersecting.
The state complex has an abstract k-cube for each collection of k admissible commuting
actions:
Definition 4.3. The state complex S of a local metamorphic system is the following
abstract cubicalcomplex. Each abstractk-cubee(k) of S is an equivalenceclass [U;(Φ )k ]
1. (Φ )k is a k-tuple of commuting actions of generators φ ;
2. U is some state for which all the actions (Φ )k are admissible; and
3. [U ;(Φ )k ] = [U ;(Φ )k ] if and only if the list (β ) is a permutation of (α )
0 αi i=1 1 βi i=1 i i
and U =U on the set W − Φ (sup(φ )) .
0 1 i αi αi
The boundary of each abstract k-cube is the collection of 2k faces obtained by deleting the
ith action from the list and using U and φ [U] as the ambient states. Specifically,
αi i=1 αj j6=i αi αj j6=i
Itfollowseasilythatthek-cellsarewell-definedwithrespecttoadmissibilityofactions. The
proof of the following obvious lemma is given in detail to flesh out the previous definition.
Lemma 4.4. (a) The 0-dimensional skeleton of S, S(0), is the set of states in the reconfig-
urable system. (b) The 1-dimensional skeleton of S, S(1), is precisely the transition graph.
2Theindividualroboticcellsarenotlabeled: onlytheshapeoftheaggregate isrecorded.
COMPLEXESFORMETAMORPHICROBOTS 7
proof: (a) Vertices of S consist of equivalence classes consisting of zero (i.e., no) actions
of generators up to permutation, together with a state defined on the complement of the
supports ofthe actions. As there are no actions, each0-cellis precisely a single state of the
reconfigurable system.
(b)A1-cellofS isanequivalenceclassoftheform[U;(Φ)]. Theonlyotherrepresentativeof
theequivalenceclassis[φ[U];(Φ)];hence,the1-cellsarepreciselytheedgesinthetransition
graph. Clearly, the boundary of [U;(Φ)] is the pair of 0-cells [U;(·)] and [φ[U];(·)]. ⋄
For small numbers of cells, it is easy to illustrate the state complex.
PSfragreplacements
Fig. 4.2. The planar sliding square example [left] with two movable blocks [in black] and a p-by-q
obstacle set [ingrey] yields a state complex S that istopologically a circle [right].
Example 4.5. Consider the 2-dsquare lattice row/columnsliding system whose catalogue
is illustrated in Fig. 3.2. If we consider a system with (occupied) obstacles in the form of a
p-by-q rectangle generated from the state of Fig. 4.2 [left], one obtains a planar transition
graph with 4(pq+1)+2(p+q) vertices and 8(pq+1)−2(p+q) edges. In contrast, the
state complex is that of Fig. 4.2 [right]: this is topologically a circle, corresponding to the
fact that the pair of free squares can circulate about the obstacle set through a sequence
of slides. The large 2-d regions correspond to states in which the two free squares are on
separate (but adjacent) sides of the obstacle set.
Example 4.6. Consider the planar hex system of Fig. 3.1 [left] with a workspace W
consisting ofa long channeloffour rows,the bottomrow being filled obstacles,andthe top
row being non-occupied obstacles. A line of cells in one of the two free rows can “climb
across” one by one, yielding the state complex of Fig. 4.3[right] (cf. the algorithm of [20]).
This state complex is contractible for any length column.
Fig.4.3. Foralineofhexagonsfilingoutofaconstrainedtunnel[left],thestatecomplexiscontractible
[right]. Blackcellsrepresentoccupiedobstaclesets;thetoprowisanunoccupiedobstacleset. Afairlyshort
tunnel isshown: for longer tunnels, the state complex is stillcontractible, but of higher dimension.
8 AARONABRAMS&ROBERTGHRIST
Example 4.7. The state complex associated to the positive articulated robot arm of
Example 3.3 in the case N = 5 is given in Fig. 4.4. Note that there can be at most
threeindependent motions(whenthe armisina“staircase”configuration);hencethe state
complex has top dimension three. Notice also that although the transition graph for this
system is complicated, the state complex itself is topologically trivial (contractible).
Fig.4.4. Thestatecomplexofa5-linkpositivearmhasonecellofdimensionthree,alongwithseveral
cells of lower dimension.
Example 4.8. In the system of Example 3.4 with the graph being a K (the complete
graph on five vertices) and N = 2, the state complex is a two-dimensional closed surface.
A simple combinatorial argument (as in [1, 2]) reveals that the Euler characteristic is −5,
implying that the state complex is non-orientable. If the AGV’s are labeled, the state
complex becomes a closed orientable surface of genus 6.
5. ThetopologyofS. Ifonelooksatatransitiongraphwithoutknowingtheparticu-
larsofthemetamorphicsystem,verylittle informationcanbe extracted. Thispaperargues
thatcompletingthetransitiongraphtothe statecomplexis“natural”—thestate complex
simplifies the transition graph and endows it with topological and geometric content.
Ourfirstexampleofnaturalityismotivatedbythedesiretobuildmetamorphicsystemswith
largenumbers ofmicro-ornano-scalecells. While largenumbers ofcells wouldyielda type
of continuum-limit convergence on the dynamics of shape change, the resulting transition
graphs have no such convergence. The size of the transition graphgoes up exponentially in
the number of cells; more ominous is thatthe topologyofthe transitiongraph(the number
of basic cycles) blows up as well. This is not always so with the state complex: in certain
key examples, the topology of S is either invariant or converges to a limiting type.
We have already seen one such example of this stabilization. In Example 4.5, the state
complexofapairofsquaresslidingalongarectangularobstacleofsizep-by-qistopologically
a circle, independent ofp and q. This canbe interpretedas a type of convergence: consider
theeffectofrefiningthe underlyinglatticestructure,increasingpandq whilemaintaininga
pair of sliding squares. Then the dimension of the state complex remains the same, as does
the topological type of the space. Intuitively speaking, the “limit” as this refining process
is repeated yields a “topological” configuration space of two points sliding smoothly along
the boundary of a rectangle, which can dock or un-dock at the corners.
Example 5.1. Recallthe statecomplexassociatedtothe metamorphicsystemofN points
onagraphΓ,Example3.4. ConsiderarefinementofΓwhichinsertsadditionalverticesalong
edges. It follows from the techniques of [1] that the state complex of this refined system
has the same topological type (up to homotopy equivalence) after a fixed bound on the
refinement (N additional vertices per edge). Furthermore, this “stabilized” state complex
is infacthomotopicto the topologicalconfigurationspace ofN non-collidingpoints ofΓ —
COMPLEXESFORMETAMORPHICROBOTS 9
precisely what one expects as the number of refinements goes to infinity.
Example 5.2. RecallthepositivearticulatedrobotarmofExample3.3. Considerarefine-
ment of the underlying lattice which shrinks the lattice by a factor of two (or, equivalently,
which inserts an additional joint in the middle of each edge). This is a more dramatic
changesincethe dimensionofthe statecomplexdoubles. Nevertheless,thetopologicaltype
is invariant: the state complex remains contractible.
Proposition 5.3. Let S denote the state complex of the positive articulated arm from
Example 3.3 with N segments. The complexes S are all contractible.
proof: For these articulated arms, there is a nice inductive structure on the state
complexes. Fixing N, each state (vertex) in S is represented as a length N word in the
symbols x and y, where x denotes the arm going to the right and y denotes the arm going
up. In this language, the two generators are (1) transposing a subword xy ↔ yx, and (2)
changing the last letter of the word.
ConsiderthesubcomplexX ⊂S consistingofallcellswhoseverticeshavewordsbeginning
withtheletterx. Likewise,letY denotethesubcomplexallofwhoseverticesbeginwiththe
letter y. These subcomplexes are each a copy of S which we may assume inductively is
contractible. One passes between the subcomplexes X and Y only when a move exchanges
theinitialtwolettersofthewordfromxytoyx. Theconnectingsetisthushomeomorphicto
S ×[−1,1] and attached to X and Y along S ×{−1} and S ×{1} respectively.
N−2 N−2 N−2
Again, by induction, these sets are contractible. A pair of contractible sets joined along
contractible subsets is contractible. ⋄
Thisshouldcomeasnosurprise: inthelimitasN →∞,thereconfigurablesystemapproxi-
matestheconfigurationspaceofasmoothcurveoffixedlengthwhichispositiveinthesense
that the curve is alwaysnondecreasinginthe horizontalandverticalcomponents. That the
(infinite dimensional) space of such smooth curves is contractible is easily demonstrated:
givenanysuchcurvewithendpointfixedattheorigininthe plane,pull theotherendalong
the straight line connecting it to the origin until the strand is taut. Then, rotate the line
segmentrigidly untilit is,say,vertical. This is a continuousdeformationonthe spaceofall
smooth positive curves of fixed length to a single vertical segment.
Itiscertainlynotthecasethatanarbitraryreconfigurablesystempossessessuchconvergence
properties: the manner in which one refines the states is important. Still, we conjecture
that state complexes can often be viewed as “discretizations” of some underlying smooth
configuration space.
6. The geometry of S. There are severalnatural waysto measure distances in state
complexes. We first discuss the geometry arising from considering each cube of S to be
Euclidean (i.e., flat), with unit side length; we call S with this metric a Euclidean cube
complex. However, this does not imply that the complex, as a whole, is flat. Indeed, non-
zero curvature can be concentrated at places where several cells meet. A simple example
appears in Fig. 6.1: here, a surface built from flat 2-cells can be seen to have curvature
which depends on the number of 2-cells incident to a vertex. Four incident cells implies
zerocurvature;three cells implies positivecurvature;andfive ormorecells implies negative
curvature. For a two-dimensional complex, this is equivalent to computing the total angle
about a vertex.
Such an extension of curvature to general metric spaces is made precise in Gromov’s work
10 AARONABRAMS&ROBERTGHRIST
Fig.6.1. Curvature about avertex ina 2-d Euclidean cubical complex: positive, zero, and negative.
on curved metric spaces [12] (extending the classical work of Alexandrov, Busemann, and
others) in which triangles with geodesic edges are used to measure curvature bounds. In
brief,letX beametricspaceandp∈X apoint. ToboundthecurvatureofX atp,consider
a small triangle T about p with geodesic edges of length a, b, and c. Build a comparison
triangle T′ in the Euclidean plane whose sides also have length a, b, and c respectively.
Choose a geodesic chord of T and measure its length d. In T′, measure the length d′ of the
chord whose endpoints correspond to those of the chord in X.
DefPinSfirtagiorenplac6e.m1e.ntsA metric space X is nonpositively curved (or NPC) if for every
sufficiently small geodesic triangle T and for every chord of T, it follows that d≤d′.
Fig.6.2. Comparison triangles measure curvature bounds.
In other words, geodesic chords are no longer than Euclidean comparison chords. It should
be stressedthat the NPC property is very special and highly desirable. Indeed, being NPC
implies a variety of topological consequences reminiscent of smooth nonpositively curved
manifolds.
Despite the variety of (local) metamorphic systems, all state complexes share this special
geometric property.
Theorem 6.2. The state complex S of any local metamorphic system is nonpositively
curved.
The proof of this theorem is simple, but requires some additional machinery.
Definition 6.3. Let X denote a complex (either simplicial or cubical) and let v denote
a vertex of X. The link of v, ℓk[v], is defined to be the abstract complex which has
one k-dimensional simplex for each (k + 1)-dimensional cube in X incident to v. The
boundary relations are those inherited from X: namely, the boundary of a k-simplex in
ℓk[v] represented by a (k+1)-cube in X is the set of all simplices represented by the faces
of the (k+1)-cube.
Links can be thought of as a simplicial version of the locus of points a small fixed distance
from the vertex v.
Definition 6.4. A Euclidean cube complex X satisfies the link condition if, for each
COMPLEXESFORMETAMORPHICROBOTS 11
vertex v ∈ X, ℓk[v] satisfies the following: for each k, if any k +1 vertices in ℓk[v] are
pairwiseconnectedbyedgesinℓk[v],thenthoseverticesboundauniquek-simplexinℓk[v].
An important and deep theorem of Gromov [12] asserts that a Euclidean cube complex is
nonpositively curved if and only if it satisfies the link condition. This criterion makes it
easy to prove Theorem 6.2.
proof of theorem 6.2: Let U denote a vertex of S. Consider the link ℓk[U]. The
0-cells of the ℓk[U] correspondto all edges in S incident to U; that is, actions of generators
admissibleatthe stateU. Ak-cellofℓk[U]isthus acommutingsetofk+1oftheseactions
based at U. The interpretation of the link condition for a state complex is as follows: if at
U one has a set of k+1 admissible actions, {(φ ,Φ )}k+1, of which each pair commutes,
then the full set of k+1 generators must commute [existence of the k-simplex in the link].
Furthermore, they must commute in a unique manner [uniqueness of the k-simplex in the
link].
The proof of existence follows directly from Definition 4.1: any collection of pairwise com-
mutative actions is totally commutative. We therefore have a (k +1)-dimensional cell in
S which is the equivalence class [U;(Φ )k+1]. This is the representative in S of the k-
simplex in ℓk[U]. To show uniqueness, consider any other k-simplex in ℓk[U] which has the
same vertex set. This must correspond to a (k +1)-dimensional cube in S with actions
(φ ,Φ )k+1 (up to some permutation) based at U. From Definition 4.3, this cell must be
the same equivalence class, namely [U;(Φ )k+1]. ⋄
Example 6.5. To see how the NPC property can fail, consider the following non-local
metamorphic system. Recall the generator for the planar hexagonal system presented in
Fig.3.1[right]which(alongwithitsrotations)allowsforlocaldisconnectionoftheaggregate.
If we add to this system a global rule that requires the aggregateto be connected (for, say,
considerations of power transmission), then we no longer have a local system, and positive
curvaturemayexist. Fig.6.3showsaconfigurationinwhichthreeactionsoflocalgenerators
act to disconnect the aggregate locally but not globally. These actions commute pairwise,
and any two do not disconnect globally. However, performing all three actions disconnects
the space and leads to an illegal state. Therefore, the corresponding state complex for this
non-local system has a “corner” of positive curvature as a local factor. Note: the state
complexwillnotbe two-dimensionalhere,butwillbe locallyaproductofthis withanother
cubical complex. The positive curvature persists.
Fig. 6.3. A generator which allows for local disconnection [left] admits configurations [center] for
which pairs of actions leave the aggregate connected, but triples do not; this non-local system has positive
curvature inthe state complex at this state [right].
12 AARONABRAMS&ROBERTGHRIST
7. Geodesics and time on S. Besides displaying a unifying geometric feature, the
nonpositive curvature has implications for path-planning, and hence, the shape-planning
problem.
Corollary 7.1. Each homotopy class of paths connecting two given points of a state
complex contains a unique shortest path.
proof: This is well-known for NPC spaces. The only difficulty lies in proving that the
d≤d′ inequalityfor sufficiently smalltrianglesimplies the d≤d′ inequalityfor all geodesic
triangles which are contractible in the space: see [4]. Assume, then, that this inequality
holdsingeneral,andconsiderapairofdistincthomotopicshortestpathsfrompoints pto q
inS. Chooseanypointr ononeofthe twopaths. Thetwohalvesofthis pathbisectedbyr
are themselves shortest paths from p to r and r to q respectively. Thus, there is a geodesic
triangle in S whose comparisontriangle in the Euclidean plane is a degeneratestraightline
fromp′ toq′. Thed≤d′ inequalityappliedtothesegmentfromrtoitscorrespondingpoint
ontheothergeodesicshowsthatthesepointscoincide;thereforethetwoshortestpathsfrom
p to q in S are identical. ⋄
Fig. 7.1[left] gives a simple example of a 2-d cubical complex with positive curvature for
which the above corollary fails.
This corollaryis a key ingredient in the applications of NPC geometry to path-planning on
a configuration space, since one expects geodesics on S to coincide with optimal solutions
totheshapeplanningproblem. However,inthecontextofroboticsapplications,the goalof
solving the shape-planning problem is not necessarily coincident with the geodesic problem
on the state complex. Fig. 7.2[left] illustrates the matter concisely. Consider a portion of a
state complex S which is planar and two-dimensional. To get from point p to point q in S,
anyedge-pathwhichisweaklymonotoneincreasinginthehorizontalandverticaldirections
is of minimal length in the transition graph. The true geodesic is, of course, the straight
line, which is hardly a discrete object and thus more difficult to compute.
Fig. 7.1. [left] A 2-d cube-complex (with positive curvature) possessing distinct homotopic shortest
paths between a pair of marked points — note all edges have length one; [right] a 2-d cube-complex (with
positive curvature) possessing an edge path (the thick line on the boundary) which is a locally (but not
globally) shortest path. Any cube path near this path isstrictly longer.
Given the assumption that each elementary move can be executed at a uniform maximum
rate, it is clear that the true geodesic on S is time-minimal in the sense that the elapsed
time is minimal among allpaths fromp to q. However,there is an envelopeof non-geodesic
pathswhichareyettime-minimizing. Indeed,thetruegeodesicinFig.7.2[left]“slowsdown”
some of the moves unnecessarily in order to maintain the constant slope.
This leads us to define a second metric on S, one which measures elapsed time. Namely,
insteadofthe Euclideanmetric onthe cellsofS, considerthe spaceS withthe ℓ∞ normon
COMPLEXESFORMETAMORPHICROBOTS 13
Fig. 7.2. [left] The true geodesic lies within an envelope of time-minimizing paths. No minimal
edge-paths are time-minimizing; [right] a normal cube-path inan NPC complex (after[18]).
each cell. (This is also called the supremum norm: a vector is measured by the maximum
of its components in each coordinate direction.) The geodesics in this geometry represent
reconfiguration paths which are time minimizing. Using the results of [18], one can prove
that these geodesics are easily described using the notion of a cube path.
Definition 7.2. A cube path from a vertex v to a vertex v is an ordered sequence of
closed cubes {C }N in S which satisfy (1) C ∩C = v for some vertex v ; and (2) C
i 1 i i+1 i i i
is the smallest cell of S containing v and v . A cube path is said to be normal if in
addition (3) for all i, St(C )∩C = v , where St(C ) is the star of C (the union of all
i i+1 i i i
closed cubes, including C , which have C as a face).
Roughly speaking, a normal cube path is one which uses the highest dimensional cubes as
early as possible in the path.
Theorem 7.3. In any state complex S, there exists a unique normal cube path from p to
q in each homotopy class. The chain of diagonals through this cube path minimizes time
among all paths in its homotopy class.
This resultfollowsfromTheorem6.2anda resultof[18](or,see the constructivealgorithm
of Section 8 below for a proof of existence).
This result (or, alternatively, the constructive algorithm in the next section) also implies
that, in the category of homotopic cube-paths, there is no such thing as a strictly local
minimum for length: if a cube path in S has the property that all nearby cube paths are
longer (more cubes), then this cube path is a normal cube path and indeed is the shortest
cube path within the homotopy class of paths. See Fig. 7.1[right] for a simple example of a
cubecomplexwithsomepositivecurvaturethathasacubepathwhichislocallyofminimal
length among cube paths, but not globally so.
Thisisverysignificant. Bybeginningwithanypathinthe statecomplex,say,oneobtained
viaafastdistributedalgorithmforshape-planning,onecanemployagradient-descentcurve
shortening on the level of cube paths. The above results imply that any algorithm which
monotonically reduces length must converge to the shortest path (in that homotopy class)
and cannot be hung up on a locally minimal cube path. The presence of local minima is a
persistent problem in optimization schemes: nonpositive curvature is a handy antidote.
8. Optimizing paths. In cases where the state complex is sparse — local principal
cells being of high dimension with few neighbors — it is possible to compress the size
of the transition graph significantly. However, shape-planning via constructing all of S
and determining geodesics is, in general, computationally infeasible: the total size of the
14 AARONABRAMS&ROBERTGHRIST
state complex is often exponential in the number of cells in the aggregate. We therefore
assumethatsomeshapetrajectoryhasbeendetermined(byaperhapsadhocordistributed
method) and turn to the problem of optimizing this trajectory. The nonpositive curvature
of S allows for a time-optimization which does not require explicit construction of S. We
detail an algorithm for transforming any given edge-path to a time-optimal normal cube
path.
From Definition 4.3, an n-dimensional cube C of S can be represented by a set of n com-
mutative actions {Φ } along with an admissible state U. In the following algorithm, we
suppressthe statefornotationalconvenienceandconsiderC asthe setofactions. Addition
and subtractionis defined by adding or taking awayadmissible commutative actions to the
list.
Algorithm 8.1 (TimeGeodesic). Given: a cube path C ={C } in S.
1: Let N := Length(C).
2: Call ShrinkCubePath(C).
3: If Length(C)<N then 1: else stop.
Algorithm 8.2 (ShrinkCubePath). Given: a cube path C ={C } in S.
1: Let i=1.
2: Let X := Commute(C ;C ).
3: Update C :=C +X;
4: Update C :=C −X.
5: Call ExciseTrivial(C ).
6: Call CommonEdge(C ,C ).
7: Call ExciseTrivial(C ;C ).
8: If X =∅ then i=i+1.
9: If C 6=∅ then 2: else stop.
Subroutine 8.3 (Commute). Given: a pair of cubes C = {Φj } and C =
j αi i=1..m j+1
1: Let S := sup(Φj )
2: Let T :=S
3: For i=1.S.n return Φj+1 if
Subroutine ExciseTrivial checks a cube for an empty list, removes these from the path,
and reindexes the cube path, thus reducing the length. Subroutine CommonEdge checks a
cube againstadjacent cubes in the sequence for common edges and deletes these, returning
a genuine cube path (recall Definition 7.2).
Subroutine Commute takes as its argument a pair of cubes C and C and returns those
elements of C which commute with all elements of C . The following lemma is a manip-
ulation of the definitions.
Lemma 8.4. The result of Commute(C;C ) is precisely the set of edges in St(C )∩C .
i i+1 i i+1
Theorem 8.5. Given a cube path C, Algorithm 8.1 computes a globally time-optimal path
in the homotopy class of C.
COMPLEXESFORMETAMORPHICROBOTS 15
PSfragreplacements
Fig. 8.1. Three rounds of shortening an edge path C. Cube path length stabilizes after two calls to
ShrinkCubePath. Three more calls produces a normal cube path.
proof: Recallthatinthissetting,thelengthofacubepathreferstothenumberofcubes
in the path; this equals the time required to execute the reconfiguration.
Repeated calls to Algorithm ShrinkCubePatheventually leave a cube path fixed. To show
this, note that the integer-valued function f(C) := i·dim(C ) decreases in each call to
ShrinkCubePathwhich changes the path. Lemma 8P.4 implies that ShrinkCubePathleaves
a cube path fixed if and only if it is a normal cube path. From Theorem 7.3, this yields a
time-optimal path.
However, Algorithm TimeGeodesiccalls ShrinkCubePathonly until the length of the cube
pathisunchanged. Thusitremainstoshowthatoncethelengthofacubepathinunchanged
byacalltoShrinkCubePath,thisisequaltothelengthoftheassociatednormalcubepath.
To show this, assume that ShrinkCubePath stops without excising any trivial cubes (i.e.,
shortening the length). We show that further calls merely redistribute actions earlier in
the list C without deleting any permanently. Without a loss of generality, assume that the
first call to ShrinkCubePathdoes not change the length of the cube path, but that in the
subsequent call, the cube C is eliminated via C commuting with a portion of C : see
the schematic of Fig. 8.2.
C i+1 C i+1
PSfragreplacements C i C i = C i
C i−1 C i−1
Fig. 8.2. Schematic of exchanging actions in sequential rounds. Each dimension in this cartoon
represents a multi-dimensional cube.
Since C is not eliminated in the first call, there must have been actions in C which
did not commute with those of C but which are subsequently pushed backward in the
secondcall. Inaddition, allthe actionsofC arecontainedin(“parallelto” inthe figure)
the subset of C which commutes with C in the second call. This being the case, the
commutativity of C with C would have occurred in the first call: contradiction. ⋄
16 AARONABRAMS&ROBERTGHRIST
It is not surprising that Algorithm 8.1 converges to a locally time-minimal solution. The
interesting implication is that the cube-path obtained is the global minimum for all paths
obtainable from the initial: there is no way to get a quicker reconfiguration path by first
lengtheningthepathandthenshortening. Thisistheboonofnonpositivecurvature. Fig.8.1
gives an example of paths generated by Algorithm 8.1.
ThecomplexityofAlgorithm8.1dependsonboththecatalogueofgeneratorsforthesystem
and the length N of the input edge path. However, the dependence on the catalogue
arisesonly in Subroutine Commute,whichtests various pairs of subsets of the workspacefor
disjointness; the sizes of these subsets are governed by the generators. Assuming a fixed
catalogue,then, there isa constantboundonthe time requiredfor asingle callto Commute,
and we may analyze the complexity of Algorithm 8.1 as a function of N alone.
Notice that Algorithm 8.1 calls ShrinkCubePathat most N times, since it stops as soon as
thelengthofthecubepathfailstodecrease. EachtimeanindividualloopofShrinkCubePath
is executed, the quantity dim(C ) decreases. Since this quantity equals N initially,
ShrinkCubePath calls the sPubroutines Commute, ExciseTrivial, and CommonEdge each at
most N times. Each of these has a constant running time, with Commute being the only
one depending on the particulars of the metamorphic system. Therefore the complexity of
the entire Algorithm 8.1 is O(N2), with the constant determined by the running time of
Commute.
TheworstcaseforAlgorithm8.1seemstobeachievedinatotallyflat2-dstatecomplexbya
pathconsistingoftwoperpendicularsegmentsoflengthN/2. (ThiscaserequiresN2/2runs
of ShrinkCubePath.) The presence of true negative curvature in a state complex greatly
increases the speed of convergence. On the other hand, a flat state complex is desirable for
other reasons.
It remains an important computational question to determine whether the homotopy class
of the initial path (given, say, from a distributed algorithm) is optimal in the sense that
its geodesic is the shortest among all homotopy classes. Interestingly, in contrast to the
previous paragraph, this problem becomes quite a bit more difficult in the presence of
negative curvature. From this point of view it is preferable to have a flat state complex.
9. Discussion. Our principal contributions are:
1. A mathematical definition ofametamorphicsystemwhichencompassmanymodels
currently studied and suggests seemingly unrelated (and often simpler) systems.
Given the difficulty of building large metamorphic systems, simpler examples pos-
sessing the same formal structure may be valuable.
2. The state complex, whose naturality is manifested on the level of its topology (S
canbehomotopicallysimple)anditsgeometry(non-positivecurvatureisuniversal,
mathematically helpful, and highly desirable for shape planning).
There are drawbacks to this approach. Primary among them are the dual dilemmas that
shape planning is inherently complex, and that there are many types of reconfiguration
possible. A state complex approach is not meant for all systems. Indeed, it is possible to
designdegeneratemetamorphicsystemswithlittle to nocommutativity. Nevertheless,pay-
ing attention to the geometry lurking behind our higher-dimensional versions of transition
graphs leads to a nontrivial result on the optimality of path-shortening.
COMPLEXESFORMETAMORPHICROBOTS 17
Asaninterestingside-note,weobservethatinthe presentcontext,the optimalreconfigura-
tionpathisnotalwayscoincidentwithageodesicontheconfigurationspace. Thisprinciple
holds in more generality.
Finally, in this initial work, we have focused only on the first-order problem of shape plan-
ning. We hope that the mathematical framework here suggested finds uses in more sophis-
ticated task-planning problems for metamorphic and reconfigurable robots.
Appendix A. Shape complexes.
State complexes, despite their relative simplicity over the transition graph, nevertheless
typicallycontainalargenumberofcells. Forlattice-basedsystems, andinsomeothercases
as well, a much smaller complex called the shape complex can be used to encode all of the
localreconfigurations,withoutlosinganyessentialinformationfromthestatecomplex. The
idea is to exploit the symmetries of the domain.
Considerthe(lattice-based)pivotinghexsystemofExample3.1. Theunderlyinglatticehas
translational symmetry in two independent directions; so for instance, in the idealized case
where the workspace is the entire (infinite) lattice with no obstacles, the state complex S
sharesthese symmetries. Ifwe takeaquotientofS bythe actionsofthese twotranslations,
we obtain the shape complex Sh. (The precise definition follows shortly.)
ObservethatShismuchsmallerthanS;indeedeveniftheworkspaceisinfinite,thecomplex
Sh is compact (provided the system consists of connected sets of, say, N cells). Yet, Sh
carries substantially the same information as S. Whereas S keeps track of both the shape
and the location of the aggregate,the quotient Sh ignores the location.
Note that no information about the system is lost in the process of forming the quotient; S
canbecompletelyreconstructedfromSh. Indeed,S isacovering space ofSh(withcovering
transformationgroupequalto the groupofsymmetriesofthe lattice). InparticularSh and
S share the same universal covering space, so Sh (just like S) is non-positively curved.
Here is the definition of the shape complex; compare with Definition 4.3.
Definition A.1. The shape complex Sh of a (lattice-based) local reconfigurablesystem
istheabstractcubecomplexwhosek-dimensionalcubesareequivalenceclasses[U;(Φ )k ]
1. (Φ )k is a k-tuple of commuting actions of generators φ ;
2. U is some state for which all the actions (Φ )k are admissible; and
3. [U ;(Φ )k ] = [U ;(Φ )k ] if and only if there is a translation T : L → L such
0 αi i=1 1 βi i=1
that the list (Φ ◦ T) is a permutation of (Φ ), and U = U ◦ T on the set
The boundary of a k-cube is obtained just as it is in S.
Example A.2. The shape complex for the system of Example 3.1 (with the generator of
Fig. 3.1[left]) having a total of N =3 occupied cells is shownin Figure A.1. There are nine
square cells. Two pairs of edges are identified according to the matching arrows, yielding
a Mobius strip; additionally, the three black vertices are identified to one, as are the three
white vertices. The shape complex is therefore a Mobius strip with some of the boundary
points identified.
18 AARONABRAMS&ROBERTGHRIST
Fig.A.1. The shape complex for a pivoting hex system consisting of 3 robotic cells.
Macros. Themostobviousadvantageoftheshapecomplexisthatthediscoveryofasingle
shortest path in Sh simultaneously solves several state-changing problems in the complex
S. This is particularly helpful in systems which require frequent transportation within the
workspace (perhaps to perform various tasks in different areas). For instance, suppose the
workspaceincludes severalnarrowcorridorsthroughwhichthe robotmusttravelatvarious
times. At each encounter with such a corridor, it must change to a shape which is skinny
enough to navigate the passageway. But this is the same problem at each corridor, even
thoughitoccursindifferentplacesinthestatecomplex: thethreehexagonsinExampleA.2
canmovefromatriangularshapetoalinearshapebythesamesequenceofmoves,wherever
the problem may arise in L.
In the shape complex, we view this as a single shortest-path problem, whose solution we
may lift to various locations in the domain. In this sense a shortest path P in Sh can be
viewed as a macro for solving state-changing problems in S.
A drawback to the shape complex is that it neglects the shape of the workspace W. In
the presence of obstacles or at the edge of W, a path P in Sh may fail to lift to a path
in S. Thus before lifting a path P one must check that the actions are admissible at the
appropriate locations in W.