]hcem-tats.tam-dnoc[
1v7315.7031:viXra
Statistical Physics: A Short Course for Electrical
Engineering Students
Neri Merhav
Statistical Physics: A Short Course for Electrical
Engineering Students
Neri Merhav
Department of Electrical Engineering
Technion - Israel Institute of Technology
Technion City, Haifa 32000, ISRAEL
merhav@ee.technion.ac.il
This is a set of lecture notes of a course on statistical physics and thermodynamics,
whichisoriented,toacertainextent, towardselectricalengineeringstudents. Themain
body of the lectures is devoted to statistical physics, whereas much less emphasis is
given to the thermodynamics part. In particular, the idea is to let the most important
results of thermodynamics (most notably, the laws of thermodynamics) to be obtained
as conclusions from the derivations in statistical physics. Beyond the variety of central
topics in statistical physics that are important to the general scientific education of the
EE student, special emphasis is devoted to subjects that are vital to the engineering
education concretely. These include, first of all, quantum statistics, like the Fermi–
Dirac distribution, as well as diffusion processes, which are both fundamental for deep
understanding of semiconductor devices. Another important issue for the EE student
is to understand mechanisms of noise generation and stochastic dynamics in physical
systems, most notably, in electric circuitry. Accordingly, the fluctuation–dissipation
theorem of statistical mechanics, which is the theoretical basis for understanding ther-
mal noise processes in systems, is presented from a signals–and–systems point of view,
inaway thatwouldhopefullybeunderstandableandusefulfor anengineeringstudent,
andwell connected toothercoursesintheelectrcial engineeringcurriculumlikecourses
on random priocesses. The quantum regime, in this context, is important too and
hence provided as well. Finally, we touch very briefly uponsome relationships between
statistical mechanics and information theory, which is the theoretical basis for com-
munications engineering, and demonstrate how statistical–mechanical approach can be
useful in order for the study of information–theoretic problems. These relationships
are further explored, and in a much deeper manner, in my previously posted arXiv
monograph, entitled: “Information Theory and Statistical Physics – Lecture Notes”
1 Introduction 6
2 Kinetic Theory and the Maxwell Distribution 8
2.1 The Statistical Nature of the Ideal Gas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
2.2 Collisions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
2.3 Dynamical Aspects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3 Elementary Statistical Physics 21
3.1 Basic Postulates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
3.2 Statistical Ensembles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
3.2.1 The Microcanonical Ensemble . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
3.2.2 The Canonical Ensemble . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
3.2.3 The Grand–Canonical Ensemble and the Gibbs Ensemble . . . . . . . 48
4 Quantum Statistics – the Fermi–Dirac Distribution 56
4.1 Combinatorial Derivation of the FD Statistics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
4.2 FD Statistics From the Grand–Canonical Ensemble . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60
4.3 The Fermi Energy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
4.4 Useful Approximations of Fermi Integrals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
4.5 Applications of the FD Distribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66
4.5.1 Electrons in a Solid . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66
4.5.2 Thermionic Emission . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68
4.5.3 Photoelectric Emission . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 70
5 Quantum Statistics – the Bose–Einstein Distribution 72
5.1 Combinatorial Derivation of the BE Statistics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 72
5.2 Derivation Using the Grand–Canonical Ensemble . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 73
5.3 Bose–Einstein Condensation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 74
5.4 Black–Body Radiation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 77
6 Interacting Particle Systems and Phase Transitions 81
6.1 Introduction – Sources of Interaction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 81
6.2 Models of Interacting Particles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 82
6.3 A Qualitative Discussion on Phase Transitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 88
6.4 The One–Dimensional Ising Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 91
6.5 The Curie–Weiss Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 94
6.6 Spin Glasses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 99
7 Vibrations in a Solid – Phonons and Heat Capacity 102
7.1 Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 102
7.2 Formulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 103
7.3 Heat Capacity Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 104
7.3.1 Einstein’s Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 106
7.3.2 Debye’s Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 107
8 Fluctuations, Stochastic Dynamics and Noise 110
8.1 Elements of Fluctuation Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 111
8.2 Brownian Motion and the Langevin Equation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 113
8.3 Diffusion and the Fokker–Planck Equation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 119
8.4 The Fluctuation–Dissipation Theorem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 124
8.5 Johnson–Nyquist Noise in the Quantum–Mechanical Regime . . . . . . . . . 131
8.6 Other Noise Sources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 134
9 A Brief Touch on Information Theory 137
9.1 Introduction – What is Information Theory About? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 137
9.2 Entropy in Info Theory and in Thermo & Statistical Physics . . . . . . . . . 138
9.3 Statistical Physics of Optimum Message Distributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . 142
1 Introduction
Statistical physics is a branch in physics which deals with systems with a huge number of
particles (or any other elementary units). For example, Avogadro’s number, which is about
6 1023, is the number of molecules in 22.4 liters of ideal gas at standard temperature and
pressure. Evidently, when it comes to systems with such an enormously large number of
particles, there is no hope to keep track of the physical state (e.g., position and momentum)
of each and every individual particle by means of the classical methods in physics, that is,
by solving a gigantic system of differential equations pertaining to Newton’s laws for all
particles. Moreover, even if these differential equations could have been solved somehow (at
least approximately), the information that they would give us would be virtually useless.
What we normally really want to know about our physical system boils down to a fairly
short list of macroscopic parameters, such as energy, heat, pressure, temperature, volume,
magnetization, andthelike. Inother words, while we continue to believe inthegoodoldlaws
of physics that we have known for some time, even the classical ones, we no longer use them
in the ordinary way that we are familiar with from elementary physics courses. Instead, we
thinkofthestateofthesystem, atanygivenmoment, asarealizationofacertainprobabilistic
ensemble. This is to say that we approach the problem from a probabilistic (or a statistical)
point of view. The beauty of statistical physics is that it derives the macroscopic theory of
thermodynamics (i.e., the relationships between thermodynamical potentials, temperature,
pressure, etc.) as ensemble averages that stem from this probabilistic microscopic theory, in
the limit of an infinite number of particles, that is, the thermodynamic limit.
The purpose of this set of lecture notes is to teach statistical mechanics and thermody-
namics, with some degree of orientation towards students in electrical engineering. The main
body of the lectures is devoted to statistical mechanics, whereas much less emphasis is given
to the thermodynamics part. In particular, the idea is to let the most important results of
thermodynamics (most notably, the laws of thermodynamics) to be obtained as conclusions
from the derivations in statistical mechanics.
Beyond the variety of central topics in statistical physics that are important to the gen-
eral scientific education of the EE student, special emphasis is devoted to subjects that are
vital to the engineering education concretely. These include, first of all, quantum statistics,
like the Fermi–Dirac distribution, as well as diffusion processes, which are both fundamen-
tal for understanding semiconductor devices. Another important issue for the EE student
is to understand mechanisms of noise generation and stochastic dynamics in physical sys-
tems, most notably, in electric circuitry. Accordingly, the fluctuation–dissipation theorem
of statistical mechanics, which is the theoretical basis for understanding thermal noise pro-
cesses and physical systems, is presented from the standpoint of a system with an input and
output, and in a way that would hopefully be understandable and useful for an engineer,
and well related to other courses in the undergraduate curriculum, like courses in random
processes. This engineering perspective is typically not available in standard physics text-
books. The quantum regime, in this context, is important too and hence provided as well.
Finally, we touch upon some relationships between statistical mechanics and information
theory, which is the theoretical basis for communications engineering, and demonstrate how
statistical–mechanical approach can be useful in order for the study of information–theoretic
problems. These relationships are further explored, and in a much deeper manner, in a pre-
vious arXiv paper, entitled: “Information Theory and Statistical Physics – Lecture Notes,”
The reader is assumed to have prior background in elementary quantum mechanics and
in random processes, both in undergraduate level. The lecture notes include fairly many
examples, exercises and figures, which will hopefully help the student to grasp the material
better. Most of the material in this set of lecture notes is based on well–known, classical
textbooks (see bibliography), but some of the derivations are original. Chapters and sections
marked by asterisks can be skipped without loss of continuity.
2 Kinetic Theory and the Maxwell Distribution
The concept that a gas consists of many small mobile mass particles is very old – it dates
back to the Greek philosophers. It has been periodically rejected and revived throughout
many generations of the history of science. Around the middle of the 19–th century, against
the general trend of rejecting the atomistic approach, Clausius,1 Maxwell2 and Boltzmann3
succeeded to develop a kinetic theory for the motion of gas molecules, which was mathemat-
ically solid, on the one hand, and had good agreement with the experimental evidence (at
least in simple cases), on the other hand.
In this part, we will present some elements of Maxwell’s formalism and derivation that
builds the kinetic theory of the ideal gas. It derives some rather useful results from first
principles. While the main results that we shall see in this section can be viewed as a special
case of the more general concepts and principles that will be provided later on, the purpose
here is to give a quick snapshot on the taste of this matter and to demonstrate how the
statistical approach to physics, which is based on very few reasonable assumptions, gives rise
to rather far–reaching results and conclusions.
The choice of the ideal gas, as a system of many mobile particles, is a good testbed to
begin with, as on the one hand, it is simple, and on the other hand, it is not irrelevant to
electrical engineering and electronics in particular. For example, the free electrons in a metal
can often be considered a “gas” (albeit not an ideal gas), as we shall see later on.
2.1 The Statistical Nature of the Ideal Gas
From the statistical–mechanical perspective, and ideal gas is a system of mobile particles,
which interact with one another only via elastic collisions, whose duration is extremely short
1 Rudolf Julius Emanuel Clausius (1822–1888) was a German physicist and mathematician who is con-
sidered one of the central pioneers of thermodynamics.
2James Clerk Maxwell (1831–1879)was a Scottish physicist and mathematician, whose other prominent
achievement was formulating classical electromagnetic theory.
3Ludwig Eduard Boltzmann (1844–1906) was an Austrian physicist, who has founded contributions in
statistical mechanics and thermodynamics. He was one of the advocators of the atomic theory when it was
still very controversial.
compared to the time elapsed between two consecutive collisions in which a given particle
is involved. This basic assumption is valid as long as the gas is not too dense and the
pressure that it exerts is not too high. As explained in the Introduction, the underlying
idea of statistical mechanics in general, is that instead of hopelessly trying to keep track
of the motion of each individual molecule, using differential equations that are based on
Newton’s laws, one treats the population of molecules as a statistical ensemble using tools
from probability theory, hence the name statistical mechanics (or statistical physics).
What is the probability distribution of the state of the molecules of an ideal gas in
equilibrium? Here, by “state” we refer to the positions and the velocities (or momenta) of
all molecules at any given time. As for the positions, if gravity is neglected, and assuming
that the gas is contained in a given box (container) of volume V, there is no apparent reason
to believe that one region is preferable over others, so the distribution of the locations is
assumed uniform across the container, and independently of one another. Thus, if there are
N molecules, the joint probability density of their positions is 1/VN everywhere within the
container and zero outside. It is therefore natural to define the density of particles per unit
volume as ρ = N/V.
What about the distribution of velocities? This is slightly more involved, but as we shall
see, still rather simple, and the interesting point is that once we derive this distribution, we
will be able to derive some interesting relationships between macroscopic quantities pertain-
ing to the equilibrium state of the system (pressure, density, energy, temperature, etc.). As
for the velocity of each particle, we will make two assumptions:
1. All possible directions of motion in space are equally likely. In other words, there are
no preferred directions (as gravity is neglected). Thus, the probability density function
(pdf) of the velocity vector ~v = v xˆ+v yˆ+v zˆ depends on ~v only via its magnitude,
i.e., the speed s = ~v = v2 +v2 +v2, or in mathematical terms:
f(v ,v ,v ) = g(v2 +v2 +v2) (2.1.1)
x y z x y z
for some function g.
2. The various components v , v and v are identically distributed and independent, i.e.,
f(v ,v ,v ) = f(v )f(v )f(v ). (2.1.2)
x y z x y z
The rationale behind identical distributions is, like in item 1 above, namely, the
isotropic nature of the pdf. The rationale behind independence is that in each col-
lision between two particles, the total momentum is conserved and in each component
(x, y, and z) separately, so there are actually no interactions among the component
momenta. Each three–dimensional particle actually behaves like three independent
one–dimensional particles, as far as the momentum or velocity is concerned.
We now argue that there is only one kind of (differentiable) joint pdf f(v ,v ,v ) that
complies with both assumptions at the same time, and this is the Gaussian density where
all three components of ~v are independent, zero–mean and with the same variance.
To see why this is true, consider the equation
x y z x y z
which combines both requirements. Let us assume that both f and g are differentiable.
First, observe that this equality already tells that f(v ) = f( v ), namely, f(v ) depends
on v only via v2, and obviously, the same comment applies to v and v . Let us denote
then f ˆ (v2) = f(v ), i x,y,z . Further, let us temporarily denote u = v2, u = v2 and
i i ∈ { } x x y y
u = v2. The last equation then reads
x y z x y z
Taking now partial derivatives w.r.t. u , u and u , we obtain
′ x y z x ′ y z x y ′ z ′ x y z
The first two equalities imply that
f (u ) f (u ) f (u )
′ x ′ y ′ z
for all u , u and u , which means that f (u)/f(u) d[lnf(u)]/du must be a constant. Let
us denote this constant by α. Then,
implies that
where β is a constant of integration, i.e.,
f ˆ (u) = B e αu, (2.1.9)
where B = eβ. Returning to the original variables,
f(v x ) = Be − αv x 2 , (2.1.10)
and similar relations for v and v . For f to be a valid pdf, α must be positive and B must
be the appropriate constant of normalization, which gives
f(v x ) = e − αv x 2 (2.1.11)
and the same applies to v and v . Thus, we finally obtain
f(v x ,v y ,v z ) = e − α(v x 2+v y 2+v z 2) (2.1.12)
(cid:16) (cid:17)
and it only remains to determine the constant α.
To this end, we adopt the following consideration. Assume, without essential loss of
generality, that the container is a box of sizes L L L , whose walls are parallel to the
axes of the coordinate system. Consider a molecule with velocity ~v = v xˆ+v yˆ+v zˆhitting
a wall parallel to the Y Z plane from its left side. The molecule is elastically reflected with
a new velocity vector v~ = v xˆ+v yˆ+v zˆ, and so, the change in momentum, which is also
the impulse F τ that the molecule exerts on the wall, is ∆p = 2mv , where m is the mass
of the molecule. For a molecule of velocity v in the x–direction to hit the wall within time
duration τ, its distance from the wall must not exceed v τ in the x–direction. Thus, the
total average impulse contributed by all molecules with an x–component velocity ranging
between v and v +dv , is given by
2mv x N x e − αv x 2 dv x .
Thus, the total impulse exerted within time τ is the integral, given by
2mNτ α mNτ
L · π ∞ v x 2e − αv x 2 dv x = 2αL .
The total force exerted on the Y Z wall is then mN/(2αL ), and so the pressure is
2αL L L 2αV 2α
and so, we can determine α in terms of the physical quantities P and ρ and m:
α = . (2.1.14)
From the equation of state of the ideal gas4
P = ρkT (2.1.15)
where k is Boltzmann’s constant (= 1.381 10 23 Joules/degree) and T is absolute temper-
ature. Thus, an alternative expression for α is:
α = . (2.1.16)
On substituting this into the general Gaussian form of the pdf, we finally obtain
m 3/2 m m 3/2 ǫ
f(~v) = exp (v2 +v2 +v2) = exp , (2.1.17)
2πkT −2kT x y z 2πkT −kT
(cid:16) (cid:17) h i (cid:16) (cid:17) h i
where ǫ is the (kinetic) energy of the molecule. This form of a pdf, that is proportional to
e ǫ/(kT), where ǫ is the energy, is not a coincidence. We shall see it again and again later on,
andin much greater generality, as a fact that stems frommuch deeper andmore fundamental
principles. It is called the Boltzmann–Gibbs distribution.
4Consider this as an experimental fact.
Having derived the pdf of ~v, we can now calculate a few moments. Throughout this
course, we will denote the expectation operator by , which is the customary notation used
by physicists. Since
v2 = v2 = v2 = (2.1.18)
(cid:10) (cid:11) (cid:10) (cid:11) (cid:10) (cid:11)
we readily have
~v 2 = v2 +v2 +v2 = , (2.1.19)
k k x y z m
(cid:10) (cid:11) (cid:10) (cid:11)
and so the root mean square (RMS) speed is given by
s = ~v 2 = . (2.1.20)
Other related statistical quantities, that can be derived from f(~v), are the average speed
s and the most likely speed. Like s , they are also proportional to kT/m but with
different constants of proportionality (see Exercise below). The average kpinetic energy per
molecule is
ǫ = m ~v 2 = (2.1.21)
h i 2 k k 2
(cid:28) (cid:29)
independent of m. This relation gives to the notion of temperature its basic significance:
at least in the case of the ideal gas, temperature is simply a quantity that is directly pro-
portional to the average kinetic energy of each particle. In other words, temperature and
kinetic energy are almost synonyms in this case. In the sequel, we will see a more general
definition of temperature. The factor of 3 at the numerator is due to the fact that space has
three dimensions, and so, each molecule has 3 degrees of freedom. Every degree of freedom
contributes an amount of energy given by kT/2. This will turn out later to be a special case
of a more general principle called the equipartition of energy.
The pdf of the speed s = ~v can be derived from the pdf of the velocity ~v using the
obvious consideration that all vectors ~v of the same norm correspond to the same speed.
Thus, the pdf of s is simply the pdf of ~v (which depends solely on ~v = s) multiplied by
the surface area of a three–dimensional sphere of radius s, which is 4πs2, i.e.,
m 3/2 2 m 3
f(s) = 4πs2 e ms2/(2kT) = s2e ms2/(2kT) (2.1.22)
2πkT π kT ·
(cid:16) (cid:17) (cid:16) (cid:17)
This is called the Maxwell distribution and it is depicted in Fig. 1 for various values of the
parameter kT/m. To obtain the pdf of the energy ǫ, we should change variables according
to s = 2ǫ/m and ds = dǫ/√2mǫ. The result is
Exercise 2.1: Use the above to calculate: (i) the average speed s , (ii) the most likely speed
argmax f(s), and (iii) the most likely energy argmax f(ǫ).
0 1 2 3 4 5
Figure 1: Demonstration of the Maxwell distribution for various values of the parameter kT/m.
The red curve (tall and narrow) corresponds to smallest value and the blue curve (short and wide)
– to the highest value.
An interesting relation, that will be referred to later on, links between the average energy
per particle ¯ǫ = ǫ , the density ρ, and the pressure P, or equivalently, the total energy
E = Nǫ¯, the volume V and P:
which after multiplying by V becomes
PV = . (2.1.25)
It is interesting to note that this relation can be obtained directly from the analysis of the
impulse exerted by the particles on the walls, similarly as in the earlier derivation of the
parameter α, and without recourse to the equation of state (see, for example, [13, Sect. 20–
4, pp. 353–355]). This is because the parameter α of the Gaussian pdf of each component of
~v has the obvious meaning of 1/(2σ2), where σ2 is the common variance of each component
of ~v. Thus, σ2 = 1/(2α) and so, ~v 2 = 3σ2 = 3/(2α), which in turn implies that
v hk k i v
m 3m 3m 3P
2 k k 4α 4ρm/(2P) 2ρ
which is equivalent to the above.
2.2 Collisions
We now take a closer look into the issue of collisions. We first define the concept of collision
cross–section, which we denote by σ. Referring to Fig. 2, consider a situation, where two
hard spheres, labeled A and B, with diameters 2a and 2b, respectively, are approaching
each other, and let c be the projection of the distance between their centers in the direction
perpendicular to the direction of their relative motion, ~v ~v . Clearly, collision will occur
if and only if c < a + b. In other words, the two spheres would collide only if the center
of B lies in inside a volume whose cross sectional area is σ = π(a + b)2, or for identical
spheres, σ = 4πa2. Let the colliding particles have relative velocity ∆~v = ~v ~v . Passing
to the coordinate system of the center of mass of the two particles, this is equivalent to the
motion of one particle with the reduced mass µ = m m /(m + m ), and so, in the case
of identical particles, µ = m/2. The average relative speed is easily calculated from the
Maxwell distribution, but with m being replaced by µ = m/2, i.e.,
hk ki 4πkT · πm h i
(cid:16) (cid:17)
The total number of particles per unit volume that collide with a particular particle within
and so, the collision rate of each particle is
The mean distance between collisions (a.k.a. the mean free path) is therefore
λ = hk ki = = . (2.2.4)
Figure 2: Hard sphere collision.
What is the probability distribution of the random distance L between two consecutive
collisions of a given particle? In particular, what is p(l) = Pr L l ? Let us assume
that the collision process is memoryless in the sense that the event of not colliding before
distance l +l is the intersection of two independent events, the first one being the event of
not colliding before distance l , and the second one being the event of not colliding before
the additional distance l . That is
We argue that under this assumption, p(l) must be exponential in l. This follows from the
following consideration.5 Taking partial derivatives of both sides w.r.t. both l and l , we
′ 1 2 ′ 1 2 1 ′ 2
5Similar idea to the one of the earlier derivation of the Gaussian pdf of the ideal gas.
for all non-negative l and l . Thus, p(l)/p(l) must be a constant, which we shall denote
by a. This trivial differential equation has only one solution which obeys with the obvious
initial condition p(0) = 1:
p(l) = e al l 0 (2.2.8)
so it only remains to determine the parameter a, which must be positive since the function
p(l) must be monotonically non–increasing by definition. This can easily found by using the
fact that L = 1/a = λ, and so,
p(l) = e l/λ = exp . (2.2.9)
!
2.3 Dynamical Aspects
The discussion thus far focused on the static (equilibrium) behavior of the ideal gas. In
this subsection, we will briefly touch upon dynamical issues pertaining to non–equilibrium
situations. These issues will be further developed in the second part of the course, and with
much greater generality.
Consider two adjacent containers separated by a wall. Both of them have the same
volume V, they both contain the same ideal gas at the same temperature T, but with
different densities ρ and ρ , and hence different pressures P and P . Let us assume that
P > P . At time t = 0, a small hole is generated in the separating wall. The area of this
hole is A (see Fig. 3).
ρ1 P1 ρ2 P2
Figure 3: Gas leakage through a small hole.
If the mean free distances λ and λ are relatively large compared to the dimensions of
the hole, it is safe to assume that every molecule that reaches the hole, passes through it.
The mean number of molecules that pass from left to right within time τ is given by
N = ρ 1 V ∞ dv x e − αv x 2 x = 1 (2.3.1)
and so the number of particles per second, flowing from left to right is
Similarly, in the opposite direction, we have
and so, the net left–to–right current is
Animportantpointhereisthatthecurrent isproportionaltothedifferencebetween densities
(ρ ρ ),andconsideringtheequationofstateoftheidealgas, itisthereforealsoproportional
to the pressure difference, (P P ). This rings the bell of the well known analogous fact that
the electric current is proportional to the voltage, which in turn is the difference between
the electric potentials at two points. Considering the fact that ρ = (ρ +ρ )/2 is constant,
we obtain a simple differential equation
dt − V 2πm − −
whose solution is
which means that equilibrium is approached exponentially fast with time constant
Imagine now a situation, where there is a long pipe aligned along the x–direction. The
pipe is divided into a chain of cells in a linear fashion. and in the wall between each two
consecutive cells there is a hole with area A. The length of each cell (i.e., the distance
between consecutive walls) is the mean free distance λ, so that collisions within each cell can
be neglected. Assume further that λ is so small that the density of each cell at time t can be
approximated using a continuous function ρ(x,t). Let x be the location of one of the walls.
Then, according to the above derivation, the current at x = x is
I(x ) = ρ x ,t ρ x + ,t A
− 2 − 2 2πm
(cid:20) (cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18) (cid:19)(cid:21) r
kT ∂ρ(x,t)
Aλ . (2.3.8)
r (cid:12)x=x0
Thus, the current is proportional to the negative g(cid:12)radient of the density. This is quite a
fundamental result which holds with much greater generality. In the more general context,
it is known as Fick’s law.
Consider next two close points x and x +dx, with possibly different current densities
(i.e., currents per unit area) J(x ) and J(x + ∆x). The difference J(x ) J(x + ∆x) is
the rate at which matter accumulates along the interval [x ,x + ∆x] per unit area in the
perpendicular plane. Within ∆t seconds, the number of particles per unit area within this
interval has grown by [J(x ) J(x + ∆x)]∆t. But this amount is also [ρ(x ,t + ∆t)
ρ(x ,t)]∆x, Taking the appropriate limits, we get
= , (2.3.9)
which is a one–dimensional version of the so called equation of continuity. Differentiating
now eq. (2.3.8) w.r.t. x and comparing with (2.3.9), we obtain the diffusion equation (in one
dimension):
= D (2.3.10)
where the constant D, in this case,
D = , (2.3.11)
which is called the diffusion coefficient. Here S is the cross–section area.
Thisis, ofcourse, atoymodel–itisacaricatureofarealdiffusionprocess, butbasically, it
captures the essence of it. Diffusion processes are central in irreversible statistical mechanics,
since the solution to the diffusion equation is sensitive to the sign of time. This is different
from the Newtonian equations of frictionless motion, which have a time reversal symmetry
and hence are reversible. We will touch upon these issues near the end of the course.
The equation of continuity, Fick’s law, the diffusion equation and its extension, the
Fokker–Planck equation (which will also be discussed), are all very central in physics in
general andinsemiconductor physics, inparticular, astheydescribe processes ofpropagation
of concentrations of electrons and holes in semiconductor materials. Another branch of
physics where these equations play an important role is fluid mechanics.
3 Elementary Statistical Physics
In this chapter, we provide the formalism and the elementary background in statistical
physics. We first define the basic postulates of statistical mechanics, and then define various
ensembles. Finally, we shall derive some of the thermodynamic potentials and their proper-
ties, as well as the relationships among them. The important laws of thermodynamics will
also be pointed out.
3.1 Basic Postulates
As explained in the Introduction, statistical physics is about a probabilistic approach to
systems of many particles. While our discussion here will no longer be specfic to the ideal
gas as before, we will nonetheless start again with this example in mind, just for the sake of
concreteness, Consider then a system with a very large number N of mobile particles, which
are free to move in a given volume. The microscopic state (or microstate, for short) of the
system, at each time instant t, consists, in this example, of the position vector ~r (t) and the
momentum vector p~ (t) of each and every particle, 1 i N. Since each one of these is
a vector of three components, the microstate is then given by a (6N)–dimensional vector
x~(t) = (~r (t),~p (t)) : i = 1,2,...,N , whose trajectory along the time axis, in the phase
space IR6N, is called the phase trajectory.
Let us assume that the system is closed, i.e., isolated from its environment, in the sense
that no energy flows inside or out. Imagine that the phase space IR6N is partitioned into very
small hypercubes (or cells) ∆p~ ∆~r. One of the basic postulates of statistical mechanics
is the following: In the very long range, the relative amount of time at which x~(t) spends
within each such cell, converges to a certain number between 0 and 1, which can be given the
meaning oftheprobabilityofthis cell. Thus, thereis anunderlying assumption of equivalence
between temporal averages and ensemble averages, namely, this is the postulate of ergodicity.
Considerable efforts were dedicated to the proof of the ergodic hypothesis at least in some
cases. As reasonable and natural as it may seem, the ergodic hypothesis should not be taken
for granted. It does not hold for every system but only if no other conservation law holds.
For example, the ideal gas in a box is non–ergodic, as every particle retains its momentum
(assuming perfectly elastic collisions with the walls).
What arethentheprobabilitiesoftheabove–mentioned phase–space cells? Wewould like
to derive these probabilities fromfirst principles, based onasfew aspossible basic postulates.
Oursecondpostulateisthatforanisolatedsystem(i.e., whoseenergyisfixed)allmicroscopic
states x~(t) are equiprobable. The rationale behind this postulate is twofold:
In the absence of additional information, there is no apparent reason that certain
regions in phase space would have preference relative to any others.
Thispostulateisinharmonywithabasicresultinkinetictheoryofgases–the Liouville
theorem, which we will not touch upon in this course, but in a nutshell, it asserts that
the phase trajectories must lie along hyper-surfaces of constant probability density.6
3.2 Statistical Ensembles
3.2.1 The Microcanonical Ensemble
Before we proceed, let us slightly broaden the scope of our discussion. In a more general con-
text, associated with our N–particle physical system, is a certain instantaneous microstate,
generically denoted by x = (x ,x ,...,x ), where each x , 1 i N, may itself be a vector
of several physical quantities associated particle number i, e.g., its position, momentum, an-
gular momentum, magnetic moment, spin, and so on, depending on the type and the nature
of the physical system. For each possible value of x, there is a certain Hamiltonian (i.e.,
energy function) that assigns to x a certain energy (x).7 Now, let us denote by A(E) the
6This is a result of the energy conservation law along with the fact that probability mass behaves like
an incompressible fluid in the sense that whatever mass that flows into a certain regionfrom some direction
mustbeequaltothe outgoingflowfromsomeotherdirection. This isreflectedintheequationofcontinuity,
which was demonstrated earlier.
7Forexample,inthecaseofanideal gas, (x)= N p~ 2/(2m),wheremisthemassofeachmolecule,
E i=1k i k
namely, it accounts for the contribution of the kinetic energies only. In more complicated situations, there
might be additional contributions of potential energy, which depend on the positions.
volume of the shell of energy about E. This means
A(E) = Vol x : E (x) E +dE = dx, (3.2.1)
{ ≤ E ≤ } Z x : E ( x ) E+dE
where dE is a very small (but fixed) energy increment, which is immaterial when N is large.
Then, our above postulate concerning the ensemble of an isolated system, which is called
the microcanonincal ensemble, is that the probability density P(x) is given by
1 E (x) E +dE
0 elsewhere
In the discrete case, things are simpler, of course: Here, A(E) is the number of microstates
with (x) = E (exactly) and P(x) is the uniform probability mass function over this set of
states.
Back to the general case, we next define the notion of the density of states Ω(E), which
is intimately related to A(E), but with a few minor corrections. The first correction has
to do with the fact that A(E) is, in general, not dimensionless: In the above example of
a gas, it has the physical units of [length momentum]3N = [Joule sec]3N, but we must
eliminate these physical units because very soon we are going to apply non–linear functions
like the logarithmic function. To this end, we normalize the volume A(E) by the volume of
an elementary reference volume. In the gas example, this reference volume is taken to be
h3N, where h is Planck’s constant (h 6.62 10 34 Joules sec). Informally, the intuition
comes from the fact that h is our best available “resolution” in the plane spanned by each
component of ~r and the corresponding component of p~ , owing to the uncertainty principle
in quantum mechanics, which tells that the product of the standard deviations ∆p ∆r of
each component a (a = x,y,z) is lower bounded by ~/2, where ~ = h/(2π). More formally,
this reference volume is obtained in a natural manner from quantum statistical mechanics:
by changing the integration variable p~ to
k using the relation p~ =
k is the wave
vector. This is a well–known relationship (one of the de Broglie relationships) pertaining to
particle–wave duality. The second correction that is needed to pass from A(E) to Ω(E) is
applicable only when the particles are indistinguishable:8 in these cases, we don’t consider
8Intheexampleoftheidealgas,sincetheparticlesaremobileandsincetheyhavenocolorsandnoidentity
permutations between particles in a given configuration as distinct microstates. Thus, we
have to divide also by N!. Thus, taking into account both corrections, we find that in the
example of the ideal gas,
Once again, it should be understood that both of these corrections are optional and their
appicability depends on the system in question: The first correction is applicable only if
A(E) has physical units and the second corection is applicable only if the particles are
indistinguishable. For example, if x is discrete, in which case the integral defining A(E) is
replaced by a sum (that counts x’s with (x) = E), and the particles are distinguishable,
then no corrections are needed at all, i.e.,
Now, the entropy is defined as
where k isBoltzmann’s constant. Wewill see later what is therelationship between S(E) and
the classical thermodynamical entropy, due to Clausius (1850), as well as the information–
theoretic entropy, due to Shannon (1948). As it will turn out, all three are equivalent to
one another. Here, a comment on the notation is in order: The entropy S may depend on
additional quantities, other thantheenergy E, like the volume V andthenumber of particles
N. When this dependence will be relevant and important, we will use the more complete
form of notation S(E,V,N). If only the dependence on E is relevant in a certain context,
we use the simpler notation S(E).
Togetsomefeelingofthis, itshouldbenotedthatnormally, Ω(E)behavesasanexponen-
tialfunctionofN (atleastasymptotically), andso, S(E)isroughlylinearinN. Forexample,
if (x) = N k p~i k 2 , then Ω(E) is the volume of a shell or surface of a (3N)–dimensional
spherewithPradius√2mE, dividedbyN!h3N, which isproportionalto(2mE)3N/2VN/N!h3N,
certificates, there is no distinction between a state where particle no. 15 has position ~r and momentum p~
while particle no. 437 has position~r and momentum ~p and a state where these two particles are swapped.
where V is the volume, More precisely, we get
4πmE 3N/2 VN 3
S(E,V,N) = kln + Nk
3N · N!h3N 2
(cid:18) (cid:19)
Nkln + Nk. (3.2.6)
≈ 3N · Nh3 2
(cid:18) (cid:19)
Assuming thatE andV arebothproportionaltoN (E = NǫandV = N/ρ), itisreadilyseen
that S(E,V,N) is also proportional to N. A physical quantity that has a linear dependence
on the size of the system N, is called an extensive quantity. Energy, volume and entropy are
then extensive quantities. Other quantities, which are not extensive, i.e., independent of the
system size, like temperature and pressure, are called intensive.
It is interesting to point out that from the function S(E,V,N), one can obtain the
entire information about the relevant macroscopic physical quantities of the system, e.g.,
temperature, pressure, and so on. Specifically, the temperature T of the system is defined
according to:
1 ∂S(E,V,N)
(cid:20) (cid:21)V,N
where [ ] emphasizes that the derivative is taken while keeping V and N constant. One
may wonder, at this point, what is the justification for defining temperature this way. We
will get back to this point a bit later, but for now, we can easily see that this is indeed true
at least for the ideal gas, as by taking the derivative of (3.2.6) w.r.t. E, we get
∂S(E,V,N) 3Nk 1
where the second equality has been shown already in Chapter 2.
Intuitively, in most situations, we expect that S(E) would be an increasing function of
E for fixed V and N (although this is not strictly always the case), which means T 0.
But T is also expected to be increasing with E (or equivalently, E is increasing with T, as
otherwise, the heat capacity dE/dT < 0). Thus, 1/T should decrease with E, which means
that the increase of S in E slows down as E grows. In other words, we expect S(E) to
be a concave function of E. In the above example, indeed, S(E) is logarithmic in E and
E = 3NkT/2, as we have seen.
How can we convince ourselves, in mathematical terms, that under “conceivable condi-
tions”, S(E) is concave function in E? The answer may be given by a simple superadditivity
argument: As both E and S are extensive quantities, let us define E = Nǫ and for a given
density ρ,
s(ǫ) = lim , (3.2.9)
i.e., the per–particle entropy as a function of the per–particle energy, where we assume that
the limit exists. Consider the case where the Hamiltonian is additive, i.e.,
just like in the above example where (x) = N k p~i k 2 . Then, the inequality
1 1 2 2 1 1 2 2
expresses the simple fact that if our system is partitioned into two parts,9 one with N
particles, and the other with N = N N particles, then every combination of individual
microstates with energies N ǫ and N ǫ corresponds to a combined microstate with a total
energy of N ǫ + N ǫ (but there are more ways to split this total energy between the two
parts). Thus,
1 1 2 2 1 1 2 2
N +N ≥ N +N N +N
1 2 1 2 1 2
. (3.2.12)
and so, by taking N and N to , with N /(N +N ) λ (0,1), we get:
9This argument works for distinguishable particles. We will see later on a more general argument that
holds for indistingusihable particles too.
which establishes the concavity of s( ) at least in the case of an additive Hamiltonian, which
means that the entropy of mixing two systems of particles is greater than the total entropy
before they are mixed. A similar proof can be generalized to the case where (x) includes
also a limited degree of interactions (short range interactions), e.g., (x) = N (x ,x ),
E i=1E i i+1
but this requires somewhat more caution. In general, however, concavity maPy no longer hold
when there are long range interactions, e.g., where some terms of (x) depend on a linear
subset of particles.
Example 3.1 – Schottky defects. In a certain crystal, the atoms are located in a lattice, and at any
positive temperature there may be defects, where some of the atoms are dislocated (see Fig. 4).
Assuming that defects are sparse enough, such that around each dislocated atom all neighbors are
in place, the activation energy, ǫ , required for dislocation is fixed. Denoting the total number of
atoms by N and the number of defected ones by n, the total energy is then E = nǫ , and so,
N N!
n n!(N n)!
(cid:18) (cid:19) −
or, equivalently,
N!
n!(N n)!
(cid:20) − (cid:21)
k[N lnN nlnn (N n)ln(N n)] (3.2.15)
where in the last passage we have used the Stirling approximation. An important comment to
point out is that here, unlike in the example of the ideal gas we have not divided Ω(E) by N!. The
reason is that we do distinguish between two different configurations where the same number of
particlesweredislocatedbutthesitesofdislocation aredifferent. Yetwedonotdistinguishbetween
two microstates whose only difference is that two (identical) particles that were not dislocated are
swapped. This is the reason for the denominator n!(N n)! in the expression of Ω(E). Now,10
1 ∂S dS dn 1 N n
= = = kln − , (3.2.16)
T ∂E dn · dE ǫ · n
which gives the number of defects as
n= . (3.2.17)
At T = 0, there are no defects, but their number increases gradually with T, approximately
10Here and in the sequel, the reader might wonder about the meaning of taking derivatives of, and with
respect to, integer valued variables, like the number of dislocated particles, n. To this end, imagine an
approximation where n is interpolated to be a continuous valued variable.
Figure 4: Schottky defects in a crystal lattice.
according to exp( ǫ /kT). Note also that
S(E) = kln kNh
(cid:18) (cid:19)
(cid:16) (cid:17)
= kNh = kNh , (3.2.18)
(cid:18) 0(cid:19) (cid:18) 0(cid:19)
h (x) = xlnx (1 x)ln(1 x), 0 x 1
is the called the binary entropy function. Note also that s(ǫ) = kh (ǫ/ǫ ) is indeed concave in this
example.
What happens if we have two independent subsystems with total energy E, which are
both isolated from the environment and they reside in equilibrium with each other? What is
the temperature T and how does the energy split between them? The number of combined
microstateswheresubsystemno.1hasenergyE andsubsystemno.2hasenergyE = E E
isΩ (E ) Ω (E E ). Asthecombined system isisolated, theprobabilityofsuchacombined
macrostate is proportional to Ω (E ) Ω (E E ). Keeping in mind that normally, Ω andΩ
1 1 2 1 1 2
areexponential inN, thenforlargeN, thisproduct isdominatedbythevalueofE forwhich
it is maximum, or equivalently, the sum of logarithms, S (E ) +S (E E ), is maximum,
i.e., it is a maximum entropy situation, which is the second law of thermodynamics,
asserting that an isolated system (in this case, combined of two subsystems) achieves its
maximum possible entropy in equilibrium. This maximum is normally achieved at the value
of E for which the derivative vanishes, i.e.,
S (E ) S (E E ) = 0 (3.2.19)
S (E ) S (E ) = 0 (3.2.20)
which means
S (E ) = S (E ) . (3.2.21)
Thus, in equilibrium, which is the maximum entropy situation, the energy splits in a way
that temperatures are the same. Now, we can understand the concavity of entropy more
generally: λs(ǫ )+(1 λ)s(ǫ ) was the total entropy per particle when two subsystems (with
the same entropy function) were isolated from one another, whereas s(λǫ +(1 λ)ǫ ) is the
equilibrium entropy per particle after we let them interact thermally.
At this point, we are ready to justify why S (E) is equal to 1/T in general, as was
promised earlier. Although it is natural to expect that equality between S (E ) and S (E ),
in thermal equilibrium, is related equality between T and T , this does not automatically
mean that the derivative of each entropy is given by one over its temperature. On the face
of it, for the purpose of this implication, this derivative could have been equal any one–to–
one function of temperature f(T). To see why f(T) = 1/T indeed, imagine that we have a
system with anentropy function S (E) andthat we let it interact thermally with anideal gas
whose entropy function, which we shall denote now by S (E), is given as in eq. (3.2.6). Now,
at equilibrium S (E ) = S (E ), but as we have seen already, S (E ) = 1/T , where T is
0′ 0 g′ g g′ g g g
the temperature of the ideal gas. But in thermal equilibrium the temperatures equalize, i.e.,
T = T , where T is thetemperatureofthe system ofinterest. Itthen followseventually that
S (E ) = 1/T , which now means that in equilibrium, the derivative of entropy of the system
of interest is equal to the reciprocal of its temperature in general, and not only for the ideal
gas! At this point, the fact that our system has interacted and equilibrated with an ideal
gas is not important anymore and it does not limit the generality this statement. In simple
words, our system does not ‘care’ what kind system it has interacted with, whether ideal
gas or any other. This follows from a fundamental principle in thermodynamics, called the
zero–th law of thermodynamics, which states that thermal equilibrium has a transitive
property: If system A is in equilibrium with system B and system B is in equilibrium with
system C, then A is in equilibrium with C.
So we have seen that ∂S/∂E = 1/T, or equivalently, δS = δE/T. But in the absence of
any mechanical work (V is fixed) applied to the system and any chemical energy injected
into the system (N is fixed), any change in energy must be in the form of heat, thus we
denote δE = δQ, where Q is the heat intake. Consequently,
δS = , (3.2.22)
This is exactly the definition of the classical thermodynamical entropy due to Clausius.
Thus, at least for the case where no mechanical work is involved, we have demonstrated the
equivalence of the two notions of entropy, the statistical notiondue to Boltzmann S = klnΩ,
and the thermodynamical entropy due to Clausius, S = dQ/T, where the integration
should be understood to be taken along a slow (quasi–static)Rprocess, where after each small
increase in the heat intake, the system is allowed to equilibrate, which means that T is
given enough time to adjust before more heat is further added. For a given V and N, the
difference ∆S between the entropies S and S associated with two temperatures T and
T (pertaining to internal energies E and E , respectively) is given by ∆S = dQ/T
along such a quasi–static process. This is a rule that defines entropy differences,Rbut not
absolute levels. A reference value is determined by the third law of thermodynamics,
which asserts that as T tends to zero, the entropy tends to zero as well.11
Wehave seen whatisthemeaning ofthepartialderivative ofS(E,V,N)w.r.t. E. Isthere
also a simple meaning to the partial derivative w.r.t. V? Again, let us begin by examining
the ideal gas. Differentiating the expression of S(E,V,N) of the ideal gas w.r.t. V, we obtain
∂S(E,V,N) Nk P
= = , (3.2.23)
where the second equality follows again from the equation of state. So at least for the ideal
gas, this partial derivative is related to the pressure P. For similar considerations as before,
11In this context, it should be understood that the results we derived for the ideal gas hold only for
high enough temperatures: Since S was found proportional to lnE and E is proportional to T, then S is
proportional to lnT, but this cannot be true for small T as it contradicts (among other things) the third
law.
the relation
∂S(E,V,N) P
= (3.2.24)
is true not only for the ideal gas, but in general. Consider again an isolated system that
consists of two subsystems, with a wall (or a piston) separating between them. Initially, this
wall is fixed such that the volumes are V and V . At a certain moment, this wall is released
and allowed to be pushed in either direction. How would the total volume V = V +V divide
between the two subsystems in equilibrium? Again, the total entropy S (E ,V )+S (E
E ,V V ) would tend to its maximum for the same reasoning as before. The maximum
will be reached when the partial derivatives of this sum w.r.t. both E and V would vanish.
The partial derivative w.r.t. E has already been addressed. The partial derivative w.r.t. V
P ∂S (E ,V ) ∂S (E ,V ) P
1 1 1 1 2 2 2 2
Since T = T by the thermal equilibrium pertaining to derivatives w.r,t. energies, it fol-
lows that P = P , which means mechanical equilibrium: the wall will be pushed to the
point where the pressures from both sides are equal. We now have the following differential
relationship:
δE = TδS PδV = δQ δW, (3.2.27)
which is the the first law of thermodynamics, asserting that the change in the energy δE
ofasystem withafixed number ofparticles isequal tothedifference between theincremental
heat intake δQ and the incremental mechanical work δW carried out by the system. This is
nothing but a restatement of the law of energy conservation.
Finally, we should consider the partial derivative of S w.r.t. N. This is given by
= , (3.2.28)
where µ is called the chemical potential. If we now consider again the isolated system, which
consists of two subsystems that are allowed to exchange, not only heat and volume, but also
particles (of the same kind), whose total number is N = N + N , then again, maximum
entropy considerations would yield an additional equality between the chemical potentials,
µ = µ (chemical equilibrium).12 The chemical potential should be understood as a kind
of a force that controls the ability to inject particles into the system. For example, if the
particles are electrically charged, then the chemical potential has a simple analogy to the
electrical potential. The first law is now extended to have an additional term, pertaining to
an increment of chemical energy, and it now reads:
Example 3.2 – compression of ideal gas. Consider again an ideal gas of N particles at constant
temperature T. The energy is E = 3NkT/2 regardless of the volume. This means that if we
(slowly) compress the gas from volume V to volume V (V < V ), the energy remains the same,
in spite of the fact that we injected energy by applying mechanical work
V2 V2 dV V
W = PdV = NkT = NkT ln . (3.2.30)
What happened to that energy? The answer is that it was transformed into heat as the entropy of
the system (which is proportional to lnV) has changed by the amount ∆S = Nkln(V /V ), and
so, the heat intake ∆Q =T∆S = NkT ln(V /V ) exactly balances the work.
3.2.2 The Canonical Ensemble
So far we have assumed that our system is isolated, and therefore has a strictly fixed energy
E. Let us now relax this assumption and assume instead that our system is free to exchange
energy with its very large environment (heat bath) and that the total energy of the heat bath
12Equity of chemical potentials is, in fact, the generalprinciple of chemical equilibrium, and not equity of
concentrations or densities. In Section 2.3, we saw equity of densities, because in the case of the ideal gas,
the chemical potential is a function ofthe density, so equity of chemicalpotentials happens to be equivalent
to equity of densities in this case.
E is by far larger than the typical energy of the system. The combined system, composed
of our original system plus the heat bath, is now an isolated system at temperature T.
Similarly as before, since the combined system is isolated, it is governed by the micro-
canonical ensemble. The only difference is that now we assume that one of the systems (the
heat bath) is very large compared to the other (our test system). This means that if our
small system is in microstate x (for whatever definition of the microstate vector) with energy
(x), then the heat bath must have energy E (x) to complement the total energy to
E . The number of ways that the heat bath may have energy E (x) is Ω (E (x)),
where Ω ( ) is the density–of–states function pertaining to the heat bath. In other words,
the number of microstates of the combined system for which the small subsystem is in mi-
crostate x is Ω (E (x)). Since the combined system is governed by the microcanonical
ensemble, the probability of this is proportional to Ω (E (x)). More precisely:
P(x) = B 0 −E . (3.2.31)
Let us focus on the numerator for now,Pand normalize the result at the end. Then,
exp B 0 B (x)
S (E ) 1 (cid:12)
= exp B 0 (x)(cid:12)
(cid:26) (cid:27)
It is customary to work with the so called inverse temperature:
as we have already seen in the example of the ideal gas (where (x) was the kinetic energy),
but now it is much more general. Thus, all that remains to do is to normalize, and we then
obtain the Boltzmann–Gibbs (B–G) distribution, or the canonical ensemble, which describes
the underlying probability law in equilibrium:
where Z(β) is the normalization factor:
in the discrete case, or
in the continuous case. This is called the canonical ensemble. While the microcanonical
ensemble was defined in terms of the extensive variables E, V and N, in the canonical
ensemble, we replaced the variable E by the intensive variable that controls it, namely, β
(or T). Thus, the full notation of the partition function should be Z (β,V) or Z (T,V).
Exercise 3.1: Show that for the ideal gas
Z (T,V)= (3.2.38)
(cid:18) (cid:19)
λ = . (3.2.39)
λ is called the thermal de Broglie wavelength.
The formula of the B–G distribution is one of the most fundamental results in statistical
mechanics, which was obtained solely from the energy conservation law and the postulate
that in an isolated system the distribution is uniform. The function Z(β) is called the parti-
tion function, andasweshall see, itsmeaning isbyfardeeperthanjustbeinganormalization
constant. Interestingly, a great deal of the macroscopic physical quantities, like the internal
energy, the free energy, the entropy, the heat capacity, the pressure, etc., can be obtained
from the partition function. This is in analogy to the fact that in the microcanonical ensem-
ble, S(E) (or, more generally, S(E,V,N)) was pivotal to the derivation of all macroscopic
physical quantities of interest.
The B–G distribution tells us then that the system “prefers” to visit its low energy states
more than the high energy states, and what counts is only energy differences, not absolute
energies: If we add to all states a fixed amount of energy E , this will result in an extra
factor of e βE0 both in the numerator and in the denominator of the B–G distribution,
which will, of course, cancel out. Another obvious observation is that when the Hamiltonian
is additive, that is, (x) = N (x ), the various particles are statistically independent:
Additive Hamiltonians correPspond to non–interacting particles. In other words, the x
behave as if they were drawn from a i.i.d. probability distribution. By the law of large
numbers 1 N (x ) will tend (almost surely) to ǫ = (X ) . Thus, the average energy of
N i=1E i hE i i
the system Pis about N ǫ, not only on the average, but moreover, with an overwhelmingly
high probability for large N. Nonetheless, this is different from the microcanonical ensemble
where 1 N (x ) was held strictly at the value of ǫ.
One oPf the important principles of statistical mechanics is that the microcanonical en-
semble and the canonical ensemble (with the corresponding temperature) are asymptotically
equivalent (in the thermodynamic limit) as far as macroscopic quantities go. They continue
to be such even in cases of interactions, as long as these are short range13 and the same
is true with the other ensembles that we will encounter later in this chapter. This is an
important and useful fact, because more often than not, it is more convenient to analyze
things in one ensemble rather than in others, so it is OK to pass to another ensemble for
the purpose of the analysis, even though the “real system” is in the other ensemble. We will
use this ensemble equivalence principle many times later on. The important thing, however,
is to be consistent and not to mix up two ensembles or more. Once you moved to the other
ensemble, stay there.
Exercise 3.2: Consider the ideal gas with gravitation, where the Hamiltonian includes, in addition
to the kinetic energy term for each molecule, also an additive term of potential energy mgz for the
i–th molecule (z being its height). Supposethat an ideal gas of N molecules of mass m is confined
to a room whose floor and ceiling areas are both A and whose height is h: (i) Write an expression
for the joint pdf of the location ~r and the momentum ~p of each molecule. (ii) Use this expression
13This is related to the concavity of s(ǫ) [1], [8].
to show that the gas pressures at the floor and the ceiling are given by
P = ; P = . (3.2.40)
floor A(1 e mgh/kT) ceiling A(emgh/kT 1)
It is instructive to point out that the B–G distribution could have been obtained also
in a different manner, owing to the maximum–entropy principle that stems from the second
law. Specifically, define the Gibbs entropy (which is also the Shannon entropy of information
theory – see Chapter 9 later on) of a given distribution P as
and consider the following optimization problem:
s.t. (X) = E (3.2.42)
By formalizing the equivalent Lagrange problem, where β now plays the role of a Lagrange
multiplier:
or equivalently,
min P(x) (x) (3.2.44)
one readily verifies that the solution to this problem is the B-G distribution where the choice
of β controls the average energy E.14 In many physical systems, the Hamiltonian is a
quadratic (or “harmonic”) function, e.g., 1mv2, 1kx2, 1CV2, 1LI2, 1Iω2, etc., in which
case the resulting B–G distribution turns out to be Gaussian. This is at least part of the
explanation why the Gaussian distribution is so frequently encountered in Nature.
14 At this point, one may ask what is the relationship between the Boltzmann entropy as we defined it,
S =klnΩ, and the Shannon entropy, H = lnP(X) , where P is the B–G distribution. It turns out that
atleastasymptotically,S =kH,aswe shallseeshortly. Fornow,letus continue under the assumptionthat
this is true.
Properties of the Partition Function and the Free Energy
Let us now examine more closely the partition function and make a few observations about
its basic properties. For simplicity, we shall assume that x is discrete. First, let’s look at
the limits: Obviously, Z(0) is equal to the size of the entire set of microstates, which is also
Ω(E), This is the high temperature limit, where all microstates are equiprobable. At
tPhe other extreme, we have:
lim = min (x) = E (3.2.45)
β β − x E − GS
which describes the situation where the system is frozen to the absolute zero. Only states
with minimum energy – the ground–state energy, prevail.
Another important propertyof Z(β), ormoreprecisely, of lnZ(β), is thatit is acumulant
generating function: By taking derivatives of lnZ(β), we can obtain cumulants of (X). For
the first cumulant, we have
(X) = E = . (3.2.46)
For example, referring to Exercise 3.1,Pfor the ideal gas,
1 V N 1 VN 2πm 3N/2
N! λ3 N!h3N · β
(cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18) (cid:19)
thus, (X) = dlnZ (β,V)/dβ = 3N/(2β) = 3NkT/2 in agreement with the result we
already got both in Chapter 2 and in the microcanonical ensemble, thus demonstrating the
ensemble equivalence principle. Similarly, it is easy to show that
{E } hE i−hE i dβ2
This in turn implies that
0, (3.2.49)
which means that lnZ(β) must always be a convex function. Note also that
= kT2C(T) (3.2.50)
where C(T) = d (X) /dT is the heat capacity (at constant volume). Thus, the convexity
of lnZ(β) is intimately related to the physical fact that the heat capacity of the system is
positive.
Next, we look at the function Z(β) slightly differently. Instead of summing the terms
e β ( ) over all states individually, we sum them by energy levels, in a collective manner.
This amounts to:
= Ω(E)e βE
= ∆ e βF, (3.2.51)
where here and throughout the sequel, the notation =· means asymptotic equivalence in the
exponential scale. More precisely, a
for two positive sequences a
that lim 1 ln aN = 0.
The quantity f = ǫ Ts(ǫ ) is the (per–particle) free energy. Similarly, the entire free
energy, F, is defined as
F = E TS = = kT lnZ(β). (3.2.52)
Once again, due to the exponentiality of (3.2.51) in N, with very high probability the system
would be found in a microstate x whose normalized energy ǫ(x) = (x)/N is very close to
ǫ , the normalized energy that minimizes ǫ Ts(ǫ) and hence achieves f. We see then that
equilibrium in the canonical ensemble amounts to minimum free energy. This extends
the second law of thermodynamics from isolated systems to non–isolated ones. While in an
isolated system, the second law asserts the principle of maximum entropy, when it comes to
a non–isolated system, this rule is replaced by the principle of minimum free energy.
Exercise 3.3: Show that the canonical average pressure is given by
P = = kT .
Examinethisformulaforthecanonical ensembleof theidealgas. Comparetotheequation ofstate.
The physical meaning of the free energy, or more precisely, the difference between two
free energies F and F , is the minimum amount of work that it takes to transfer the system
from equilibrium state 1 to another equilibrium state 2 in an isothermal (fixed temperature)
process. This minimum is achieved when the process is quasi–static, i.e., so slow that the
system is always almost in equilibrium. Equivalently, ∆F is the maximum amount energy
in the system, that is free and useful for performing work (i.e., not dissipated as heat) in
fixed temperature.
To demonstrate this point, let us consider the case where (x) includes a term of a
potential energy that is given by the (scalar) product of a certain external force and the
conjugate physical variable at which this force is exerted (e.g., pressure times volume, grav-
itational force times height, moment times angle, magnetic field times magnetic moment,
voltage times electric charge, etc.), i.e.,
where λ is the force and L(x) is the conjugate physical variable, which depends on (some
coordinates of) the microstate. The partition function then depends on both β and λ and
hence will be denoted Z(β,λ). It is easy to see (similarly as before) that lnZ(β,λ) is convex
in λ for fixed β. Also,
L(X) = kT . (3.2.54)
The free energy is given by15
= kT λ lnZ . (3.2.55)
(cid:18) (cid:19)
Now, let F and F be the equilibrium free energies pertaining to two values of λ, denoted
λ and λ . Then,
= dλ λ h i
h L(X) iλ2
Z h L(X) iλ1
The product λ d L(X) designates an infinitesimal amount of (average) work performed
by the force λ on a small change in the average of the conjugate variable L(X) , where
the expectation is taken w.r.t. the actual value of λ. Thus, the last integral expresses the
total work along a slow process of changing the force λ in small steps and letting the system
adapt and equilibrate after this small change every time. On the other hand, it is easy to
show (using the convexity of lnZ in λ), that if λ varies in large steps, the resulting amount
of work will always be larger.
Returning to the definition of f, as we have said, the value ǫ of ǫ that minimizes f,
dominates the partition function and hence captures most of the probability for large N.
15At this point, there is a distinction between the Helmholtz free energy and the Gibbs free energy. The
formerisdefinedasF =E TS ingeneral,asmentionedearlier. ThelatterisdefinedasG=E TS λL=
kTlnZ, where L is shorthandnotationfor L(X) (the quantity H =E λL is calledthe enthalpy). The
physical significance of the Gibbs free energy is similar to that of the Helmholtz free energy, except that
it refers to the total work of all other external forces in the system (if there are any), except the work
contributed by the force λ (Exercise 3.4: show this!). The passage to the Gibbs ensemble, which replaces
a fixed value of L(x) (say, constant volume of a gas) by the control of the conjugate external force λ, (say,
pressureinthe exampleofagas)canbecarriedoutbyanotherLegendretransform(see,e.g.,[6,Sect.1.14])
as well as Subsection 3.2.3 in the sequel.
Note that the Lagrange minimization problem that we formalized before, i.e.,
min P(x) (x) , (3.2.57)
is nothing but minimization of the free energy, provided that we identify H with the physical
entropy S (to be done soon) and the Lagrange multiplier 1/β with kT. Thus, the B–G
distribution minimizes the free energy for a given temperature.
Let us define
and, in order to avoid dragging the constant k, let us define
Then, the chain of equalities (3.2.51), written slightly differently, gives
φ(β) = lim
Thus, φ(β) is (a certain variant of) the Legendre transform16 of Σ(ǫ). As Σ(ǫ) is (normally)
a concave, monotonically increasing function, then it can readily be shown17 that the inverse
transform is:
The achiever, ǫ (β), of φ(β) in the forward transform is obtained by equating the derivative
to zero, i.e., it is the solution to the equation
16More precisely, the 1D Legendre transform of a real function f(x) is defined as g(y)=sup [xy f(x)].
If f is convex, it can readily be shown that: (i) The inverse transform has the very same form, i.e., f(x)=
sup [xy g(y)], and (ii) The derivatives f (x) and g (y) are inverses of each other.
17Should be done in a recitation.
where Σ(ǫ) is the derivative of Σ(ǫ). In other words, ǫ (β) the inverse function of Σ( ).
By the same token, the achiever, β (ǫ), of Σ(ǫ) in the backward transform is obtained by
equating the other derivative to zero, i.e., it is the solution to the equation
or in other words, the inverse function of φ( ).
This establishes a relationship between the typical per–particle energy ǫ and the inverse
temperature β that gives rise to ǫ (cf. the Lagrange interpretation above, where we said that
β controls the average energy). Now, observe that whenever β and ǫ are related as explained
above, we have:
The Gibbs entropy per particle is defined in its normalized for as
H¯ = lim P(x)lnP(x) = lim lnP(x) , (3.2.64)
which in the case of the B–G distribution amounts to
H = lim ln
N N e β ( X )
→∞ (cid:28) − E (cid:29)
= lim + hE i
but this is exactly the same expression as in (3.2.63), and so, Σ(ǫ) and H¯ are identical
whenever β and ǫ are related accordingly. The former, as we recall, we defined as the
normalized logarithm of the number of microstates with per–particle energy ǫ. Thus, we
have learned that thenumber ofsuch microstates isof theexponential order
look at this relation is the following:
exp β (x )
x : ( x ) Nǫ x : ( x ) Nǫ P
which means that
for all β, and so,
A compatible lower bound is obtained by observing that the minimizing β gives rise to
(X ) = ǫ, which makes the event x : (x) Nǫ a high–probability event, by the
hE i { E ≈ }
weak law of large numbers. A good reference for further study, and from a more general
perspective, is the article by Hall [5]. See also [4].
Note also that eq. (3.2.63), which we will rewrite, with a slight abuse of notation as
can be viewed in two ways. The first suggests to take derivatives of both sides w.r.t. β and
= k kT˜2c(T˜) c(T˜) = ∆ heat capacity per particle
T c(T˜)dT˜
= (3.2.69)
recovering the Clausius entropy as c(T˜)dT˜ is the increment of heat intake per particle dq.
The second way to look at eq. (3.2.68) is as a first order differential equation in φ(β), whose
solution is easily found to be
where ǫ = lim E /N. Equivalently,
, (3.2.71)
namely, the partition function at a certain temperature can be expressed as a functional
of the entropy pertaining to all temperatures lower than that temperature. Changing the
integration variable from β to T, this readily gives the relation
F = E S(T )dT . (3.2.72)
Since F = E ST, we have
E = E +ST S(T )dT = E + T(S )dS , (3.2.73)
where the second term amounts to the heat Q that accumulates in the system, as the
temperature is raised from 0 to T. This is a special case of the first law of thermodynamics.
The more general form, as said, takes into account also possible work performed on (or by)
the system.
Let us now summarize the main properties of the partition function that we have seen
thus far:
1. Z(β) is a continuous function. Z(0) = n and lim lnZ(β) = E .
2. Generating cumulants: (X) = dlnZ/dβ, Var (X) = d2lnZ/dβ2, which im-
hE i − {E }
plies convexity of lnZ, and hence also of φ(β).
3. φ and Σ are a Legendre–transform pair. Σ is concave.
We have also seen that Boltzmann’s entropy is not only equivalent to the Clausius entropy,
but also to the Gibbs/Shannon entropy. Thus, there are actually three different forms of the
expression of entropy.
Comment: Consider Z(β)foranimaginary temperatureβ = iω, wherei = √ 1, anddefine
z(E) as the inverse Fourier transform of Z(jω). It can readily be seen that z(E) = Ω(E)
is the density of states, i.e., for E < E , the number of states with energy between E
and E is given by
E2z(E)dE.
Thus, Z( ) can be related to energy enumeration in two
different ways: one iRs by the Legendre transform of lnZ(β) for real β, and the other is by
the inverse Fourier transform of Z(β) for imaginary β. It should be kept in mind, however,
that while the latter relation holds for every system size N, the former is true only in the
thermodynamic limit, as mentioned.
Example 3.3 – two level system. Similarly to the earlier example of Schottky defects, which was
previously given in the context of the microcanonical ensemble, consider now a system of N inde-
pendent particles, each having two possible states: state 0 of zero energy and state 1, whose energy
is ǫ , i.e., (x) = ǫ x, x 0,1 . The x ’s are independent, each having a marginal:18
P(x) = x 0,1 . (3.2.74)
In this case,
To find β (ǫ), we take the derivative and equate to zero:
ǫ = 0 (3.2.77)
which gives
ln(ǫ /ǫ 1)
On substituting this back into the above expression of Σ(ǫ), we get:
Σ(ǫ)= ln 1 +ln 1+exp ln 1 , (3.2.79)
0 (cid:18) 0 (cid:19) (cid:20) (cid:26) (cid:18) 0 (cid:19)(cid:27)(cid:21)
which after a short algebraic manipulation, becomes
(cid:18) 0(cid:19)
just like in the Schottky example. In the other direction:
ǫ (cid:20) (cid:18) ǫ 0(cid:19) − (cid:21)
whose achiever ǫ (β) solves the zero–derivative equation:
ln − = β (3.2.82)
0 (cid:20) 0 (cid:21)
18Notethattheexpectednumberof‘activated’particles n =NP(1)=Ne −βǫ0/(1+e −βǫ0)=N/(eβǫ0+1),
in agreement with the result of Example 3.1 (eq. (3.2.17)). This demonstrates the ensemble equivalence
principle.
or equivalently,
which is exactly the inverse function of β (ǫ) above, and which when plugged back into the expres-
sion of φ(β), indeed gives
Comment: A very similar model (and hence with similar results) pertains to non–interacting
spins (magnetic moments), where the only difference is that x 1,+1 rather than
x 0,1 . Here, the meaning of the parameter ǫ becomes that of a magnetic field, which is
more customarily denoted by B (or H), and which is either parallel or anti-parallel to that
of the spin, and so the potential energy (in the appropriate physical units), B~ ~x, is either
Bx or Bx. Thus,
The net magnetization per–spin is defined as
m = X = X = = tanh(βB). (3.2.86)
This is the paramagnetic characteristic of the magnetization as a function of the magnetic
field: As B , the magnetization m 1 accordingly. When the magnetic field is
removed (B = 0), the magnetization vanishes too. We will get back to this model and its
extensions in Chapter 6.
The Energy Equipartition Theorem
It turns out that in the case of a quadratic Hamiltonian, (x) = 1αx2, which means that x is
Gaussian, the average per–particle energy, is always given by 1/(2β) = kT/2, independently
of α. If we have N such quadratic terms, then of course, we end up with NkT/2. In the
case of the ideal gas, we have three such terms (one for each dimension) per particle, thus a
total of 3N terms, and so, E = 3NkT/2, which is exactly the expression we obtained also
from the microcanonical ensemble as well as in the previous chapter. In fact, we observe
that in the canonical ensemble, whenever we have an Hamiltonian of the form αx2 plus some
arbitrary terms that do not depend on x , then x is Gaussian (with variance kT/α) and
independent of the other variables, i.e., p(x i ) e − αx2 i /(2kT). Hence it contributes an amount
2 i 2 · α 2
(cid:28) (cid:29)
to the total average energy, independently of α. It is more precise to refer to this x as a
degree of freedom rather than a particle. This is because in the three–dimensional world, the
kinetic energy, for example, is given by p2/(2m)+p2/(2m)+p2/(2m), that is, each particle
contributes three additive quadratic terms rather than one (just like three independent one–
dimensional particles) and so, it contributes 3kT/2. This principle is called the the energy
equipartition theorem.
Below is a direct derivation of the equipartition theorem:
(cid:28) 2 (cid:29) R ∞ dxe − βαx2/2)
(cid:20)Z (cid:21)
(cid:20) Z (cid:21)
(cid:20) Z (cid:21)
1dlnβ 1 kT
= = = .
Note that although we could have used closed–form expressions for both the numerator and
the denominator of the first line, we have deliberately taken a somewhat different route in
the second line, where we have presented it as the derivative of the denominator of the first
line. Also, rather than calculating the Gaussian integral explicitly, we only figured out how it
scales with β, because this is the only thing that matters after taking the derivative relative
to β. The reason for using this trick of bypassing the need to calculate integrals, is that it
can easily be extended in two directions at least:
1. Let x IRN and let (x) = 1xTAx, where A is a N N positive definite matrix.
This corresponds to a physical system with a quadratic Hamiltonian, which includes also
interactions between pairs (e.g., harmonic oscillators or springs, which are coupled because
they are tied to one another). It turns out that here, regardless of A, we get:
(X) = XTAX = N . (3.2.88)
hE i 2 · 2
(cid:28) (cid:29)
2. Back to the case of a scalar x, but suppose now a more general power–law Hamiltonian,
(x) = α x θ. In this case, we get
hE i | | θ
(cid:10) (cid:11)
Moreover, if lim xe β (x) = 0 for all β > 0, and we denote (x) = ∆ d (x)/dx, then
X (X) = kT. (3.2.90)
It is easy to see that the earlier power–law result is obtained as a special case of this, as
(x) = αθ x θ 1sgn(x) in this case.
Example 3.4 – ideal gas with gravitation: Let
p2 +p2 +p2
(x) = +mgz. (3.2.91)
Theaverage kineticenergyofeach particleis3kT/2, assaidbefore. Thecontributionoftheaverage
potential energy is kT (one degree of freedom with θ = 1). Thus, the total is 5kT/2, where 60%
come from kinetic energy and 40% come from potential energy, universally, that is, independent of
T, m, and g.
3.2.3 The Grand–Canonical Ensemble and the Gibbs Ensemble
A brief summary of what we have done thus far, is the following: we started with the
microcanonical ensemble, which was very restrictive in the sense that the energy was held
strictly fixed to the value of E, the number of particles was held strictly fixed to the value
of N, and at least in the example of a gas, the volume was also held strictly fixed to a
certain value V. In the passage from the microcanonical ensemble to the canonical one, we
slightly relaxed the first of these parameters, E: Rather than insisting on a fixed value of
E, we allowed energy to be exchanged back and forth with the environment, and thereby
to slightly fluctuate (for large N) around a certain average value, which was controlled by
temperature, or equivalently, by the choice of β. This was done while keeping in mind that
the total energy of both system and heat bath must be kept fixed, by the law of energy
conservation, which allowed us to look at the combined system as an isolated one, thus
obeying the microcanonical ensemble. We then had a one–to–one correspondence between
the extensive quantity E and the intensive variable β, that adjusted its average value. But
the other extensive variables, like N and V were still kept strictly fixed.
It turns out, that we can continue in this spirit, and ‘relax’ also either one of the other
variables N or V (but not both at the same time), allowing it to fluctuate around a typical
average value, and controlling it by a corresponding intensive variable. Like E, both N and
V are also subjected to conservation laws when the combined system is considered. Each
one of these relaxations, leads to a new ensemble in addition to the microcanonical and the
canonical ensembles that we have already seen. In the case where it is the variable V that
is allowed to be flexible, this ensemble is called the Gibbs ensemble. In the case where it is
the variable N, this ensemble is called the grand–canonical ensemble. There are, of course,
additional ensembles based on this principle, depending on the kind of the physical system.
The Grand–Canonical Ensemble
The fundamental idea is essentially the very same as the one we used to derive the canonical
ensemble: Let us get back to our (relatively small) subsystem, which is in contact with a
heat bath, and this time, let us allow this subsystem to exchange with the heat bath, not
only energy, but also matter, i.e., particles. The heat bath consists of a huge reservoir of
energy and particles. The total energy is E and the total number of particles is N . Suppose
that we can calculate the density of states of the heat bath as function of both its energy E
and amount of particles N , call it Ω (E ,N ). A microstate is now a combination (x,N),
where N is the (variable) number of particles in our subsystem and x is as before for a given
N. From the same considerations as before, whenever our subsystem is in state (x,N), the
heat bath can be in any one of Ω (E (x),N N) microstates of its own. Thus, owing
to the microcanonical ensemble,
= exp S (E (x),N N)/k
S (E ,N ) 1∂S 1∂S
exp B 0 0 B (x) B N
(cid:26) (cid:27)
exp E + (3.2.92)
(cid:26) (cid:27)
where µ is the chemical potential of the heat bath. Thus, we now have the grand–canonical
distribution:
eβ[µN ( )]
P(x,N) = , (3.2.93)
where the denominator is called the grand partition function:
Example 3.5 – grand partition function of the ideal gas. Using the result of Exercise 3.1, we have
for the ideal gas:
N=0 (cid:18) (cid:19)
N=0 (cid:18) (cid:19)
= exp eβµ . (3.2.95)
(cid:18) (cid:19)
It is sometimes convenient to change variables and to define z = eβµ (which is called the
fugacity) and then, define
This notation emphasizes the fact that for a given β, Ξ˜(z) is actually the z–transform of the
sequence Z . A natural way to think about P(x,N) is as P(N) P(x N), where P(N) is
proportional to zNZ (β) and P(x N) corresponds to the canonical ensemble as before.
Using the grand partition function, it is now easy to obtain moments of the random
variable N. For example, the first moment is:
N = N N = z . (3.2.97)
Thus, we have replaced the fixedPnumber of particles N by a random number of particles,
which concentrates around an average controlled by the parameter µ, or equivalently, z.
The dominant value of N is the one that maximizes the product zNZ (β), or equivalently,
βµN +lnZ (β) = β(µN F). Thus, lnΞ˜ is related to lnZ by another kind of a Legendre
transform.
Note that by passing to the grand–canonical ensemble, we have replaced two exten-
sive quantities, E and N, be their respective conjugate intensive variables, T and µ. This
means that the grand partition function depends only on one remaining extensive vari-
able, which is V, and so, under ordinary conditions, lnΞ(β,z), or in its more complete
notation, lnΞ(β,z,V), depends linearly on V at least in the thermodynamic limit, namely,
lim [lnΞ(β,z,V)]/V tends to a constant that depends only on β and z. What is this
constant? Let us examine again the first law in its more general form, as it appears in eq.
(3.2.29). For fixed T and µ, we have the following:
kT δ[lnΞ(β,z,V)] V large (3.2.98)
Thus, the constant of proportionality must be P. In other words, the grand–canonical
formula of the pressure is:
lnΞ(β,z,V)
P = kT lim . (3.2.99)
Example 3.6 – more on the ideal gas. Applying formula (3.2.97) on eq. (3.2.95), we readily obtain
N = = . (3.2.100)
We see then that the grand–canonical factor eµ/kT has the physical meaning of the average number
of ideal gas atoms in a cube of size λ λ λ, where λ is the thermal de Broglie wavelength. Now,
applying eq. (3.2.99) on (3.2.95), we get
kT eµ/kT N kT
P = · = h i· , (3.2.101)
recovering again the equation of state of the ideal gas. This is also demonstrates the principle of
ensemble equivalence.
Once again, it should be pointed out that beyond the obvious physical significance of
the grand–canonical ensemble, sometimes it proves useful to work with it from the reason of
pure mathematical convenience, using the principle of enemble equivalence. We will see this
very clearly in the next chapters on quantum statistics.
The Gibbs Ensemble
Consider next the case where T and N are fixed, but V is allowed to fluctuate around an
average volume controlled by the pressure P. Again, we can analyze our relatively small test
system surrounded by a heat bath. The total energy is E and thetotal volume of the system
and the heat bath is V . Suppose that we can calculate the density of states of the heat bath
as function of both its energy E and the volume V , call it Ω (E ,V ). A microstate is now
a combination (x,V), where V is the (variable) volume of our subsystem. Once again, the
same line of thought is used: whenever our subsystem is at state (x,V), the heat bath can
be in any one of Ω (E (x),V V) microstates of its own. Thus,
= exp S (E (x),V V)/k
S (E ,V ) 1∂S 1∂S
exp B 0 0 B (x) B V
(cid:26) (cid:27)
∝ − kT − kT
(cid:26) (cid:27)
The corresponding partition function that normalizes this probability function is given by
Y (β,P) = ∞ e βPVZ (β,V)dV = ∞ e βPVdV e β ( x ). (3.2.103)
N − N − − E
For a given N and β, the function Y (β,P) can be thought of as the Laplace transform
of Z (β,V) as a function of V. In the asymptotic regime (the thermodynamic limit),
lim 1 lnY (β,P) is the Legendre transform of lim 1 lnZ (β,V) for fixed β, sim-
N N N N N N
ilarly to the Legendre relationship between the entropy and the canonical log–partition
function. Note that analogously to eq. (3.2.97), here the Gibbs partition function serves as
a cumulant generating function for the random variable V, thus, for example,
∂lnY (β,P)
V = kT . (3.2.104)
h i − · ∂P
As mentioned in an earlier footnote,
G = kT lnY (β,P) = E TS +PV = F +PV (3.2.105)
is the Gibbs free energy of the system, and for the case considered here, the force is pressure
and the conjugate variable it controls is the volume. In analogy to the grand–canonical
ensemble, here too, there is only one extensive variable, this time, the variable N. Thus,
G should be (at least asymptotically) proportional to N with a constant of proportionality
that depends on the fixed values of T and P.
Exercise 3.5: Show that this constant is the chemical potential µ.
All this is, of course, relevant when the physical system is a gas in a container. In general,
the Gibbs ensemble is obtained by a similar Legendre transform replacing an extensive
physical quantity of the canonical ensemble by its conjugate force. For example, magnetic
field is conjugate to magnetization, electric field is conjugate to electric charge, mechanical
force is conjugate to displacement, moment is conjugate to angular shift, and so on. By the
same token, the chemical potential is a ‘force’ that is conjugate to the number of particles
in grand–canonical ensemble, and (inverse) temperature is a ‘force’ that controls the heat
energy.
Fig. 5 summarizes the thermodynamic potentials associated with the various statistical
ensembles. Thearrowbetweeneachtwoconnectedblocksinthediagramdesignatesapassage
from one ensemble to another by a Legendre transform operator that is defined generically
at the bottom of the figure. In each passage, it is also indicated which extensive variable is
replaced by its conjugate intensive variable.
Micro-canonical ensemble
S(E,V,N)=klnΩ(E,V,N)
Canonical ensemble
F(T,V,N)=−kTlnZ N(T,V)
Gibbs ensemble Grand-canonical ensemble
Figure 5: Diagram of Legendre relations between the various ensembles.
It should be noted, that at least mathematically, one could have defined three more
ensembles that would complete the picture of Fig. 5 in a symmetric manner. Two of the
additional ensembles can be obtained by applying Legendre transforms on S(E,V,N), other
than the transform that takes us to the canonical ensemble. The first Legendre transform
is w.r.t. the variable V, replacing it by P, and the second additional ensemble is w.r.t.
the variable N, replacing it by µ. Let us denote the new resulting ‘potentials’ (minus
kT times log–partition functions) by A(E,P,N) and B(E,V,µ), respectively. The third
ensemble, with potential C(E,P,µ), whose only extensive variable is E, could obtained by
yet another Legendre transform, either on A(E,P,N) or B(E,V,µ) w.r.t. the appropriate
extensive variable. Of course, A(E,P,N) and B(E,V,µ) are also connected directly to
the Gibbs ensemble and to the grand–canonical ensemble, respectively, both by Legendre–
transforming w.r.t. E. While these three ensembles arenot really used in physics, they might
prove useful to work with them for the purpose of calculating certain physical quantities, by
taking advantage of the principle of ensemble equivalence.
Exercise 3.6: Complete the diagram of Fig. 5 by the three additional ensembles just defined. Can
you give physical meanings to A, B and C? Also, as said, C(E,P,µ) has only E as an extensive
variable. Thus, lim C(E,P,µ)/E should be a constant. What this constant is?
Even more generally, we could start from a system model, whose micro–canonical en-
semble consists of many extensive variables L ,...,L , in addition to the internal energy E
(not just V and N). The entropy function is then S(E,L ,...,L ,N). Here, L can be, for
example, volume, mass, electric charge, electric polarization in each one of the three axes,
magnetization in each one of three axes, and so on. The first Legendre transform takes us
from the micro–canonical ensemble to the canonical one upon replacing E by β. Then we
can think of various Gibbs ensembles obtained by replacing any subset of extensive variables
L by their respective conjugate forces λ = T∂S/∂L , i = 1,...,n (in the above examples,
pressure, gravitational force (weight), voltage (or electric potential), electric fields, and mag-
netic fields in the corresponding axes, respectively). In the extreme case, all L are replaced
by λ upon applying successive Legendre transforms, or equivalently, a multi–dimensional
Legendre transform:
G(T,λ ,...,λ ,N) = kT sup [kT lnZ (β,L ,...,L ) λ L ... λ L ].
1 n N 1 n 1 1 n n
Once again, there must be at least one extensive variable.
4 Quantum Statistics – the Fermi–Dirac Distribution
In our discussion thus far, we have largely taken for granted the assumption that our system
can be analyzed in the classical regime, where quantum effects are negligible. This is, of
course, not always the case, especially at very low temperatures. Also, if radiation plays a
role in the physical system, then at very high frequency ν, the classical approximation also
breaksdown. Roughlyspeaking, kT shouldbemuch largerthanhν fortheclassical regimeto
be well justified.19 It is therefore necessary to address quantum effects in statistical physics
issues, most notably, the fact that certain quantities, like energy and angular momentum (or
spin), no longer take on values in the continuum, but only in a discrete set, which depends
on the system in question.
Consideragasofidenticalparticleswithdiscretesingle–particlequantumstates, 1,2,...,r,...,
corresponding to energies
ǫ ǫ ... ǫ ....
Since the particles are assumed indistinguishable, then for a gas of N particles, a micro–state
is defined by the combination of occupation numbers
N ,N ,...,N ,...,
where N is the number of particles at single state r.
The first fundamental question isthe following: What values can theoccupation numbers
N ,N ,... assume? According to quantum mechanics, there might be certain restrictions on
these numbers. In particular, there are two kinds of situations that may arise, which divide
the various particles in the world into two mutually exclusive classes.
For the first class of particles, there are no restrictions at all. The occupation numbers
can assume any non–negative integer value (N = 0,1,2,...), Particles of this class are
19Onewell–knownexampleisblack–bodyradiation. Accordingtotheclassicaltheory,theradiationdensity
per unit frequency grows proportionally to kTν2, a function whose integral over ν, from zero to infinity,
diverges (“the ultraviolet catastrophe”). This absurd is resolved by quantum mechanical considerations,
according to which the factor kT should be replaced by hν/[ehν/(kT) 1], which is close to kT at low
frequencies, but decays exponentially for ν >kT/h.
called Bose–Einstein (BE) particles20 or bosons for short. Another feature of bosons is that
their spins are always integral multiples of ~, namely, 0, ~, 2~, etc. Examples of bosons are
photons, π mesons and K mesons. We will focus on them in the next chapter.
In the second class of particles, the occupation numbers are restricted by the Pauli
exclusion principle (discovered in 1925), according to which no more than one particle can
occupy a given quantum state r (thus N is either 0 or 1 for all r), since the wave function
of two such particles is anti–symmetric and thus vanishes if they assume the same quantum
state (unlike bosons for which the wave function is symmetric). Particles of this kind are
called Fermi–Dirac (FD) particles21 or fermions for short. Another characteristic of fermions
is that their spins are always odd multiples of ~/2, namely, ~/2, 3~/2, 5~/2, etc. Examples
of fermions are electrons, positrons, protons, and neutrons. The statistical mechanics of
fermions will be discussed in this chapter.
4.1 Combinatorial Derivation of the FD Statistics
Consider a gas of N fermions in volume V and temperature T. In the thermodynamic limit,
where the dimensions of the system are large, the discrete single–particle energy levels ǫ
arevery closetooneanother. Therefore, insteadofconsidering eachoneofthemindividually,
we shall consider groups of neighboring states. Since the energy levels in each group are very
close, we will approximate all of them by a single energy value. Let us label these groups
by s = 1,2,.... Let group no. s contain G single–particle states and let the representative
energy level be ǫˆ . Let us assume that G 1. A microstate of the gas is now defined by
the occupation numbers
Nˆ ,Nˆ ,...,Nˆ ,...,
Nˆ being the total number of particles in group no. s, where, of course Nˆ = N.
To derive the equilibrium behavior of this system, we analyze the HePlmholtz free energy
20Bosons were first introduced by Bose (1924) in order to derive Planck’s radiation law, and Einstein
applied this finding in the same year to a perfect gas of particles.
21Introduced independently by Fermi and Dirac in 1926.
F as a function of the occupation numbers, and use the fact that in equilibrium, it should
be minimum. Since E = Nˆ ǫˆ and F = E TS, this boils down to the evaluation of the
entropy S = klnΩ(Nˆ ,Nˆ P,...). Let Ω (Nˆ ) be the number of ways of putting Nˆ particles
into G states of group no. s. Now, for fermions each one of the G states is either empty or
occupied by one particle. Thus,
G !
s s Nˆ !(G Nˆ )!
Therefore,
1 2 s s s s
Nˆ ǫˆ kTG h s . (4.1.3)
As said, we wish to minimize F(N ,N ,...) s.t. the constraint N = N. Consider then
the minimization of the Lagrangian P
L = Nˆ ˆǫ kTG h s λ Nˆ N . (4.1.4)
" s!# !
The solution is readily obtained to read
Nˆ = s (4.1.5)
where the Lagrange multiplier λ is determined to satisfy the constraint
= N. (4.1.6)
Exercise 4.1: After showing the general relation µ = (∂F/∂N) , convince yourself that λ = µ,
namely, the Lagrange multiplier λ has the physical meaning of the chemical potential. From now
on, then we replace the notation λ by µ.
Note that N /G is the mean occupation number N of a single state r within group no.
with the constraint
= N. (4.1.8)
The nice thing is that this result no longer depends on the partition into groups. This is the
FD distribution.
0 2 4 6 8 10
Figure 6: Illustration of the FD distribution. As T decreases, the curve becomes closer to n¯ =
u(µ ǫ ), where u() is the unit step function.
4.2 FD Statistics From the Grand–Canonical Ensemble
Thanks to the principle of ensemble equivalence, an alternative, simpler derivation of the
FD distribution results from the use of the grand–canonical ensemble. Beginning from the
canonical partition function
Z N (β) = ...δ N r = N e − βP r Nrǫr, (4.2.1)
!
N X1=0N X2=0
we pass to the grand–canonical ensemble in the following manner:
!
=0 N X1=0N X2=0
= ...eβµP r Nrδ N r = N e − βP r Nrǫr
!
=0N X1=0N X2=0
= ...δ N r = N eβP r Nr(µ − ǫr)
!
=0N X1=0N X2=0
= ... δ N r = N eβP r Nr(µ − ǫr)
N X1=0N X2=0 N
N X1=0N X2=0
Y(cid:2) (cid:3)
Note that this product form of the grand partition function means that under the grand–
canonical ensemble the binary random variables N are statistically independent, i.e.,
P(N ,N ,...) = P (N ) (4.2.3)
eβNr(µ ǫr)
P (N ) = , N = 0,1, r = 1,2,.... (4.2.4)
N¯ = Pr N = 1 = − = . (4.2.5)
4.3 The Fermi Energy
Let us now examine what happens if the system is cooled to the absolute zero (T 0).
It should be kept in mind that the chemical potential µ depends on T, so let µ be the
chemical potential at T = 0. It is readily seen that N¯ approaches as step function (see Fig.
6), namely, all energy levels ǫ below µ are occupied (N¯ 1) by a fermion, whereas all
those that are above µ are empty (N¯ 0). The explanation is simple: Pauli’s exclusion
principle does not allow all particles to reside at the ground state at T = 0 since then many
of them would have occupied the same quantum state. The minimum energy of the system
that can possibly be achieved is when all energy levels are filled up, one by one, starting
from the ground state up to some maximum level, which is exactly µ . This explains why
even at the absolute zero, fermions have energy.22 The maximum occupied energy level in
a gas of non–interacting fermions at the absolute zero is called the Fermi energy, which we
shall denote by ǫ . Thus, µ = ǫ , and then the FD distribution at very low temperatures
is approximately
N¯ = . (4.3.1)
We next take a closer look on the FD distribution, taking into account the density of states.
Consider a metal box of dimensions L L L and hence volume V = L L L . The
x y z x y z
energy level associated with quantum number (l ,l ,l ) is given by
π2~2 l2 l2 l2 ~2
ǫ = x + y + z = (k2 +k2 +k2), (4.3.2)
lx,ly,lz 2m L2 L2 L2 2m x y z
(cid:18) x y z(cid:19)
where the k’s are the wave numbers pertaining to the various solutions of the Schro¨dinger
equation. First, we would like to count how many quantum states (l ,l ,l ) give rise to
energy between ǫ and ǫ+dǫ. We denote this number by g(ǫ)dǫ, where g(ǫ) is the density of
states.
~2 ≤ L2 L2 L2 ≤ ~2
lxX ,ly,lz (cid:26) x y z (cid:27)
22Indeed, free electrons in a metal continue to be mobile and free even at T =0.
x y z Vol ~k : ~k 2
(cid:26) (cid:27)
= Vol ~k : ~k 2 . (4.3.3)
(cid:26) (cid:27)
A volume element pertaining to a given value of K =
being k xˆ + k yˆ+ k zˆ) is
given by dK times the surface area of sphere of radius K, namely, 4πK2dK, but it has to
be divided by 8, to account for the fact that the components of
are positive. I.e., it is
πK2dK. From eq. (4.3.2), we have ǫ = ~2K2/2m, and so
2mǫ 1 2m √2ǫm3dǫ
K2dK = dǫ = (4.3.4)
Therefore, combining the above, we get
For electrons, spin values of 1/2 are allowed, so this density should be doubled, and so
Approximating the equation of the constraint on the total number of electrons, we get
√2m3V √ǫdǫ
√2m3V 2ǫ 3/2
= F (4.3.7)
which easily leads to the following simple formula for the Fermi energy:
~2 3π2N 2/3 ~2
(cid:18) (cid:19)
where ρ is the electron density. In most metals ǫ is about the order of 5–10 electron–
volts (eV’s), whose equivalent temperature T = ǫ /k (the Fermi temperature) is of the
order of magnitude of 100,000oK. So the Fermi energy is much larger than kT in laboratory
conditions. In other words, electrons in a metal behave like a gas at an extremely high tem-
perature. This means that the internal pressure in metals (the Fermi pressure) is huge and
that’s a reason why metals are almost incompressible. This kind of pressure also stabilizes
a neutron star (a Fermi gas of neutrons) or a white dwarf star (a Fermi gas of electrons)
against the inward pull of gravity, which would ostensibly collapse the star into a Black Hole.
Only when a star is sufficiently massive to overcome the degeneracy pressure can it collapse
into a singularity.
Exercise 4.2: Derive an expression for ǫn of an electron near T = 0, in terms of ǫ .
4.4 Useful Approximations of Fermi Integrals
Before considering applications, it will be instructive to develop some useful approximations
for integrals associated with the Fermi function
For example, if we wish to calculate the average energy, we have to deal with an integral like
Consider then, more generally, an integral of the form
Upon integrating by parts, we readily have
(cid:12)0 Z0
1 (cid:12)
(cid:12) ′
Changing variables to x = (ǫ µ)/kT,
µn+1 kTx n+1
Z (cid:18) (cid:19)
where we have introduced the scaled version of f, which is φ(x) = f(µ+kTx) = 1/(ex +1)
and φ is its derivative, and where in the second line we are assuming µ kT. Applying the
Taylor series expansion to the binomial term (recall that n is not necessarily integer), and
using the symmetry of φ around the origin, we have
µn+1 kTx n(n+1) kTx 2
−n+1 µ 2 µ
Z (cid:18) (cid:19)
Z (cid:18) (cid:19) Z
1+ (4.4.4)
(cid:18) (cid:19)
where the last line was obtained by calculating the integral of x2φ(x) using a power series
expansion. Note that this series contains only even powers of kT/µ, thus the convergence is
rather fast. Let us now repeat the calculation of eq. (4.3.7), this time at T > 0.
√2m3 2 π2 kT 2
(cid:18) (cid:19)
which gives
(cid:18) (cid:19)
(cid:18) (cid:19)
This relation between µ andǫ can be easily inverted by solving a simple quadratic equation,
which yields
≈ − 12 · ǫ
" (cid:18) F (cid:19) #
" (cid:18) F(cid:19) #
Since T/T 1 for all T in the interesting range, we observe that the chemical potential
depends extremely weakly on T. In other words, we can safely approximate µ ǫ for all
relevant temperatures of interest. The assumption that kT µ was found self–consistent
with the result µ ǫ .
Having established the approximation µ ǫ , we can now calculate the average energy
of the electron at an arbitrary temperature T:
√2m3 2ǫ 5/2 5π2 T 2
e " (cid:18) F(cid:19) #
3~2 5π2 T 2
10m · · 8 T
" (cid:18) F(cid:19) #
3ǫ 5π2 T 2
" (cid:18) F(cid:19) #
Notethatthedependence oftheaverageper–particleenergyonthetemperatureisdrastically
different from that of the ideal gas. While in the idea gas it was linear ( ǫ = 3kT/2), here
it is actually almost a constant, independent of the temperature (just like the chemical
potential).
The same technique can be used, of course, to calculate any moment of the electron
energy.
4.5 Applications of the FD Distribution
The FD distribution is at the heart of modern solid–state physics and semiconductor physics
(see also, for example, [3, Section 4.5]) and indeed frequently encountered in related courses,
like courses on semiconductor devices. It is also useful in understanding the physics of white
dwarfs. We next briefly touch upon the very basics of conductance in solids (as a much
more comprehensive treatment is given, of course, in other courses), as well as on two other
applications: thermionic emission and photoelectric emission.
4.5.1 Electrons in a Solid
The structure of the electron energy levels in a solid are basically obtained using quantum–
mechanical considerations. In the case of a crystal, this amounts to solving the Schro¨dinger
equation in a periodic potential, stemming from the corresponding periodic lattice structure.
Its idealized form, which ignores the size of each atom, is given by a train of equispaced Dirac
delta functions. This is an extreme case of the so called Kronig–Penney model, where the
potential function is a periodic rectangular on–off function (square wave function), and it
leads toa certainbandstructure. In particular, bands ofallowed energy levels arealternately
interlaced with bands of forbidden energy levels. The Fermi energy level ǫ , which depends
on the overall concentration of electrons, may either fall in an allowed band or in a forbidden
band. The former case is the case of a metal, whereas the latter case is the case of an
insulator or a semiconductor (the difference being only how wide is the forbidden band in
which ǫ lies). While in metals it is impossible to change ǫ , in semiconductors, it is possible
by doping.
A semiconductor can then be thought of as a system with electron orbitals grouped into
two23 energy bands separated by an energy gap. The lower band is the valence band (where
electrons are tied to their individual atoms) and the upper band is the conduction band,
where they are free. In a pure semiconductor at T = 0, all valence orbitals are occupied with
23We treat both bands as single bands for our purposes. It does not matter that both may be themselves
groups of (sub)bands with additional gaps within each group.
electrons and all conduction orbitals are empty. A full band cannot carry any current so a
pure semiconductor at T = 0 is an insulator. In a pure semiconductor the Fermi energy is
exactly in the middle of the gap between the valence band (where f(ǫ) is very close 1) and
the conduction band (where f(ǫ) is very close to 0). Finite conductivity in a semiconductor
follows either from the presence of electrons in the conduction band (conduction electrons)
or from unoccupied orbitals in the valence band (holes).
Two different mechanisms give rise toconduction electrons andholes: The first isthermal
excitation of electrons from the valence band to the conduction band, and the second is the
presence of impurities that change the balance between the number of orbitals in the valence
band and the number of electrons available to fill them.
We will not delve into this too much beyond this point, since this material is well–covered
in other courses solid state physics. Here we just demonstrate the use of the FD distribution
in order to calculate the density of charge carriers. The density of charge carriers n of the
conduction band is found by integrating up, from the conduction band edge ǫ , the product
of the density of states g (ǫ) and the FD distribution f(ǫ), i.e.,
where here m designates the effective mass of the electron24 and where we have taken the
density of states to be proportional to √ǫ ǫ since ǫ is now the reference energy and only
the difference ǫ ǫ goes for kinetic energy.25 For a semiconductor at room temperature,
kT is much smaller than the gap, and so
which yields the approximation
24The effective mass is obtained by a second order Taylor series expansion of the energy as a function of
the wavenumber (used to obtain the density of states), and thinking of the coefficient of the quadratic term
as ~2/2m.
25Recall that earlier we calculated the density of states for a simple potential well, not for a periodic
potential function. Thus, the earlier expression of g (ǫ) is not correct here.
√π 2(mkT)3
(cid:18) (cid:19)
We see then that the density of conduction electrons, and hence also the conduction prop-
erties, depend critically on the gap between ǫ and ǫ . A similar calculation holds for the
holes, of course.
4.5.2 Thermionic Emission
Ifarefractorymetal, liketungsten, isheatedtoatemperatureofafewhundreddegreesbelow
the melting point, an electron emission can be drawn from it to a positive anode. From a
quantum–mechanical viewpoint, the heated metal can be regarded as a potential well with
finitely high walls determined by the surface potential barrier. Thus, some of the incident
particles will have sufficient energy to surmount the surface barrier (a.k.a. the surface work
function) and hence will be emitted. The work function φ varies between 2eV and 6eV for
pure metals. The electron will not be emitted unless the energy component normal to the
surface would exceed ǫ + φ. The excess energy beyond this threshold is in the form of
translational kinetic energy which dictates the velocity away from the surface.
The analysis of this effect is made by transforming the energy distribution into a distri-
bution in terms of the three component velocities v , v , v . We begin with the expression
of the energy of a single electron26
1 π2~2 l2 l2 l2
ǫ = m(v2 +v2 +v2) = x + y + z . (4.5.4)
2 x y z 2m L2 L2 L2
(cid:18) x y z(cid:19)
Thus, dv = hdl /(2mL ) and similar relations hold for two the other components, which
26We are assuming that the potential barrier φ is fairly large (relative to kT), such that the relationship
between energy and quantum numbers is reasonably well approximated by that of a particle in a box.
together yield
dl dl dl = Vdv dv dv , (4.5.5)
x y z x y z
(cid:16) (cid:17)
where we have divided by 8 since every quantum state can be occupied by only one out
of 8 combinations of the signs of the three component veocities. Thus, we can write the
distribution function of the number of electrons in a cube dv dv dv as
m 3 dv dv dv
dN = 2V , (4.5.6)
h 1+exp 1 1m(v2 +v2 +v2) ǫ
(cid:16) (cid:17) kT 2 x y z − F
where we have taken the chemical potentia(cid:8)l of(cid:2)the electron gas to be(cid:3)ǫ(cid:9) , independently of
temperature, aswasjustifiedintheprevioussubsection. Assuming thatthesurfaceisparallel
to the YZ plane, the minimum escape velocity in the x–direction is v = 2(ǫ +φ) and
there are no restrictions on v and v . The current along the x–direction is
dq q dN[leaving the surface]
q + + v dt m 3 dv dv dv
e ∞ ∞ ∞ x x y z
dt L · h 1+exp 1 1m(v2 +v2 +v2) ǫ
Zv0 Z −∞ Z −∞ x (cid:16) (cid:17) kT 2 x y z − F
m 3 + dv dv
∞ ∞ (cid:8) (cid:2) y z (cid:3)(cid:9)
= 2L L q v dv , (4.5.7)
y z e h x x 1+exp 1 1m(v2 +v2 +v2) ǫ
(cid:16) (cid:17) Zv0 Z −∞ kT 2 x y z − F
where the factor v dt/L in the second line is the f(cid:8)racti(cid:2)on of electrons close en(cid:3)o(cid:9)ugh to the
sufrace so as to be emitted within time dt. Thus, the current density (current per unity
m 3 + + dv dv
J = 2q dv v . (4.5.8)
e h x · x 1+exp 1 1m(v2 +v2 +v2) ǫ
(cid:16) (cid:17) Zv0 Z −∞ Z −∞ kT 2 x y z − F
As for the inner double integral, transform to pola(cid:8)r coo(cid:2)rdinates to obtain (cid:3)(cid:9)
1+exp 1 1m(v2 +v2 +v2) ǫ
Z −∞ Z −∞ kT 2 x y z − F
= 2π ∞ (cid:8) y(cid:2)z yz (cid:3)(cid:9)
Z0 1+emv y 2 z /2kT · exp k 1 T 1 2 mv x 2 − ǫ F
= ∞ (cid:2) (cid:0) (cid:1)(cid:3) u = mv2 /2kT
m 1+exp 1 1mv2 ǫ eu yz
Z0 kT 2 x − F ·
= ln 1+exp (cid:2) (cid:0) ǫ mv(cid:1)2(cid:3) (4.5.9)
m kT F − 2 x
(cid:26) (cid:20) (cid:18) (cid:19)(cid:21)(cid:27)
which yields
4πm2q kT 1 1
J = e ∞ dv v ln 1+exp ǫ mv2 . (4.5.10)
h3 x · x kT F − 2 x
Zv0 (cid:26) (cid:20) (cid:18) (cid:19)(cid:21)(cid:27)
Now, since normally φ kT, the exponent in the integrand is very small throughout the
entire range of integration and so, it is safe to approximate it by ln(1+x) x, i.e.,
J ≈ h3 e eǫF/kT ∞ dv x · v x e − mv x 2/2kT
4πmq (kT)2 1 1
= e exp ǫ mv2
h3 kT F − 2 0
(cid:26) (cid:18) (cid:19)(cid:27)
4πmq (kT)2
= e e φ/kT, (4.5.11)
and thus we have obtained a simple expression for the density current as function of tem-
perature. This result, which is known as the Richardson–Dushman equation, is in very good
agreement with experimental evidence. Further discussion on this result can be found in [3]
and [10].
4.5.3 Photoelectric Emission
An analysis based on a similar line of thought applies also to the photoelectric emission, an
effect where electrons are emitted from a metal as a result of radiation at frequency beyond a
certain critical frequency ν (the Einstein threshold frequency), whose corresponding photon
energy hν is equal to the work function φ. Here, the electron gains an energy amount of
hν from a photon, which helps to pass the energy barrier, and so the minimum velocity of
emission, after excitation by a photon of energy hν is given by
Let α denote the probability that a photon actually excites an electron. Then, similarly as
in the previous subsection,
4πm2q kT 1 1
J = α e ∞ dv v ln 1+exp ǫ mv2 . (4.5.13)
· h3 x · x kT F − 2 x
Zv0 (cid:26) (cid:20) (cid:18) (cid:19)(cid:21)(cid:27)
where this time
Changing the integration variable to
kT 2 x − 0 − F
(cid:20) (cid:21)
we can write the last integral as
J = α dxln 1+exp − x dx. (4.5.15)
Z0 (cid:26) (cid:20) (cid:21)(cid:27)
Now, let us denote
Integrating by parts (twice), we have
1 x2ex ∆dx
For h(ν ν ) kT, we have e∆ 1, and then it can be shown (using the same technique
as in Subsection 4.4) that f(e∆) ∆2/2, which gives
independently of T. In other words, when the energy of light quantum is much larger than
the thermal energy kT, temperature becomes irrelevant. At the other extreme of very low
frequency, where h(ν ν) kT, and then e∆ 1, we have f(e∆) e∆, and then
4πmq (kT)2
which is like the thermionic current density, enhanced by a photon factor ehν/kT.
5 Quantum Statistics – the Bose–Einstein Distribution
The general description of bosons was provided in the introductory paragraphs of Chapter
4. As said, the crucial difference between bosons and fermions is that in the case of bosons,
Pauli’s exclusion principle does not apply. In this chapter, we study the statistical mechanics
of bosons.
5.1 Combinatorial Derivation of the BE Statistics
We use the same notation as in Chapter 4. Again, we are partitioning the energy levels
ǫ ,ǫ ,... into groups, labeled by s = 1,2,..., where in group no. s, where the representative
energy is ǫˆ , there are G quantum states. As before, a microstate is defined in terms of
the combination of occupation numbers N and Ω(N ,N ,...) = Ω (N ), but now we
{ s } 1 2 s s s
need a different estimate of each factor Ω
), since now there areQno restrictions on the
occupation numbers of the quantum states.
In how many ways can one partition N particles among G quantum states? Imagine
that the Nˆ particles of group no. s are arranged along a straight line. By means of G 1
partitions we can divide these particles into G different subsets corresponding to the various
states in that group. In fact, we have a total of (Nˆ + G 1) elements, Nˆ of them are
particles and the remaining (G 1) are partitions (see Fig. 7). In how many distinct ways
Figure 7: Nˆ particles and G 1 partitions.
can we configure them? The answer is simple:
(Nˆ +G 1)!
s s Nˆ !(G 1)!
On the account that G 1, the 1 can be safely neglected, and we might as well write
(Nˆ +G )!
N !G !
Repeating the same derivation as in Subsection 4.1, but with the above assignment for
Ω (Nˆ ), we get by Stirling’s formula:
s s ≈ s s 2 Nˆ +G
(cid:18) s s(cid:19)
and so the free energy is now
F N ˆǫ kT(N +G )h , (5.1.4)
≈ s " s s − s s 2 Nˆ s +G s!#
which again, should be minimized s.t. the constraint Nˆ = N. Upon carrying out the
minimization of the corresponding Lagrangian (see SuPbsection 4.1), we arrive27 at the fol-
lowing result for the most probable occupation numbers:
Nˆ = s (5.1.5)
or, moving back to the original occupation numbers,
N¯ = , (5.1.6)
where µ is again the Lagrange multiplier, which has the meaning of the chemical potential.
This is Bose–Einstein (BE) distribution. As we see, the formula is very similar to that of
the FD distribution, the only difference is that in the denominator, +1 is replaced by 1.
Surprisingly enough, this is a crucial difference that makes the behavior of bosons drastically
differentfromthatoffermions. Notethatforthisexpressiontomakesense, µmustbesmaller
than the ground energy ǫ , otherwise the denominator either vanishes or becomes negative.
If the ground–state energy is zero, this means µ < 0.
5.2 Derivation Using the Grand–Canonical Ensemble
As in Subsection 4.2, an alternative derivation can be carried out using the grand–canonical
ensemble. The only difference is that now, the summations over N , are not only over
27Exercise 5.1: fill in the detailed derivation.
0,1 but over all non–negative integers. In particular,
Of course, here too, for convergence of each geometric series, we must assume µ < ǫ , and
then the result is
1 eβ(µ ǫr)
Here, under the grand–canonical ensemble, N ,N ,... are independent geometric random
variables with distributions
P (N ) = [1 eβ(µ ǫ)]eβNr(µ ǫr) N = 0,1,2,..., r = 1,2,... (5.2.3)
Thus, N¯ is just the expectation of this geometric random variable, which is readily found28
to be as in eq. (5.1.6).
5.3 Bose–Einstein Condensation
In analogy to the FD case, here too, the chemical potential µ is determined from the con-
straint on the total number of particles. In this case, it reads
= N. (5.3.1)
eβ(ǫr µ) 1
Taking into account the density of states in a potential well of sizes L L L (as was
done in Chapter 4), in the continuous limit, this yields
At this point, animportant peculiarity shouldbe discussed. Consider eq. (5.3.2) andsuppose
that we are cooling the system. As T decreases, µ must adjust in order to keep eq. (5.3.2)
holding since the number of particles must be preserved. In particular, as T decreases, µ
must increase, yet it must be negative. The point is that even for µ = 0, which is the
28Exercise 5.2: show this.
maximum allowed value of µ, the integral at the r.h.s. of (5.3.2) is finite29 as the density of
states is proportional to √ǫ and hence balances the ‘explosion’ of the BE integral near ǫ = 0.
Let us define then
and let T be the solution to the equation ̺(T) = ρ, which can be found as follows. By
changing the integration variable to z = ǫ/kT, we can rewrite the r.h.s. as
mkT 3/2 2 √zdz mkT 3/2
̺(T) = 2.612 , (5.3.4)
(cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:26) Z0 − (cid:27) (cid:18) (cid:19)
where theconstant 2.612is the numerical value of the expression in the curly brackets. Thus,
T 0.5274 ρ2/3 = 3.313 (5.3.5)
The problem is that for T < T , eq. (5.3.2) can no longer be solved by any non–positive
value of µ. So what happens below T ?
The root of the problem is in the passage from the discrete sum over r to the integral
over ǫ. The paradox is resolved when it is understood that below T , the contribution of
ǫ = 0 should be separated from the integral. That is, the correct form is
N = + . (5.3.6)
− − Z0 − −
or, after dividing by V,
where ρ is the density of ground–state particles, and now the integral accommodates the
contribution of all particles with strictly positive energy. Now, for T < T , we simply have
ρ = ρ ̺(T), which means that a macroscopic fraction of the particles condensate at the
ground state. This phenomenon is called Bose–Einstein condensation. Note that for T < T ,
ρ = ρ ̺(T)
29Exercise 5.3: show this.
(cid:20) c (cid:21)
" (cid:18) c(cid:19) #
" (cid:18) c(cid:19) #
which gives a precise characterization of the condensation as a function of temperature. It
should be pointed out that T is normally extremely low.30
One might ask why does the point ǫ = 0 require special caution when T < T , but doesn’t
require such caution for T > T ? The answer is that for T > T , ρ = 1/V[e µ/kT 1] tends
to zero in the thermodynamic limit (V ) since µ < 0. However, as T T , µ 0, and
ρ becomes singular.
It is instructive to derive the pressure exerted by the ideal Boson gas for T < T . This
can be obtained from the grand partition function
= ∞ dx √xln(1 e x), (5.3.9)
where integral over x (including the minus sign) is just a positive constant C that we won’t
bother to calculate here. Now,
kT lnΞ C√2m3(kT)5/2
P = lim = . (5.3.10)
We see that the pressure is independent of the density ρ (compare with the ideal gas where
P = ρkT). This is because the condensed particles do not contribute to the pressure. What
30 In1995thefirstgaseouscondensatewasproducedbyEricCornellandCarlWiemanattheUniversityof
Colorado,usingagasofrubidiumatomscooledto170nanokelvin. FortheirachievementsCornell,Wieman,
andWolfgangKetterle atMIT receivedthe 2001Nobel PrizeinPhysics. In November2010the firstphoton
BEC was observed.
matters is only the density of those with positive energy, and this density in turn depends
only on T.
Exercise 5.4: Why don’t fermions condensate? What changes in the last derivation?
Exercise 5.5: The last derivation was in three dimensions (d = 3). Modify the derivation of the BE
statistics to apply to a general dimension d, taking into account the dependence of the density of
states upon d. For which values of d bosons condensate?
5.4 Black–Body Radiation
One of the important applications of the BE statistics is to investigate the equilibrium
properties of black–body radiation. All bodies emit electromagnetic radiation whenever
at positive temperature, but normally, this radiation is not in thermal equilibrium. If we
consider theradiationwithinanopaqueenclosurewhose wallsaremaintainedattemperature
T then radiation and walls together arrive at thermal equilibrium and in this state, the
radiation has certain important properties. In order to study this equilibrium radiation, one
creates a small hole in the walls of the enclosure, so that it will not disturb the equilibrium
of the cavity and then the emitted radiation will have the same properties as the cavity
radiation, which in turn are the same as the radiation properties of a black body – a body
that perfectly absorbs all the radiation falling on it. The temperature of the black body is
T as well, of course. In this section, we study these radiation properties using BE statistics.
We consider then a radiation cavity of volume V and temperature T. Historically, Planck
(1900) viewed this system as an assembly of harmonic oscillators with quantized energies
(n+1/2)~ω, n = 0,1,2,..., where ω is theangular frequency of the oscillator. An alternative
point of view is as an ideal gas of identical and indistinguishable photons, each one with
energy ~ω. Photons have integral spin and hence are bosons, but they have zero mass and
zero chemical potential when they interact with a black–body. The reason is that there is
no constraint that their total number would be conserved (they are emitted and absorbed
in the black–body material with which they interact). Since in equilibrium F should be
minimum, then (∂F/∂N) = 0. But (∂F/∂N) = µ. and so, µ = 0. It follows then that
distribution of photons across the quantum states obeys BE statistics with µ = 0, that is
N¯ = . (5.4.1)
ω e~ω/kT 1
The calculation of the density of states here is somewhat different from the one in Sub-
section 4.3. Earlier, we considered a particle with positive mass m, whose kinetic energy is
~p 2/2m = ~2 ~k 2/2m, whereas now we are talking about a photon whose rest mass is zero
and whose energy is ~ω = ~ ~ k c = ~p c (c being the speed of light), so the dependence on
is now linear rather than quadratic. This is a relativistic effect.
Assuming that V is large enough, we can pass to the continuous approximation. The
number of oscillatory modes for which a wave–vector
resides in an infinitesimal cube
d3~k = dk dk dk is V 4π ~k 2d ~k /(2π)3, as in phase space of position and momentum, it
k k k k k k k k · k k k k
Using the relation ω = c
and doubling the above expression (for two directions of polar-
ization), we have that thetotalnumber ofquantum states ofa photonintherange[ω,ω+dω]
is Vω2dω/π2c3. Thus, the number of photons in this frequency range is
dN = . (5.4.3)
The contribution of this to the energy is
This expression for the spectrum of black–body radiation is known as Planck’s law.
Exercise 5.6: Write Planck’s law in terms of the wavelength dE .
At low frequencies (~ω kT), this gives
dE ω2dω (5.4.5)
0 1 2 3 4 5
Figure 8: Illustration of Planck’s law. The energy density per unit frequency as a function of
frequency.
which is the Rayleigh–Jeans law. This is actually the classic limit (see footnote at the
Introduction to Chap. 4), obtained from multiplying kT/2 by the “number of waves.” In the
other extreme of ~ω kT, we have
which is Wien’s law. At low temperatures, this is an excellent approximation over a very
wide range of frequencies. The frequency of maximum radiation is
ω = 2.822 , (5.4.7)
namely, linear in temperature. This relation has immediate applications. For example, the
sun is known to be a source of radiation, which with a good level of approximation, can
be considered a black body. Using a spectrometer, one can measure the frequency ω of
maximum radiation, and estimate the sun’s surface temperature (from eq. (5.4.7)), to be
T 5800 K.
Now, the energy density is
= ∞ = aT4 (5.4.8)
V π2c3 e~ω/kT 1
where the second equality is obtained by changing the integration variable to x = ~ω/kT
~ k 4 x3dx π2k4
a = = . (5.4.9)
π2c3 ~ ex 1 15~3c3
(cid:18) (cid:19) Z0 −
The relation E/V = aT4 is called the Stefan–Boltzmann law. The heat capacity in constant
volume, C = (∂E/∂T) , is therefore proportional to T3.
Exercise 5.7: Calculate ρ, the density of photons.
Additional thermodynamic quantities can now be calculated from the logarithm of the
grand–canonical partition function
For example, the pressure of the photon gas can be calculated from
= ∞ dx x2ln(1 e x)
= aT4 = , (5.4.11)
where the integral is calculated using integration by parts.31 Note that while in the ideal
gas P was only linear in T, here it is proportional to the fourth power of T. Note also that
here, PV = E/3, which is different from the ideal gas, where PV = 2E/3.
31Exercise 5.8: Fill in the details.
6 Interacting Particle Systems and Phase Transitions
In this chapter, we discuss systems with interacting particles. As we shall see, when the
interactions among the particles are sufficiently significant, the system exhibits a certain
collective behavior that, in the thermodynamic limit, may be subjected to phase transitions,
i.e., abrupt changes in the behavior and the properties of the system in the presence of a
gradual change in an external control parameter, like temperature, pressure, or magnetic
field.
6.1 Introduction – Sources of Interaction
So far, we have dealt almost exclusively with systems that have additive Hamiltonians,
(x) = (x ), which means, under the canonical ensemble, that the particles are statis-
tically inPdependent and there are no interactions among them: each particle behaves as if
it was alone in the world. In Nature, of course, this is seldom really the case. Sometimes
this is still a reasonably good approximation, but in many other cases, the interactions are
appreciably strong and cannot be neglected. Among the different particles there could be
many sorts of mutual forces, such as mechanical, electrical, or magnetic forces, etc. There
could also be interactions that stem from quantum–mechanical effects: As described ear-
lier, fermions must obey Pauli’s exclusion principle, which asserts that no quantum state
can be populated by more than one particle. This gives rise to a certain mutual influence
between particles. Another type of interaction stems from the fact that the particles are
indistinguishable, so permutations between them are not considered as distinct states. For
example, referring again to BE statistics of Chapter 5, had the N particles been statistically
independent, the resulting partition function would be
N!
= δ N = N exp β N ǫ (6.1.1)
N1X ,N2,...
whereas in eq. (4.2.1) (but with summations extending over all integers N ), the com-
binatorial factor, N!/ N !, that distinguishes between the various permutations among
the particles, is absentQ. This introduces dependency, which physically means interaction.
Indeed, in the case of the ideal boson gas, we have encountered the effect of Bose–Einstein
condensation, which is actually a phase transition, and phase transitions can occur only in
systems of interacting particles, as will be discussed in this chapter.32
6.2 Models of Interacting Particles
The simplest forms of deviation from the purely additive Hamiltonian structure are those
that consists, in addition to the individual energy terms, (x ) , also terms that depend on
pairs, and/or triples, and/or even larger cliques of particles. In the case of purely pairwise
interactions, this means a structure like the following:
where the summation over pairs can be defined over all pairs i = j, or over some of the pairs,
according to a given rule, e.g., depending on the distance between particle i and particle j,
and according to the geometry of the system, or according to a certain graph whose edges
connect the relevant pairs of variables (that in turn, are designated as nodes).
For example, in a one–dimensional array (a lattice) of particles, a customary model
accounts for interactions between neighboring pairs only, neglecting more remote ones, thus
the second term above would be ε(x ,x ). A well known special case of this is that of a
polymer or a solid with crystal laPttice structure, where in the one–dimensional version of the
model, atomsarethoughtofasachainofmassesconnected bysprings(seeleftpartofFig.9),
i.e., anarrayofcoupled harmonicoscillators. Inthiscase, ε(x ,x ) = 1K(x x )2, where
i i+1 2 i+1 − i
K is a constant and x is the displacement of the i-th atom from its equilibrium location,
i.e., the potential energies of the springs. In higher dimensional arrays (or lattices), similar
32Another way to understand the dependence is to observe that occupation numbers N are depen-
dent via the constraint on their sum. This is different from the grand–canonical ensemble, where they are
independent.
Figure 9: Elastic interaction forces between adjacent atoms in a one–dimensional lattice (left part
of the figure) and in a two–dimensional lattice (right part).
interactions apply, there are just more neighbors to each site, from the various directions
(see right part of Fig. 9). These kinds of models will be discussed in the next chapter in
some depth.
In a system where the particles are mobile and hence their locations vary and have
no geometrical structure, like in a gas, the interaction terms are also potential energies
pertaining to the mutual forces (see Fig. 10), and these normally depend solely on the
distances ~r ~r . For example, in a non–ideal gas,
Figure 10: Mobile particles and mutual forces between them.
E 2m k − k
A very simple special case is that of hard spheres (Billiard balls), without any forces, where
~r ~r < 2R
k i − j k 0 ~r ~r 2R
(cid:26) k − k ≥
which expresses the simple fact that balls cannot physically overlap. The analysis of this
model can be carried out using diagrammatic techniques (the cluster expansion, etc.), but
we will not get into the details of it in the framework of this course.33 To demonstrate,
however, the effect of interactions on the deviation from the equation of state of the ideal
gas, we consider next a simple one–dimensional example.
Example 6.1 – Non–ideal gas in one dimension. Consider a one–dimensional object of length L
that contains N+1 particles, whose locations are 0 r r ... r r L, namely, the
first and the last particles are fixed at the edges. The order of the particles is fixed, namely, they
cannot be swapped. Let the Hamiltonian be given by
where φ is a given potential function designating the interaction between two neighboring particles
along the line. The partition function, which is an integral of the Boltzmann factor pertaining to
this Hamiltonian, should incorporate the fact that the positions r are not independent. It is
convenient to change variables to ξ = r r , i = 1,2,...,N, where it should be kept in mind
that ξ 0 for all i and N ξ = L. Let − us a − ssume that L is an extensive variable, i.e., L = Nξ
for some constant ξ > 0. Thus, the partition function is
Z N (β,L) = h 1 N
dp 1 ··· dp N ZIR+
ξ i ! (6.2.5)
= λ 1 N ZIR+
ξ i ! , (6.2.6)
where λ = h/√2πmkT. The constraint N ξ = L makes the analysis of the configurational
partition function difficult. Let us pass to the corresponding Gibbs ensemble where instead of
fixing the length L, we control it by applying a force f.34 The corresponding partition function
33The reader can find the derivations in any textbook on elementary statistical mechanics, for example,
[10, Chap. 9].
34Here we use the principle of ensemble equivalence.
!
··· " Z0 −
(cid:26) Z0 (cid:27)
With a slight abuse of notation, from now on, we will denote the last expression by Y (β,s).
Consider now the following potential function
In words, distances below d are strictly forbidden (e.g., because of the size of the particles), in the
range between d and d+δ there is a negative potential ǫ, and beyond d+δ the potential is zero.35
Now, for this potential function, the one–dimensional integral above is given by
N λNsN − −
Now, the average length of the system is given by
∂lnY (β,s)
Or, equivalently, ∆L = L Nd, which is the excess length beyond the possible minimum, is
35ThisisacaricatureoftheLennard–Jonespotentialfunctionφ(ξ) [(d/ξ)12 (d/ξ)6],whichbeginsfrom
+ , decreases down to a negative minimum, and finally increases and tends to zero.
f ∆L = NkT + −
= N kT (6.2.13)
(cid:20) − − (cid:21)
where the last line is obtained after some standard algebraic manipulation. Note that without
the potential well of the intermediate range of distances (ǫ = 0 or δ = 0), the second term in the
square brackets disappears and we get a one dimensional version of the equation of state of the
ideal gas (with the volume being replaced by length and the pressure – replaced by force). The
second term is then a correction term due to the interaction. The attractive potential reduces the
product f ∆L.
Yet another example of a model, or more precisely, a very large class of models with
interactions, are those of magnetic materials. These models will closely accompany our
discussions from this point onward in this chapter. Few of these models are solvable, most
of them are not. For the purpose of our discussion, a magnetic material is one for which
the relevant property of each particle is its magnetic moment. As a reminder, the magnetic
moment is a vector proportional to the angular momentum of a revolving charged particle
(like a rotating electron, or a current loop), or the spin, and it designates the intensity of its
response to the net magnetic field that this particle ‘feels’. This magnetic field may be the
superposition of an externally applied magnetic field and the magnetic fields generated by
the neighboring spins.
Quantum mechanical considerations dictate that each spin, which will be denoted by s ,
is quantized, that is, it may take only one out of finitely many values. In the simplest case
to be adopted in our study – two values only. These will be designated by s = +1 (“spin
up”) and s = 1 (“spin down”), corresponding to the same intensity, but in two opposite
directions, one parallel to the magnetic field, and the other – anti-parallel (see Fig. 11). The
Hamiltonian associated with an array of spins s = (s ,...,s ) is customarily modeled (up
to certain constants that, among other things, accommodate for the physical units) with a
Figure 11: Illustration of a spin array on a square lattice.
structure like this:
(s) = B s J s s , (6.2.14)
where B is the externally applied magnetic field and J are the coupling constants that
designate the levels of interaction between spin pairs, and they depend on properties of
the magnetic material and on the geometry of the system. The first term accounts for the
contributions of potential energies of all spins due to the magnetic field, which in general,
are given by the inner product B~ ~s , but since each ~s is either parallel or anti-parallel to
B~ , as said, these boil down to simple products, where only the sign of each s counts. Since
P(s) is proportional to e β ( ), the spins ‘prefer’ to be parallel, rather than anti-parallel to
the magnetic field. The second term in the above Hamiltonian accounts for the interaction
energy. If J are all positive, they also prefer to be parallel to one another (the probability
for this is larger), which is the case where the material is called ferromagnetic (like iron and
nickel). If they are all negative, the material is antiferromagnetic. In the mixed case, it is
called a spin glass. In the latter, the behavior is rather complicated.
The case where all J are equal and the double summation over (i,j) is over nearest
neighbors only is called the Ising model. A more general version of it is called the O(n)
model. according to which each spin is an n–dimensional unit vector ~s = (s1,...,sn) (and
so is the magnetic field), where n is not necessarily related to the dimension d of the lattice
in which the spins reside. The case n = 1 is then the Ising model. The case n = 2 is called
the XY model, and the case n = 3 is called the Heisenberg model.
Of course, the above models for the Hamiltonian can (and, in fact, is being) generalized
to include interactions formed also, by triples, quadruples, or any fixed size p (that does not
grow with N) of spin–cliques.
We next discuss a very important effect that exists in some systems with strong interac-
tions (both in magnetic materials and in other models): the effect of phase transitions.
6.3 A Qualitative Discussion on Phase Transitions
As was mentioned in the introductory paragraph of this chapter, a phase transition means
an abrupt change in the collective behavior of a physical system, as we change gradually one
of the externally controlled parameters, like the temperature, pressure, or magnetic field.
The most common example of a phase transition in our everyday life is the water that we
boil in the kettle when we make coffee, or when it turns into ice as we put it in the freezer.
What exactly these phase transitions are? In physics, phase transitions can occur only if
the system has interactions. Consider, the above example of an array of spins with B = 0,
and let us suppose that all J > 0 are equal, and thus will be denoted commonly by J (like
in the O(n) model). Then,
exp βJ s s
and, as mentioned earlier, this is a ferromagnetic model, where all spins ‘like’ to be in the
same direction, especially when β and/or J is large. In other words, the interactions, in this
case, tend to introduce order into the system. On the other hand, the second law talks about
maximum entropy, which tends to increase the disorder. So there are two conflicting effects
here. Which one of them prevails?
The answer turns out to depend on temperature. Recall that in the canonical ensemble,
equilibrium is attained at the point of minimum free energy f = ǫ Ts(ǫ). Now, T plays
the role of a weighting factor for the entropy. At low temperatures, the weight of the second
term of f is small, and minimizing f is approximately equivalent to minimizing ǫ, which is
obtained by states with a high level of order, as (s) = J s s , in this example. As
E − (i,j) i j
T grows, however, the weight of the term Ts(ǫ) increases,Pand minf, becomes more and
more equivalent to maxs(ǫ), which is achieved by states with a high level of disorder (see
Fig. 12). Thus, the order–disorder characteristics depend primarily on temperature. It turns
Figure 12: Qualitative graphs of f(ǫ) at various temperatures. The minimizing ǫ increases with
T.
out that for some magnetic systems of this kind, this transition between order and disorder
may be abrupt, in which case, we call it a phase transition. At a certain critical temperature,
called the Curie temperature, there is a sudden transition between order and disorder. In
the ordered phase, a considerable fraction of the spins align in the same direction, which
means that the system is spontaneously magnetized (even without an external magnetic
field), whereas in the disordered phase, about half of the spins are in either direction, and
then the net magnetization vanishes. This happens if the interactions, or more precisely,
their dimension in some sense, is strong enough.
What is the mathematical significance of a phase transition? If we look at the partition
function, Z (β), which is the key to all physical quantities of interest, then for every finite
N, this is simply the sum of finitely many exponentials in β and therefore it is continuous
anddifferentiable infinitely many times. So what kind of abrupt changes could therepossibly
be in the behavior of this function? It turns out that while this is true for all finite N, it
is no longer necessarily true if we look at the thermodynamical limit, i.e., if we look at the
behavior of
While φ(β) must be continuous for all β > 0 (since it is convex), it need not necessarily have
continuous derivatives. Thus, a phase transition, if exists, is fundamentally an asymptotic
property, it may exist in the thermodynamical limit only. While a physical system is, after
all finite, it is nevertheless well approximated by the thermodynamical limit when it is very
large.
The above discussion explains also why a system without interactions, where all x are
i.i.d., cannothavephasetransitions. Inthiscase, Z (β) = [Z (β)]N, andso, φ(β) = lnZ (β),
which is always asmoothfunction without any irregularities. Fora phase transitionto occur,
the particles must behave in some collective manner, which is the case only if interactions
take place.
There is a distinction between two types of phase transitions:
If φ(β) has a discontinuous first order derivative, then this is called a first order phase
transition.
If φ(β) has a continuous first order derivative, but a discontinuous second order deriva-
tive thenthis iscalled a second order phase transition, or a continuous phase transition.
We can talk, of course, about phase transitions w.r.t. additional parameters other than
temperature. In the above magnetic example, if we introduce back the magnetic field B
into the picture, then Z, and hence also φ, become functions of B too. If we then look at
derivative of
= lim ln exp βB s +βJ s s (6.3.3)
w.r.t. the product (βB), which multiplies the magnetization, s , at the exponent, this
would give exactly the average magnetization per spin P
m(β,B) = S , (6.3.4)
and this quantity might not always be continuous. Indeed, as mentioned earlier, below
the Curie temperature there might be a spontaneous magnetization. If B 0, then this
magnetization is positive, and if B 0, it is negative, so there is a discontinuity at B = 0.
We shall see this more concretely later on.
6.4 The One–Dimensional Ising Model
The most familiar model of a magnetic system with interactions is the one–dimensional Ising
model, according to which
(s) = B s J s s (6.4.1)
with the periodic boundary condition s = s . Thus,
Z (β,B) = exp βB s +βJ s s
= exp h s +K s s h = βB, K = βJ
= exp (s +s )+K s s . (6.4.2)
i i+1 i i+1
Consider now the 2 2 matrix P whose entries are exp h(s+s)+Kss , s,s 1,+1 ,
P = . (6.4.3)
(cid:18) (cid:19)
Also, s = +1 will be represented by the column vector σ = (1,0)T and s = 1 will be
represented by σ = (0,1)T. Thus,
1 2 2 3 3 ··· N N 1
! ! !
= σTP I P I I Pσ
where λ and λ are the eigenvalues of P, which are
λ = eK cosh(h) e 2K +e2K sinh2(h). (6.4.5)
Letting λ denote the larger (the dominant) eigenvalue, i.e.,
λ = eK cosh(h)+ e 2K +e2K sinh2(h), (6.4.6)
then clearly,
φ(h,K) = lim = lnλ . (6.4.7)
The average magnetization is
M(h,K) = S
= P P P (6.4.8)
and so, the per–spin magnetization is:
m(h,K) = lim = = (6.4.9)
N →∞ N ∂h e 4K +sinh2(h)
or, returning to the original parametrization:
For β > 0 and B > 0 this is a smooth function, and so, there is are no phase transitions and
no spontaneous magnetization at any finite temperature.36 However, at the absolute zero
(β ), we get
lim lim m(β,B) = +1; lim lim m(β,B) = 1, (6.4.11)
B 0β B 0β −
thus m is discontinuous w.r.t. B at β , which means that there is a phase transition at
T = 0. In other words, the Curie temperature is T = 0 independent of J.
We see then that one–dimensional Ising model is easy to handle, but it is not very
interesting in the sense that there is actually no phase transition. The extension to the
two–dimensional Ising model on the square lattice is surprisingly more difficult, but it is still
solvable, albeit without a magnetic field. It was first solved in 1944 by Onsager [9], who has
shown that it exhibits a phase transition with Curie temperature given by
T = . (6.4.12)
For lattice dimension larger than two, the problem is still open.
It turns out then that whatever counts for the existence of phase transitions, is not only
the intensity of the interactions (designated by the magnitude of J), but more importantly,
the “dimensionality” of the structure of the pairwise interactions. If we denote by n the
number of ℓ–th order neighbors of every given site, namely, the number of sites that can
be reached within ℓ steps from the given site, then whatever counts is how fast does the
sequence n grow, or more precisely, what is the value of d = ∆ lim lnnℓ, which is exactly
the ordinary dimensionality for hyper-cubic lattices. Loosely speaking, this dimension must
be sufficiently large for a phase transition to exist.
To demonstrate this point, we next discuss an extreme case of a model where this dimen-
sionality is actually infinite. In this model “everybody is a neighbor of everybody else” and
to the same extent, so it definitely has the highest connectivity possible. This is not quite a
36Note,inparticular,thatforJ =0(i.i.d.spins)wegetparamagneticcharacteristicsm(β,B)=tanh(βB),
inagreementwiththeresultpointedoutintheexampleoftwo–levelsystems,inoneofourearlierdiscussions.
physically realistic model, but the nice thing about it is that it is easy to solve and that it
exhibits a phase transition that is fairly similar to those that exist in real systems. It is also
intimately related to a very popular approximation method in statistical mechanics, called
the mean field approximation. Hence it is sometimes called the mean field model. It is also
known as the Curie–Weiss model or the infinite range model.
Finally, we should comment that there are other “infinite–dimensional” Ising models, like
the one defined on the Bethe lattice (an infinite tree without a root and without leaves),
which is also easily solvable (by recursion) and it also exhibits phase transitions [2], but we
will not discuss it here.
6.5 The Curie–Weiss Model
According to the Curie–Weiss (C–W) model,
(s) = B s s s . (6.5.1)
Here, all pairs (s ,s ) communicate to the same extent, and without any geometry. The
1/N factor here is responsible for keeping the energy of the system extensive (linear in N),
as the number of interaction terms is quadratic in N. The factor 1/2 compensates for the
fact that the summation over i = j counts each pair twice. The first observation is the trivial
s = s2 + s s = N + s s (6.5.2)
i i i j i j
!
i i i=j i=j
where the second equality holds since s2 1. It follows then, that our Hamiltonian is, up
to a(n immaterial) constant, equivalent to
(s) = B s s
!
= N B s + s , (6.5.3)
! !
thus (s) depends on s only via the magnetization m(s) = 1 s . This fact makes the
C–W model very easy to handle: P
s (cid:26) (cid:20) (cid:21)(cid:27)
=· exp N max h
(cid:26) | |≤ (cid:20) (cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:21)(cid:27)
| |≤ (cid:20) (cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:21)
The maximum is found by equating the derivative to zero, i.e.,
(cid:18) (cid:19)
or equivalently, the maximizing (and hence the dominant) m is a solution m to the equa-
Consider first the case B = 0, where the equation boils down to
m = tanh(βJm). (6.5.7)
It is instructive to look at this equation graphically. Referring to Fig. 13, we have to make
a distinction between two cases: If βJ < 1, namely, T > T = J/k, the slope of the function
y = tanh(βJm) at the origin, βJ, is smaller than the slope of the linear function y = m,
which is 1, thus these two graphs intersect only at the origin. It is easy to check that in this
case, the second derivative of
(cid:18) (cid:19)
37Onceagain,forJ =0,wearebacktonon–interactingspinsandthenthisequationgivestheparamagnetic
behavior m=tanh(βB).
at m = 0 is negative, and therefore it is indeed the maximum (see Fig. 14, left part). Thus,
the dominant magnetization is m = 0, which means disorder and hence no spontaneous
magnetization for T > T . On the other hand, when βJ > 1, which means temperatures
y=tanh(βJm
Figure 13: Graphical solutions of equation m = tanh(βJm): The left part corresponds to the case
βJ < 1, where there is one solution only, m = 0. The right part corresponds to the case βJ > 1,
where in addition to the zero solution, there are two non–zero solutions m = m .
lower than T , the initial slope of the tanh function is larger than that of the linear function,
butsincethetanhfunctioncannottakevaluesoutsidetheinterval( 1,+1),thetwofunctions
must intersect also at two additional, symmetric, non–zero points, which we denote by +m
and m (see Fig. 13, right part). In this case, it can readily be shown that the second
derivative of ψ(m) is positive at the origin (i.e., there is a local minimum at m = 0) and
negative at m = m , which means that there are maxima at these two points (see Fig. 14,
right part). Thus, the dominant magnetizations are m , each capturing about half of the
probability.
Figure 14: The function ψ(m) = h ((1+m)/2)+βJm2/2 has a unique maximum at m = 0 when
βJ < 1 (left graph) and two local maxima at m , in addition to a local minimum at m = 0, when
βJ > 1 (right graph).
Consider now the case βJ > 1, where the magnetic field B is brought back into the
picture. This will break the symmetry of the right graph of Fig. 14 and the corresponding
graphs of ψ(m) would be as in Fig. 15, where now the higher local maximum (which is also
the global one) is at m (B) whose sign is as that of B. But as B 0, m (B) m of Fig.
14. Thus, we see the spontaneous magnetization here. Even after removing the magnetic
Figure 15: The case βJ > 1 with a magnetic field B. The left graph corresponds to B < 0 and
the right graph – to B > 0.
c +m 0 T > T c
Figure 16: Magnetization vs. magnetic field: For T < T there is spontaneous magnetization:
lim m(β,B) = +m and lim m(β,B) = m , and so there is a discontinuity at B = 0.
B 0 0 B 0 0
field, the system remains magnetized to the level of m , depending on the direction (the
sign) of B before its removal. Obviously, the magnetization m(β,B) has a discontinuity at
B = 0 for T < T , which is a first order phase transition w.r.t. B (see Fig. 16). We note
that the point T = T is the boundary between the region of existence and the region of
non–existence of a phase transition w.r.t. B. Such a point is called a critical point. The
phase transition w.r.t. β is of the second order.
Finally, we should mention here an alternative technique that can be used to analyze
this model, which is based on the Hubbard–Stratonovich transform. Specifically, we have
the following chain of equalities:
Z(h,K) = exp h s + s h = βB, K = βJ
s !
X  X i=1 X i=1 
= exp h s exp s
s ( ) !
X X i=1  X i=1 
= exp h s dzexp +z s
exp (h+z) s
r ZIR " s= 1 #
= 2N dzexp N[lncosh(h+z) z2/(2K)] (6.5.9)
This integral can be shown38 dominated by e to the N times the maximum of the function
in the square brackets at the exponent of the integrand, or equivalently, the minimum of the
by equating its derivative to zero, we get the very same equation as m = tanh(βB +βJm)
by setting z = βJm. The function γ(z) is different from the function ψ that we maximized
earlier, but the extremum is the same. This function is called the Landau free energy.
38The basics of saddle–point integration, or at least Laplace integration, should be taught in a recitation.
6.6 Spin Glasses
Sofarwediscussedonlymodelswherethenon–zerocouplingcoefficients, J = J areequal,
thus they are either all positive (ferromagnetic models) or all negative (antiferromagnetic
models). As mentioned earlier, there are also models where the signs of these coefficients are
mixed, which are called spin glass models.
Spin glass models have a much more complicated and more interesting behavior than
ferromagnets, because there might be metastable states due to the fact that not necessarily
allspinpairs (s ,s ) canbeintheirpreferredmutualpolarization. Itmightbethecasethat
some of these pairs are “frustrated.” In order to model situations of amorphism and disorder
in such systems, it is customary to model the coupling coefficients as random variables. This
model with random parameters means that there are now two levels of randomness:
Randomness of the coupling coefficients J.
Randomness of the spin configuration s given J, according to the Boltzmann distri-
bution, i.e.,
exp β B N s + J s s
i=1 i (i,j) ij i j
P(s J) = . (6.6.1)
| n h PZ(β,B J P) io
However, these two sets of random variables have a rather different stature. The underlying
setting is normally such that J is considered to be randomly drawn once and for all, and
then remain fixed, whereas s keeps varying all the time (according to the dynamics of the
system). At any rate, the time scale along which s varies is much smaller than that of J.
Another difference is that J is normally not assumed to depend on temperature, whereas s,
ofcourse, does. Intheterminologyofphysicists, sisconsidered anannealedrandomvariable,
whereas J is considered a quenched random variable. Accordingly, there is a corresponding
distinction between annealed averages and quenched averages.
Letusseewhatisexactlythedifferencebetweenthequenched averaging andtheannealed
one. If we examine, for instance, the free energy, or the log–partition function, lnZ(β J),
this is now a random variable, of course, because it depends on the random J. If we
denote by the expectation w.r.t. the randomness of J, then quenched averaging means
lnZ(β J) (with the motivation of the self–averaging property of the random variable
lnZ(β J) in many cases), whereas annealed averaging means ln Z(β J) . Normally, the
relevant average is the quenched one, but it is typically also much harder to calculate.
Clearly, the annealed average is never smaller than the quenched one because of Jensen’s
inequality, but they sometimes coincide at high temperatures. The difference between them
is that in quenched averaging, the dominant realizations of J are the typical ones, whereas in
annealed averaging, this is not necessarily the case. This follows from the following sketchy
consideration. As for the annealed average, we have:
Pr J : Z(β J) =· eNα eNα
e NE(α) eNα (assuming exponential probabilities)
which means that the annealed average is dominated by realizations of the system with
which may differ from the typical value of α, which is
≡ N N h | i
On the other hand, when it comes to quenched averaging, the random variable lnZ(β J)
behaves linearly in N, and concentrates strongly around the typical value Nφ(β), whereas
other values are weighted by (exponentially) decaying probabilities.
The literature on spin glasses includes many models for the randomness of the coupling
coefficients. We end this part by listing just a few.
The Edwards–Anderson (E–A) model, where J are non–zero for nearest–neighbor
pairs only (e.g., j = i 1 in one–dimensional model). According to this model, these
J ’s are i.i.d. random variables, which are normally modeled to have a zero–mean
Gaussian pdf, or binary symmetric with levels J . It is customary to work with a
zero–mean distribution if we have a pure spin glass in mind. If the mean is nonzero,
the model has either a ferromagnetic or an anti-ferromagnetic bias, according to the
sign of the mean.
The Sherrington–Kirkpatrick (S–K) model, which is similar to the E–A model, except
that the support of J is extended to include all N(N 1)/2 pairs, and not only
nearest–neighbor pairs. This can be thought of as a stochastic version of the C–W
model in the sense that here too, there is no geometry, and every spin ‘talks’ to every
other spin to the same extent, but here the coefficients are random, as said.
The p–spin model, which is similar to the S–K model, but now the interaction term
consists, not only of pairs, but also triples, quadruples, and so on, up to cliques of size
p, i.e., products s s s , where (i ,...,i ) exhaust all possible subsets of p spins out
i1 i2··· ip 1 p
of N. Each such term has a Gaussian coefficient J with an appropriate variance.
Considering the p–spin model, it turns out that if we look at the extreme case of p
(taken after the thermodynamic limit N ), the resulting behavior turns out to be ex-
tremely erratic: all energy levels (s) s 1,+1 N become i.i.d. Gaussian random variables.
{E } ∈{− }
This is, of course, a toy model, which has very little to do with reality (if any), but it is
surprisingly interesting and easy to work with. It is called the random energy model (REM).
7 Vibrations in a Solid – Phonons and Heat Capacity
7.1 Introduction
A problem mathematically similar to that of black–body radiation, discussed earlier, arises
from vibrational modes of a solid. As in the case of black–body radiation, the analysis of
vibrational modes in a solid can be viewed either by regarding the system as a bunch of
interacting harmonic oscillators or as a gas of particles, called phonons – the analogue of
photons, but in the context of sound waves, rather than electromagnetic waves.
In this chapter, we shall use this point of view and apply statistical mechanical methods
to calculate the heat capacity of solids, or more precisely, the heat capacity pertaining to
the lattice vibrations of crystalline solids.39
There are two basic experimental facts about heat capacity in solids which any good
theory must explain. The first is that in room temperature the heat capacity of most solids
is about 3k per atom40 ideal gas). This is essentially the law of Dulong and Petit (1819), but
this is only an approximation, and it might be quite wrong. The second fact is that at low
temperatures, the heat capacity at constant volume, C , decreases, and actually vanishes at
T = 0. Experimentally, it was observed that the low–temperature dependence is of the form
C = αT3 +γT, (7.1.1)
where α and γ are constants that depend on the material and the volume. For certain
insulators, like potassium chloride, γ = 0, namely, C is proportional to T3. For metals (like
copper), the linear term is present, but it is contributed by the conduction electrons. A good
theory of the vibrational contribution to heat capacity should therefore predict T3 behavior
at low temperatures.
39 In general, there are additional contributions to the heat capacity (e.g., from orientational ordering
in paramagnetic salts, or from conduction electrons in metals, etc.), but here we shall consider only the
vibrational heat capacity.
40Each atom has 6 degrees of freedom (3 of position + 3 of momentum). Classically, each one of them
contributes one quadratic term to the Hamiltonian, whose mean is kT/2, thus a total mean energy of 3kT,
which means specific heat of 3k per atom.
In classical statistical mechanics, the equipartition theorem leads to a constant heat
capacity at all temperatures, in contradiction with both experiments and with the third law
of thermodynamics that asserts that as T 0, the entropy S tends to zero (whereas a
constant heat capacity would yield S lnT for small T).
A fundamental step to resolve this discrepancy between classical theory and experiment
was taken by Einstein in 1907, who treated the lattice vibrations quantum mechanically.
Einstein’s theory qualitatively reproduces the observed features. However, he used a simpli-
fied model and didn’t expect full agreement with experiment, but he pointed out the kind
of modifications which the model requires. Einstein’s theory was later (1912) improved by
Debye who considered a more realistic model.
7.2 Formulation
Consider a Hamiltonian of a classical solid composed of N atoms whose positions in space
are specified by the coordinates x = (x ,...,x ). In the state of lowest energy (the ground
state), these coordinates are denoted by x¯ = (x¯ ,...,x¯ ), which are normally points of a
lattice in the three–dimensional space, if the solid in question is a crystal. Let ξ = x x¯ ,
i = 1,...,3N, denote the displacements. The kinetic energy of the system is is clearly
K = m x˙2 = m ξ ˙2 (7.2.1)
and the potential energy is
i (cid:18) ∂x i(cid:19) x = x¯ i,j 2 (cid:18) ∂x i ∂x j(cid:19) x = x¯
The first term in this expansion represents the minimum energy when all atoms are at rest
in their mean positions x¯ . We henceforth denote this energy by Φ . The second term
is identically zero because Φ(x) is minimized at x = x¯. The second order terms of this
expansion represent the harmonic component of the vibrations. If we assume that the overall
amplitude of the vibrations is reasonably small, we can safely neglect all successive terms
and then we are working with the so called harmonic approximation. Thus, we may write
E 0 2 i ij i j
where we have denoted
2 · ∂x i ∂x j(cid:12) x = x¯
This Hamiltonian corresponds to harmonic oscillat(cid:12)ors that are coupled to one another, as
discussed in Subsections 3.2.2 and 6.2, where the off–diagonal terms of the matrix A = α
designate the pairwise interactions. This Hamiltonian obeys the general form of eq. (6.2.1).
While Einstein neglected the off–diagonal terms of A in the first place, Debye did not.
In the following, we present the latter approach, which is more general (and more realistic),
whereas the former will essentially be a special case.
7.3 Heat Capacity Analysis
The first idea of the analysis is to transform the coordinates into a new domain where
the components are all decoupled. This means diagonalizing the matrix A. Since A is
a symmetric non–negative definite matrix, it is clearly diagonalizable by a unitary matrix
formed by its eigenvectors, and the diagonal elements of the diagonalized matrix (which are
the eigenvalues of A) are non–negative. Let us denote the new coordinates of the system
by q , i = 1,...,3N, and the eigenvalues – by 1mω2. By linearity of the differentiation
operation, the same transformation take us from the vector of velocities ξ (of the kinetic
component of the Hamiltonian) to the vector of derivatives of q , which will be denoted
q˙ . Fortunately enough, since the transformation is unitary it leaves the components q˙
decoupled. In other words, by the Parseval theorem, the norm of ξ is equal to the norm
of q˙ . Thus, in the transformed domain, the Hamiltonian reads
E 0 2 i i i
which can be viewed as 3N decoupled harmonic oscillators, each one oscillating in its indi-
vidual normal mode ω . The parameters ω are called characteristic frequencies or normal
modes.
Example 7.1 – One–dimensional ring of springs. If the system has translational symmetry and if,
in addition, there are periodic boundary conditions, then the matrix A is circulant, which means
that it is always diagonalized by the discrete Fourier transform (DFT). In this case, q are the
corresponding spatial frequency variables, conjugate to the location displacement variables ξ . The
simplest example of this is a ring of N one–dimensional springs, as discussed in Subsection 6.2 (see
left part of Fig. 9), where the Hamiltonian (in the current notation) is
E 0 2 i 2 i+1 − i
In this case, the matrix A is given by
1 1 0 ... 0 1
1 1 1 0 ... 0
0 1 1 1 0 ...
A = K −2 −2 (7.3.3)
 0 0 ... 1 1 1 
 1 0 ... 0 1 1 
The eigenvalues of A are λ = K[1 cos(2πi/N)], which are simply the DFT coefficients of the
N–sequence formed by any row of A (removing the complex exponential of the phase factor). This
means that the normal modes are ω = 2K[1 cos(2πi/N)]/m.
Classically, each of the 3N normal modes of vibration corresponds to a wave of distortion
of the lattice. Quantum–mechanically, these modes give rise to quanta called phonons, in
analogy to the fact that vibrational modes of electromagnetic waves give rise to photons.
There is one important difference, however: While the number of normal modes in the case
of an electromagnetic wave is infinite, here the number of modes (or the number of phonon
energy levels) is finite – there are exactly 3N of them. This gives rise to a few differences
in the physical behavior, but at low temperatures, where the high–frequency modes of the
solid become unlikely to be excited, these differences become insignificant.
The eigenvalues of the Hamiltonian are then
E(n ,n ,...) = Φ + n + ~ω . (7.3.4)
i (cid:18) (cid:19)
where the non-negative integers n denote the ‘states of excitation’ of the various oscil-
lators, or equally well, the occupation numbers of the various phonon levels in the system.
The internal energy is then
= ln ...exp β Φ + n + ~ω
( " #)!
i (cid:18) (cid:19)
0 2 i 1 e β~ωi
Only the last term of the last expression depends on T. Thus, the heat capacity at constant
volume41 is:
C = h i = k . (7.3.6)
V ∂T (ehωi/kT 1)2
To proceed from here, one has to know (or assume something) about the form of the density
g(ω)of ω andthenpassfromsummationtointegration. Atthispointbeginsthedifference
between Einstein’s approach and Debye’s approach.
7.3.1 Einstein’s Theory
For Einstein, who assumed that the oscillators do not interact in the original, ξ–domain,
all the normal modes are equal ω = ω for all i, because then (assuming translational
symmetry) A is proportional to the identity matrix and then all its eigenvalues are the same.
Thus, in Einstein’s model g(ω) = 3Nδ(ω ω ), and the result is
C = 3NkE(x) (7.3.7)
where E(x) is the so–called the Einstein function:
41Exercise 7.1: Why is this the heat capacity at constant volume? Where is the assumption of constant
volume being used here?
x = = . (7.3.9)
where Θ = ~ω /k is calledthe Einstein temperature. At hightemperatures T Θ , where
x 1 and then E(x) 1, we readily see that C (T) 3Nk, in agreement with classical
physics. For low temperatures, C (T) falls exponentially fast as T 0. This theoretical
rate of decay, however, is way too fast compared to the observed rate, which is cubic, as
described earlier. But at least, Einstein’s theory predicts the qualitative behavior correctly.
7.3.2 Debye’s Theory
Debye (1912), on the other hand, assumed a continuous density g(ω). He assumed some
cutoff frequency ω , so that
For g(ω) in the range 0 ω ω , Debye adopted a Rayleigh expression in the spirit of the
one we saw in black–body radiation, but with a distinction between the longitudinal mode
and the two independent transverse modes associated with the propagation of each wave at
a given frequency. Letting v and v denote the corresponding velocities of these modes,
this amounts to
2π2v3 π2v3
(cid:18) L T (cid:19)
This, together with the previous equation, determines the cutoff frequency to be
D 1/v3 +2/v3
(cid:20) L T(cid:21)
where ρ = N/V is the density of the atoms. Accordingly,
0 elsewhere
The Debye formula for the heat capacity is now
C = 3NkD(x ) (7.3.14)
where D( ) is called the Debye function
3 x0 x4exdx
0 x3 (ex 1)2
x = = , (7.3.16)
whereΘ = ~ω /k iscalledtheDebye temperature. Integratingbyparts, theDebyefunction
can also be written as
3x 12 x0 x3dx
D(x ) = 0 + . (7.3.17)
0 −ex0 1 x3 ex 1
Now, for T Θ , which means x 1, D(x ) can be approximated by a Taylor series
expansion:
D(x ) = 1 0 +... (7.3.18)
Thus, for high temperatures, we again recover the classical result C = 3Nk. On the other
hand, for T Θ , which is x 1, the dominant term in the integration by parts is the
second one, which gives the approximation
12 x3dx 4π4 4π4 T 3
D(x ) = = . (7.3.19)
0 ≈ x3 ex 1 5x3 5 Θ
0 Z0 − 0 (cid:18) D(cid:19)
Therefore, at low temperatures, the heat capacity is
C Nk . (7.3.20)
(cid:18) D(cid:19)
In other words, Debye’s theory indeed recovers the T3 behavior at low temperatures, in
agreement with experimental evidence. Moreover, the match to experimental results is very
good, not only near T = 0, but across a rather wide range of temperatures. In some
textbooks, like [7, p. 164, Fig. 6.7], or [10, p. 177, Fig. 7.10], there are plots of C as a
function of T for certain materials, which show impressive proximity between theory and
measurements.
Exercise 7.2. Extend Debye’s analysis to allow two different cutoff frequencies, ω and ω – for
the longitudinal and the transverse modes, respectively.
Exercise 7.3. Calculate the density g(ω) for a ring of springs as described in Example 7.1. Write
an expression for C as an integral and try to simplify it as much as you can.
8 Fluctuations, Stochastic Dynamics and Noise
So far we have discussed mostly systems in equilibrium. Extensive quantities like volume,
energy, occupations numbers, etc., have been calculated as means of certain ensembles, with
the justification that these are not only just means but moreover, the values around which
most of the probability concentrates in the thermodynamic limit, namely, the limit of a very
large system. In this chapter, we will investigate the statistical fluctuations around these
means, as well as dynamical issues, like the rate of approach to equilibrium when a system is
initially away from equilibrium. We will also discuss noise phenomena and noise generation
mechanisms as well as their implications and impact on electric circuits and other systems.
Historically, the theory of fluctuations has been interesting and useful because it made
explicable several experimental effects, which late–nineteenth–century physicists, firmly ad-
heringtothermostaticsandclassicalmechanics, werenotabletoexplainrigorously. Onesuch
phenomenon is Brownian motion – the irregular, random motion of light particles suspended
in a drop of liquid, which is observable with a microscope. Another phenomenon is electrical
noise, such as thermal noise and shot noise, as mentioned in the previous paragraph.
Classical thermodynamics cannot explain fluctuations and, in fact, even denies their
existence, because as we will see, a fluctuation into a less likely state involves a decrease
of entropy, which is seemingly contradictory to the nineteenth–century ideas of the steady
increase of entropy. This contradiction is resolved by the statistical–mechanical viewpoint,
according to which the increase of entropy holds true only on the average (or with high
probability), not deterministically.
Apart from their theoretical interest, fluctuations are important to understand in order
to make accurate measurements of physical properties and at the same time, to realize that
the precision is limited by the fluctuations.
8.1 Elements of Fluctuation Theory
So far, we have established probability distributions for various physical situations and have
taken for granted the most likely value (or the mean value) as the value of the physical
quantity of interest. For example, the internal energy in the canonical ensemble was taken
to be E , which is also the most likely value, with a very sharp peak as N grows.
The first question that we ask now is what is the probabilistic characterization of the
departure from the mean. One of the most natural measures of this departure is the vari-
ance. In the above–mentioned example of the energy, Var E = E2 E 2 or the relative
{ } h i−h i
standard deviation Var E / E . When several physical quantities are involved, then the
covariances betweenpthem are also measures of fluctuation. There are two possible routes to
assess fluctuations inthissecond order sense. The first isdirectly fromthe relevant ensemble,
and the second is by a Gaussian approximation around the mean. It should be emphasized
that when it comes to fluctuations, the principle of ensemble equivalence no longer holds
in general. For example, in the microcanonical ensemble, Var E = 0 (since E is strictly
fixed), whereas in the canonical ensemble, it is normally extensive, as we shall see shortly
(think of the variance of the sum of N i.i.d. random variables). Only Var E / E , which
is proportional to 1/√N and hence tends to 0, can be considered asypmptotically equivalent
(in a very rough sense) to that of the microcanonical ensemble.
Consider first a composite system, consisting of two subsystems, labeled 1 and 2, which
together reside in a microcanonical ensemble with common temperature T and common
pressure P. We think of subsystem no. 1 as the subsystem of interest, whereas subsystem
no. 2 is the reservoir. The two subsystems are allowed to exchange volume and energy, but
not particles. Let ∆S denote the deviation in the entropy of the composite system from its
equilibrium value S , i.e.,
∆S S S = klnΩ klnΩ , (8.1.1)
where Ω and Ω are the numbers of accessible microstates corresponding to the presence
and absence of the fluctuation, respectively. The probability that this fluctuation would
occur is obviously
Considering the two subsystems, of course,
f dE +PdV ∆E +P∆V
where the second equality is approximate since we have neglected the resulting perturbations
in pressure and temperature, as these have only second order effects. At the same time,
∆E = ∆E and ∆V = ∆V , so
Accordingly,
p exp (∆E T∆S +P∆V )/kT . (8.1.5)
At this point, it is observed that this probability distribution does not depend on subsystem
no. 2, it depends only on system no. 1. So from now on, we might as well forget about
subsystem no. 2 and hence drop the subscript 1. I.e.,
p exp (∆E T∆S +P∆V)/kT . (8.1.6)
By a Taylor series expansion
1 ∂2E ∂2E 1 ∂2E
− 2 ∂S2 ∂S∂V 2 ∂V2
(cid:18) (cid:19)0 (cid:18) (cid:19)0 (cid:18) (cid:19)0
Plugging this into eq. (8.1.6) and retaining only the second order terms, we end up with
1 ∂2E ∂2E 1 ∂2E
∝ −2kT ∂S2 ∂S∂V 2 ∂V2
(cid:26) (cid:20)(cid:18) (cid:19)0 (cid:18) (cid:19)0 (cid:18) (cid:19)0 (cid:21)(cid:27)
whichmeansthattherandomvector(∆V,∆S)isapproximatelyGaussian42 withacovariance
matrixthatdependsonthepartialsecondorderderivativesofE w.r.t.V andS. Inparticular,
this covariance matrix is proportional to the inverse of the Hessian matrix of E(S,V), which
42This finding can be thought of as a variation of the central limit theorem.
canbecalculatedforagivensystem inthemicrocanonicalensemble. Wenotethatthesecond
order partial derivatives of E are inversely proportional to the system size (i.e., N or V),
and therefore by the aforementioned inverse relationship, the covariances are proportional to
the system size (extensive). This means that the relative standard deviations are inversely
proportionaltothesquare rootofthesystem size. Ofcourse, onecanextend thescopeofthis
derivation and allow also fluctuations in N, finding that the random vector (∆V,∆S,∆N)
is also jointly Gaussian with a well–defined covariance matrix.43
Example 8.1 – Ideal gas. In the case of the ideal gas, eq. (3.2.6) gives
E(S,V) = e2S/(3Nk), (8.1.9)
4πe5/3mV2/3
whose Hessian is
2E = − . (8.1.10)
(cid:18) − (cid:19)
Thus, the covariance matrix of (∆V,∆S) is
9kT (NkV)2 5/V2 2/(NkV)
Λ= kT ( 2E) 1 = (8.1.11)
(cid:18) (cid:19)
or, using the relation E = 3NkT/2,
Λ = . (8.1.12)
(cid:18) (cid:19)
Thus, Var ∆S = 5Nk2/2, Var ∆V = V2/N, and ∆S∆V = kV, which are all extensive. (cid:3)
Similar derivations can be carried out for other ensembles, like the canonical ensemble
and the grand–canonical ensemble.
8.2 Brownian Motion and the Langevin Equation
We now discuss the topic of Brownian motion, which is of fundamental importance. The
term “Brownian motion” is after the botanist Robert Brown, who in 1828 made careful
observations of tiny pollen grains in a liquid under a microscope and saw that they move in
a rather random fashion, and that this motion was not triggered by any currents or other
processes that take place in the liquid, like evaporation, etc. The movement of this pollen
43Exercise 8.1: Carry out this extension.
grain was caused by frequent collisions with the particles of the liquid. Einstein (1905) was
the first to provide a sound theoretical analysis of the Brownian motion on the basis of the so
called “random walk problem.” Here, we introduce the topic using a formulation due to the
French physicist Paul Langevin (1872–1946), which makes the derivation of the dynamics
extremely simple.
Langevin focuses on the motion of a relatively large particle of mass m whose center
of mass is at x(t) at time t and whose velocity is v(t) = x˙(t). The particle is subjected
to the influence of a force, which is composed of two components, one is a slowly varying
macroscopic force and the other is varying very rapidly and randomly. The latter component
of the force has zero mean, but it fluctuates. In the one–dimensional case then, the location
of the particle obeys the simple differential equation
whereγ isafrictional(dissipative) coefficient andF (t)istherandomcomponentoftheforce.
WhilethisdifferentialequationisnothingbutNewton’slawandhenceobviousinmacroscopic
physics, itshouldnotbetakenforgrantedinthemicroscopic regime. Inelementary Gibbsian
statistical mechanics, all processes aretime reversible in the microscopic level, since energy is
conservedincollisionsastheeffectofdissipationinbinarycollisionsistraditionallyneglected.
A reasonable theory, however, should incorporate the dissipative term.
Clearly, theresponseofx(t)toF+F (t)isthesuperpositionoftheindividual responsesto
F and to F (t) separately. The former is the solution to a simple (deterministic) differential
equation, which is not the center of our interest here. Consider then the response to the
random component F (t) alone. Multiplying eq. (8.2.1) by x(t), we get
(cid:20) (cid:21)
Now, let’s take the expectation, assuming that due to the randomness of F (t) , x(t) and
F (t) at time t, are independent, and so, x(t)F (t) = x(t) F (t) = 0. Also, note
h i h ih i
that m x˙2(t) = kT by the energy equipartition theorem (which applies here since we are
assuming the classical regime), and so, we end up with
m h i = kT γ x(t)x˙(t) , (8.2.3)
a simple first order differential equation, whose solution is
where C is a constant of integration. Imposing the condition that x(0) = 0, this gives
C = kT/γ, and so
1d x2(t) kT
h i x(t)x˙(t) = 1 e γt/m , (8.2.5)
2 dt ≡ h i γ −
(cid:0) (cid:1)
which yields
x2(t) = t (1 e γt/m) . (8.2.6)
(cid:20) (cid:21)
(cid:10) (cid:11)
The last equation gives the mean square deviation of a particle away from its origin, after
time t. The time constant of the dynamics, a.k.a. the relaxation time, is θ = m/γ. For short
times (t θ), x2(t) kTt2/m, which means that it looks like the particle is moving at
constant velocity of kT/m. For t θ, however,
x2(t) t. (8.2.7)
(cid:10) (cid:11)
It should now be pointed out that this linear growth rate of x2(t) is a characeristic of
Brownian motion. Here it only an approximation for t θ, as for m > 0, x(t) is not a
pure Brownian motion. Pure Brownian motion corresponds to the case m = 0 (hence θ = 0),
namely, the term mx¨(t) in the Langevin equation can be neglected, and then x(t) is simply
proportional to F (τ)dτ where F (t) is white noise. Fig. 17 illustrates a few realizations
of a Brownian mRotion in one dimenision and in two dimensions.
We may visualize each collision on the pollen grain as that of an impulse, because the
duration of each collision is extremely short. In other words, the position of the particle x(t)
is responding to a sequence of (positive and negative) impulses at random times. Let
−20 −15 −50
0 2000 4000 6000 8000 10000 0 2000 4000 6000 8000 10000 0 2000 4000 6000 8000 10000
−40 −10 30
−50 −15 20
−90 −35 −10
−10 −5 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 −5 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 −25 −20 −15 −10 −5 0 5 10 15 20 25
Figure 17: Illustration of a Brownian motion. Upper figures: one–dimensional Brownian motion
– three realizations of x(t) as a function of t. Lower figures: two–dimensional Brownian motion –
three realizations of ~r(t)= [x(t),y(t)]. All realizations start at the origin.
denote the autocorrelation of the random process v(t) = x˙(t) and let S (ω) = R (τ) be
the power spectral density.44
Clearly, by the Langevin equation v(t) is the response of a linear, time–invariant linear
to the random input process F (t) . Assuming that the impulse process F (t) is white
noise, then
44Toavoidconfusion,itshouldbekeptinmindthatalthoughS (ω)isexpressedasafunctionoftheradial
frequency ω, which is measured in radians per second, the physical units of the spectral density function
itself here are Volt2/Hz and not Volt2/[radian per second]. To pass to the latter, one should divide by 2π.
Thus, to calculate power, one must use S (2πf)df.
v m · ω2 +ω2 0 θ m
that is, a Lorentzian spectrum. We see that the relaxation time θ is indeed a measure of
the “memory” of the particle and ω = 1/θ plays the role of 3dB cutoff frequency of the
spectrum of v(t) . What is the spectral density of the driving input white noise process?
S (ω) 2kTω
This is a very important result. The spectral density of the white noise is 2kT times the
dissipative coefficient of the system, γ. In other words, the dissipative element of the system
is‘responsible’ forthenoise. Atfirstglance, itmayseemsurprising: Whyshouldtheintensity
of the (external) driving force F (t) be related to the dissipative coefficient γ? The answer
is that they are related via energy balance considerations, since we are assuming thermal
equilibrium. Because the energy waste (dissipation) is proportional to γ, the energy supply
from F (t) must also be proportional to γ in order to balance it.
Example 8.2 – Energy balance for the Brownian particle. The friction force F (t) = γv(t)
causes the particle to loose kinetic energy at the rate of
loss friction
(cid:10) (cid:11)
On the other hand, the driving force F (t) injects kinetic energy at the rate of
injected r
(cid:28) Z0 (cid:29)
which exactly balances the loss. Here, we used that fact that ∞dτh(τ)δ(τ) = h(0)/2 since only
“half” of the delta function is “alive” where h(τ) > 0.45 ExeRrcise 8.2: What happens if γ = 0,
yet F (t) has spectral density N ? Calculate the rate of kinetic energy increase in two different
45More rigorously, think of the delta function here as the limit of narrow (symmetric) autocorrelation
functions which all integrate to unity.
ways: (i) Show that m v2(t) is linear in t and find the constant of proportionality. (ii) calculate
F (t)v(t) for this case(cid:10). (cid:11)
These principles apply not only to a Brownian particle in a liquid, but to any linear
system that obeys a first order stochastic differential equation with a white noise input,
provided that the energy equipartition theorem applies. An obvious electrical analogue of
this is a simple electric circuit where a resistor R and a capacitor C are connected to one
another (see Fig. 18). The thermal noise generated by the resistor (due to the thermal
I r(t) R C
Figure 18: An R–C circuit.
random motion of the colliding free electrons in the conductor with extremely short mean
time between collisions), a.k.a. the Johnson–Nyquist noise, is modeled as a current source
connected in parallel to the resistor (or as an equivalent voltage source connected in series to
the resistor), which generates a white noise current process I (t). The differential equation
pertaining to Kirchoff’s current law is
where V(t) is the voltage across the resistor as well as the parallel capacitor. Now, this is
exactly the same differential equation as before, where I (t) plays the role of the driving
force, V(t) is replacing x˙(t), C substitutes m, and 1/R is the dissipative coefficient instead
of γ. Thus, the spectral density of the current is
Alternatively, if one adopts the equivalent serial voltage source model then V (t) = RI (t)
S (ω) = R2 = 2kTR. (8.2.19)
These results are well–knon from elementrary courses on random processes.
Finally, note that here we have something similar the ultraviolet catastrophe: White
noise has infinite power, which is unphysical. Once again, this happens because we are
working in the classical regime and we have not addressed quantum effects pertaining to
very high frequencies (~ω kT), which similarly as in black–body radiation, cause a sharp
(exponential) decay in the spectrum beyond a cutoff frequency of the order of magnitude of
kT/~ (which is a huge frequency at room temperature). We will get back to this later on in
Subsection 8.5.
8.3 Diffusion and the Fokker–Planck Equation
In this subsection, we consider the temporal evolution of the probability density function
of x(t) (and not only its second order statistics, as in the previous subsection), under quite
general conditions.
The first successful treatment of Brownian motionwas due to Einstein, who asmentioned
earlier, reduced the problem to one of diffusion. It might be speculated that his motivation
was that the diffusion equation is the simplest differential equation in mathematical physics,
which is asymmetric in time:46 Since it includes a first order derivative w.r.t. t, replacing t
by t changes the equation. Because the Brownian motion is irreversible, it was important
to include this feature in the analysis. Einstein’s argument can be summarized as follows:
Assume that each particle moves independently of all other particles. The relaxation time
is small compared to the observation time, but is long enough for the motions of a particle
in two consecutive intervals of θ to be independent.
Let the number of suspended grains be N and let the x coordinate change by ∆ in one
relaxation time. ∆ is a random variable, symmetrically distributed around ∆ = 0. The
number of particles dN which are displaced by more than ∆ but less than ∆+d∆ is
46This is different, for example, from the wave equation that contains a second partial derivative w.r.t.
time, and hence insensitive to the direction of flow of time.
where p(∆) is the pdf of ∆. Since only small displacements are likely to occur, p(∆) is
sharply peaked at the origin. Let ρ(x,t) denote the density of particles at position x, at time
t. The number of particles in the interval [x,x+dx] at time t+δ (δ small) is
This equation simply tells that the probability of finding the particle around x at time t+δ is
made of contributions of finding it in x ∆ at time t, and then moving by ∆ within duration
δ to arrive at x at time t+δ. Here we assumed independence between the location x ∆
at time t and the probability distribution of the displacement ∆, as p(∆) is independent of
x ∆. Since θ is small, we take the liberty to use the Taylor series expansion
Also, for small ∆, we approximate ρ(x ∆,t), this time to the second order:
Putting these in eq. (8.3.2), we get
which is the diffusion equation
= D (8.3.7)
with the diffusion coefficient being
D = lim h i = lim h − i. (8.3.8)
To solve the diffusion equation, define ̺(κ,t) as the Fourier transform of ρ(x,t) w.r.t. the
variable x, i.e.,
Then, the diffusion equation becomes an ordinary differential equation w.r.t. t:
whose solution is easily found to be
Dκ2t.
Assuming that the particle is initially located at the origin, i.e., ρ(x,0) = δ(x), this means
that the initial condition is C(κ) = ̺(κ,0) = 1 for all κ, and so
̺(κ,t) = e
Dκ2t.
The density ρ(x,t) is now obtained by the inverse Fourier transform, which is
and so x(t) is zero–mean Gaussian with variance x2(t) = 2Dt. Of course, any other initial
location x would yield a Gaussian with the same variance 2Dt, but the mean would be x .
Comparing the variance 2Dt with eq. (8.2.7), we have
D = (8.3.14)
which is known as the Einstein relation,47 widely used in semiconductor physics.
The analysis thus far assumed that ∆ = 0, namely, there is no drift to either the left
or the right direction. We next drop this assumption. In this case, the diffusion equation
generalizes to
= v +D (8.3.15)
47Note that hereD is proportionalto T,whereasin the modelofthe lastsectionof Chapter 2(which was
an oversimplified caricature of a diffusion model) it was proportionalto √T.
v = lim h i = lim h − i = x˙(t) (8.3.16)
δ 0 δ δ 0 δ dt h i
has the obvious meaning of the average velocity. Eq. (8.3.15) is well known as the Fokker–
Planck equation. The diffusion equation and the Fokker–Planck equation are very central
in physics. As mentioned already in Chapter 2, they are fundamental in semiconductor
physics, as they describe processes of propagation of concentrations of electrons and holes in
semiconductor materials.
Exercise 8.3. Solve the Fokker–Planck equation and show that the solution is ρ(x,t) = (vt,2Dt).
Explain the intuition.
It is possible to further extend the Fokker–Planck equation so as to allow the pdf of
∆ to be location–dependent, that is, p(∆) would be replaced by p (∆), but the important
point to retain is that given the present location x(t) = x, ∆ would be independent of
the earlier history of x(t),t < t , which is to say that x(t) should be a Markov process.
Considerthenageneralcontinuous–timeMarkovprocessdefinedbythetransitionprobability
density function W (x x), which denotes the pdf of x(t + δ) at x given that x(t) = x. A
straightforward extension of the earlier derivation would lead to the following more general
∂t −∂x ∂x2
is the local average velocity and
is the local diffusion coefficient.
Example 8.3. Consider the stochastic differential equation
48Exercise 8.4: prove it.
wheren(t)is Gaussian whitenoisewithspectraldensity N /2. From thesolution of this differential
equation, it is easy to see that
This relation, between x(t) and x(t+δ), can be used to derive the first and the second moments
of [x(t+δ) x(t)] for small δ, and to find that v(x) = ax and D(x) = N /4 (Exercise 8.5: Show
this). Thus, the Fokker–Planck equation, in this example, reads
It is easy to check that the r.h.s. vanishes for ρ(x,t) e
(independent of t), which means
that in equilibrium, x(t) is Gaussian with zero mean and variance N /4a. This is in agreement
with the fact that, as x(t) is the response of the linear system H(s) = 1/(s +a) (or in the time
domain, h(t) = e atu(t)) to n(t), its variance is indeed (as we know from “Random Signals”):
0 ∞ h2(t)dt = 0 ∞ e 2atdt = 0 .
Note that if x(t) is the voltage across the capacitor in a simple R–C network, then a = 1/RC, and
since (x) = Cx2/2, then in equilibrium we have the Boltzmann weight ρ(x) exp( Cx2/2kT),
which is again, a zero–mean Gaussian. Comparing the exponents, we immediately obtain N /2 =
2kT/RC2. Exercise 8.6: Find the solution ρ(x,t) for all x and t subject to the initial condition
A slightly different representation of the Fokker–Planck equation is the following:
(cid:26) (cid:27)
Now, v(x)ρ(x,t) has the obvious interpretation of the drift current density J (x,t) of a
‘mass’ whose density is ρ(x,t) (in this case, it is a probability mass), whereas
diffusion −∂x
is the diffusion current density.49 Thus,
= total (8.3.21)
49This generalizesFick’s law that we have seen in Chapter 2. There, D was fixed (independent of x), and
so the diffusion current was proportional to the negative gradient of the density.
total drift diffusion
Eq. (8.3.21) is the equation of continuity, which we saw in Chapter 2. In steady state, when
ρ(x,t) is time–invariant, the total current may vanish. The drift current and the diffusion
current balance one another, or at least the net current is homogenous (independent of x),
so no mass accumulates anywhere.
Comment. It is interesting to relate the diffusion constant D to the mobility of the electrons
in the context of electric conductivity. The mobility µ is defined according to v = µE, where
E is the electric field. According to Fick’s law, the current density is proportional to the
negative gradient of the concentration, and D is defined as the constant of proportionality,
i.e., J = D∂ρ/∂x or J = Dq ∂ρ/∂x. If one sets up a field E in an open circuit, the
electrons − − e
diffusion current cancels the drift current, that is
J = ρq µE Dq = 0 (8.3.22)
which would give ρ(x) eµEx/D. On the other hand, under thermal equilibrium, with
potentialenergyV(x) = q Ex, wealsohaveρ(x) e V/kT = eqeEx/kT. Uponcomparingthe
exponents, we readily obtain the Einstein relation50 D = kTµ/q . Note that µ/q = v/q E
is related to the admittance (the dissipative coefficient) since v is proportional to the current
and E is proportional to the voltage.
8.4 The Fluctuation–Dissipation Theorem
We next take another point of view on stochastic dynamics of a physical system: Suppose
that a system (not necessarily a single particle as in the previous subsections) is initially in
equilibrium of the canonical ensemble, but at a certain time instant, it is subjected to an
abrupt, yet small change in a certain parameter that controls it (say, a certain force, like
pressure, magnetic field, etc.). Right after this abrupt change in the parameter, the system
50 This is a relation that is studied in courses on physical principles of seminconductor devices.
is, of course, no longer in equilibrium, but it is not far, since the change is assumed small.
How fast does the system re–equilibrate and what is its dynamical behavior in the course of
the passage to the new equilibrium? Also, since the change was abrupt and not quasi–static,
how is energy dissipated? Quite remarkably, it turns out that the answers to both questions
are related to the equilibrium fluctuations of the system. Accordingly, the principle that
quantifies and characterizes this relationship is called the fluctuation–dissipation theorem
and this is the subject of this subsection. We shall also relate it to the derivations of the
previous subsection.
Consider a physical system, which in the absence of any applied external field, has an
Hamiltonian (x), where here x denotes the microstate, and so, its equilibrium distribution
is the Boltzmann distribution with a partition function given by:
Now, let w be an observable (a measurable physical quantity that depends on the mi-
crostate), which has a conjugate force F, so that when F is applied, the change in the
Hamiltonian is ∆ (x) = Fw . Next suppose that the external force is time–varying ac-
cording to a certain waveform F(t), < t < . As in the previous subsection, it
should be kept in mind that the overall effective force can be thought of as a superposi-
tion of two contributions, a deterministic contribution, which is the above mentioned F(t)
– the external field that the experimentalist applies on purpose and fully controls, and a
random part F (t), which pertains to interaction with the environment (or the heat bath at
temperature T).51 The random component F (t) is responsible for the randomness of the
microstate x and hence also the randomness of the observable. We shall denote the random
variable corresponding to the observable at time t by W(t). Thus, W(t) is random variable,
which takes values in the set w , x , where is the space of microstates. When the
external deterministic field is kept fixed (F(t) const.), the system is expected to converge
to equilibrium and eventually obey the Boltzmann law. While in the section on Brownian
51For example, think again of the example a Brownian particle colliding with other particles. The other
particles can be thought of as the environment in this case.
motion, we focused only on the contribution of the random part, F (t), now let us refer only
to the deterministic part, F(t). We will get back to the random part later on.
Let us assume first that F(t) was switched on to a small level ǫ at time , and then
switched off at time t = 0, in other words, F(t) = ǫU( t), where U( ) is the unit step
function (a.k.a. the Heaviside function). We are interested in the behavior of the mean of
the observable W(t) at time t, which we shall denote by W(t) , for t > 0. Also, W( )
will denote the limit of W(t) as t , namely, the equilibrium mean of the observable
in the absence of an external field. Define now the (negative) step response function as
ζ(t) = lim h i−h ∞ i (8.4.2)
and the auto–covariance function pertaining to the final equilibrium as
t h i−h ∞ i
Then, the fluctuation–dissipation theorem (FDT) asserts that
The FDT then relates between the linear transient response of the system to a small exci-
tation (after it has been removed) and the autocovariance of the observable in equilibrium.
The transient response, that fades away is the dissipation, whereas the autocovariance is the
fluctuation. Normally, R (τ) decays for large τ and so W(t) converges to W( ) at the
same rate (see Fig. 19).
To prove this result, we proceed as follows: First, we have by definition:
W( ) = x x − E (8.4.5)
Now, for t < 0, we have P
Thus, for all negative times, and for t = 0 in particular, we have
W(0 ) = x x − E − E . (8.4.7)
P x − E − E
(cid:10) (cid:11)
Figure19: Illustrationoftheresponseof W(t) toastepfunctionattheinputforceF(t) = ǫU( t).
According to the FDT, theresponse(on top of the asymptotic level W( ) ) is proportional to the
equilibrium autocorrelation function R (t), which in turn may decay either monotonically (solid
curve) or in an oscillatory manner (dashed curve).
LetP (x x)denotetheprobabilitythatthesystemwouldbeatstatex attimet(t > 0)given
thatitwasinstatexattimet = 0 . Thisprobabilitydepends onthedynamical propertiesof
the system (in the absence of the perturbing force). Let us define W(t) = w P (x x),
h ix x′ x′ t ′ |
which is the expectation of W(t) (t > 0) given that the system was in staPte x at t = 0
.
W(t) = xh ix − E − E
P x − E − E
= xhP ix − E (8.4.8)
and W( ) can be seen as a special case ofPthis quantity for ǫ = 0 (no perturbation at all).
Thus, ζ(t) is, by definition, nothing but the derivative of W(t) w.r.t. ǫ, computed at ǫ = 0.
(cid:20)P x − E (cid:21)ǫ=0
= β xh P ix x − E β xh ix − E x x − E
P x − E P x − E P x − E
t h i−h ∞ i
where we have used the fact that the dynamics of P (x x) preserve the equilibrium distri-
bution.
Exercise 8.7. Extend the FDT to account for a situation where the force F(t) is not conjugate to
W(t), but to another physical quantity V(t).
While ζ(t) is essentially the response of the system to a (negative) step function in F(t),
then obviously,
0 t < 0 0 t < 0
would betheimpulse response. Thus, we cannowexpress theresponse of W(t) toa general
signal F(t) that vanishes for t > 0 to be
= βR F˙, (8.4.11)
where the second passage is from integration by parts and where denotes convolution.
Indeed, inour first example, F˙(t) = ǫδ(t) andwe areback totheresult W(t) W( ) =
− h i−h ∞ i
βǫR (t).
It is instructive to look at these relations also in the frequency domain. Applying the
one sided Fourier transform on both sides of the relation h(t) = βR˙ (t) and taking the
complex conjugate (i.e., multiplying by eiωt and integrating over t > 0), we get
where the last step is due to integration by parts. Upon taking the imaginary parts of both
sides, we get:
where S (ω) is the power spectrum of W(t) in equilibrium, that is, the Fourier transform
of R (τ). Equivalently, we have:
Example 8.4 An electric circuit. Consider the circuit in Fig. 20. The driving force is the voltage
source V(t) and the conjugate variable is Q(t) the of the capacitor. The resistors are considered
part of thermal environment. The voltage waveform is V(t) = ǫU( t). At time t = 0 , the voltage
across the capacitor is ǫ/2 and the energy is 1C(V + ǫ)2, whereas for t , it is 1CV2, so
2 r 2 → ∞ 2 r
the difference is ∆ = 1CV ǫ = 1Q ǫ, neglecting the O(ǫ2) term. According to the FDT then,
ζ(t)= 1βR (t), where the factor of 1/2 follows the one in ∆ . This then gives
In this case,
Im H( iω) = (8.4.17)
and finally,
Q 4+(ωRC)2
Thus, the thermal noise voltage across the capacitor is 4kTR/[4+(ωRC)2]. The same result can
be obtained, of course, using the method studied in “Random Signals”:
2kT Re R R = . (8.4.19)
(cid:26) (cid:27)
This concludes Example 8.4. (cid:3)
Figure 20: Electric circuit for Example 8.4.
Earlier, we have seen that W(t) W( ) responds to a determinstic (small) waveform
F(t) via a linear(ized) system with an impulse response h(t). By the same token, we can
think of the random part around the mean, W(t) W( ) , as the response of the same
system to a random input F (t) (thus, the total response is the superposition). If we wish
to think of our physical system in equilibrium as a linear(ized) system with input F (t) and
output W(t), then what would should the spectrum of the input process F (t) be in order
to comply with the last result? Denoting by S (ω) the spectrum of the input process, we
know from “Random Signals” that
and so comparing with (8.4.14), we have
This extends our earlier result concerning the spectrum of the driving white noise in case
the Brownian particle, where we obtained a spectral density of 2kTγ.
Example 8.5 – Second order linear system. For a second order linear system (e.g., a damped
harmonic oscillator),
the force F (t) is indeed conjugate to the variable W(t), which is the location, as required by the
FDT. Here, we have
In this case,
and so, we readily obtain
recovering the principle that the spectral density of the noise process is 2kT times the dissipative
coefficient γ of the system, which is responsible to the irreversible component. The difference
between this and the earlier derivation is that earlier, we assumed in advance that the input noise
process is whiteand we only computed its spectrallevel, whereas now, we have actually shown that
at least for a second order linear system like this, it must be white noise (as far as the classical
approximation holds).
Fromeq.(8.4.21),weseethatthethermalinteractionwiththeenvironment, whenreferred
to the inputofthesystem, hasaspectraldensityoftheformthatwecancalculate. Ingeneral,
it does not necessarily have to be a flat spectrum. Consider for example, an arbitrary electric
network consisting of one voltage source (in the role of F(t)) and a bunch of resistors and
capacitors. Suppose that our observable W(t) is the voltage across one of the capacitors.
Then, thereisacertaintransferfunctionH(iω)fromthevoltagesourcetoW(t). Thethermal
noise process is contributed by all resistors by considering equivalent noise sources (parallel
current sources or serial voltage sources) attached to each resistor. However, in order to
refer the contribution of these noise sources to the input F(t), we must calculate equivalent
noise sources which are in series with the given voltage source F(t). These equivalent noise
sources will no longer generate white noise processes, in general. For example, in the circuit
of Fig. 20, if an extra capacitor C would be connected in series to one of the resistors, then,
the contribution of the right resistor referred to the left one is not white noise.52
8.5 Johnson–Nyquist Noise in the Quantum–Mechanical Regime
As promised at the end of Subsection 8.3, we now return to the problematics of the formula
S (ω) = 2kTR when it comes to very high frequencies, namely, the electrical analogue to
the ultraviolet catastrophe. At very high frequencies, we are talking about very short waves,
much shorter than the physical sizes of the electric circuit.
The remedy to the unreasonable classical results in the high frequency range, is to view
the motion of electrons in a resistor as an instance of black–body radiation, but instead of
the three–dimensional case that we studied earlier, this time, we are talking about the one–
dimensional case. The difference is mainly thecalculationof thedensity ofstates. Consider a
long transmission line with characteristic impedance R of length L, terminating at both ends
by resistances R (see Fig. 21), so that the impedances are matched at both ends. Then any
voltage wave propagating along the transmission line is fully absorbed by the terminating
resistor without reflection. Thesystem resides inthermal equilibrium at temperatureT. The
52Exercise 8.8: Calculate its spectrum.
Figure 21: Transmission line of length L, terminated by resistances R at both ends.
resistor then can be thought of as a black–body radiator in one dimension. A voltage wave
of the form V(x,t) = V exp[i(κx ωt)] propagates along the transmission line with velocity
v = ω/κ, which depends on the capacitance and the inductance of the transmission line per
unit length. To count the possible modes, let us impose the periodic boundary condition
V(0,t) = V(L,t). Then κL = 2πn for any positive integer n. Thus, there are ∆n = ∆κ/2π
such modes per unit length in the frequency range between ω = vκ and ω+∆ω = v(κ+∆κ).
The mean energy of such a mode is given by
Since there are ∆n = ∆ω/(2πv) propagating modes per unit length in this frequency range,
the mean energy per unit time (i.e., the power) incident upon a resistor in this frequency
where L/v at the denominator is the travel time of the wave along the transmission line.
This is the radiation power absorbed by the resistor, which must be equal to the power
emitted by the resistor in this frequency range. Let the thermal voltage generated by the
resistor in the frequency range [ω,ω+∆ω] be denoted by V (t)[ω,ω+∆ω]. This voltage sets
up a current of V (t)[ω,ω+∆ω]/2R and hence an average power of V2(t)[ω,ω+∆ω] /4R.
Thus, the balance between the absorbed and the emitted power gives
h r i = · , (8.5.3)
h r i = (8.5.4)
h r i = 4R (8.5.5)
Taking the limit ∆f 0, the left–hand side becomes the one–sided spectral density of the
thermal noise, and so the two–sided spectral density is
S (ω) = 2R . (8.5.6)
We see then that when quantum–mechanical considerations are incorporated, the noise spec-
trum is no longer strictly flat. As long as ~ω kT, the denominator is very well approx-
imated by ~ω/kT, and so we recover the formula 2kTR, but for frequencies of the order
of magnitude of ω = ∆ kT/~, the spectrum falls off exponentially rapidly. So the quantum–
mechanical correction is to replace
kT = . (8.5.7)
⇒ e~ω/kT 1
At room temperature (T = 300oK), the cutoff frequency is f = ω /2π 6.2THz,53 so the
spectrum can be safely considered 2kTR flat over any frequency range of practical interest
from the engineering perspective.
What is the total RMS noise voltage generated by a resistor R at temperature T? The
total mean square noise voltage is
r ehf/kT 1
(cid:10) (cid:11) 4R(kT)2 xdx
4R(kT)2 xe xdx
∞ ∞ xe nxdx
53Recall that 1THz=1012Hz
4R(kT)2 ∞ 1
= , (8.5.8)
which is quadratic in T since both the (low frequency) spectral density and the effective
bandwidth are linear in T. The RMS is then
V = V2(t) = πkT, (8.5.9)
RMS h r i 3h ·
namely, proportional to temperature and to the square root of the resistance. To get an idea
of the order of magnitude, a resistor of 100Ω at temperature T = 300oK generates an RMS
thermal noise of about 4mV. The equivalent noise bandwidth is
B = = = f . (8.5.10)
2kTR 3h 3 ·
Exercise 8.9: Derive an expression for the autocorrelation function of the Johnson–Nyquist noise
in the quantum mechnical regime.
8.6 Other Noise Sources
In addition to thermal noise, that we have discussed thus far, there are other physical
mechanisms that generate noise in Nature in general, and in electronic circuits, in particular.
We will not cover them in great depth here, but only provide short descriptions.
Flicker noise, also known as 1/f noise, is a random process with a spectrum that falls off
steadily into the higher frequencies, with a pink spectrum. It occurs in almost all electronic
devices, and results from a variety of effects, though always related to a direct current.
According to the underlying theory, there are fluctuations in the conductivity due to the
superposition of many independent thermal processes of alternate excitation and relaxation
of certain defects (e.g., dopant atoms or vacant lattice sites). This means that every once
in a while, a certain lattice site or a dopant atom gets excited and it moves into a state of
higher energy for some time, and then it relaxes back to the lower energy state until the
next excitation. Each one of these excitation/relaxation processes can be modeled as a ran-
dom telegraph signal with a different time constant θ (due to different physical/geometric
characteristics) and hence contributes a Lorentzian spectrum parametrized by θ. The su-
perposition of these processes, whose spectrum is given by the integral of the Lorentzian
function over a range of values of θ (with a certain weight), gives rise to the 1/f behavior
over a wide range of frequencies. To see this more concretely in the mathematical language,
a random telegraph signal X(t) is given by X(t) = ( 1)N(t), where N(t) is a Poisson process
of rate λ. It is a binary signal where the level +1 can symbolize excitation and the level 1
designates relaxation. Here the dwell times between jumps are exponentially distributed.
The autocorrelation function is given by
(cid:10) ∞
k!
and so the spectrum is Lorentzian:
where the time constant is θ = 1/2λ and the cutoff frequency is ω = 2λ. Now, calculating
the integral
with g(θ) = 1/θ, yields a composite spectrum that is proportional to
− max − min
For ω 1/θ , using the approximation tan 1(x) x ( x 1), this is approximately
a constant. For ω 1/θ , using the approximation tan 1(x) π 1 ( x 1), this
is approximately proportional to 1/ω2. In between, in the range 1/θ ω 1/θ
(assuming that 1/θ 1/θ ), the behavior is accordiong to
1 π 1 1 π 1 π
(cid:18) max(cid:19) (cid:18) max (cid:19)
which is the 1/f behavior in this wide range of frequencies. There are several theories why
g(θ) should be inversely proportional to θ, but the truth is that they are not perfect, and
the issue of 1/f noise is not yet perfectly (and universally) understood.
Shot noiseinelectronicdevicesconsistsofunavoidablerandomstatisticalfluctuationsofthe
electric current in an electrical conductor. Random fluctuations are inherent when current
flows, as the current is a flow of discrete charges (electrons). The the derivation of the
spectrum of shot noise is normally studied in courses on random procsses.
Burst noise consists of sudden step–like transitions between two or more levels (non-
Gaussian), as high as several hundred microvolts, at random and unpredictable times. Each
shift in offset voltage or current lasts for several milliseconds, and the intervals between
pulses tend to be in the audio range (less than 100 Hz), leading to the term popcorn noise
for the popping or crackling sounds it produces in audio circuits.
Avalanche noise is the noise produced when a junction diode is operated at the onset
of avalanche breakdown, a semiconductor junction phenomenon in which carriers in a high
voltage gradient develop sufficient energy to dislodge additional carriers through physical
impact, creating ragged current flows.
9 A Brief Touch on Information Theory
9.1 Introduction – What is Information Theory About?
Our last topic in this course is about a very brief and concise description on the relation be-
tween statistical physics andinformationtheory, aresearch fieldpioneered byClaude Elwood
Shannon (1917–2001), whose seminal paper “A Mathematical Theory of Communications”
(1948) has established the landmark of this field.
In a nutshell, information theory is a science that focuses on the fundamental limits, on
the one hand, the achievable performance, on the other hand, concerning various information
processing tasks, including most notably:
1. Data compression (lossless/lossy).
2. Error correction coding (coding for protection against errors due to channel noise.
3. Encryption.
There are also additional tasks of information processing that are considered to belong under
the umbrella of information theory, like: signal detection, estimation (parameter estimation,
filtering/smoothing, prediction), information embedding, process simulation, extraction of
random bits, information relaying, and more.
Coreinformationtheory, which iscalledShannon theoryinthejargonoftheprofessionals,
is about coding theorems. It is associated with the development of computable formulas
that characterize the best performance that can possibly be achieved in these information
processing tasks under some (usually simple) assumptions on the probabilistic models that
governthedata,thechannelnoise, thesideinformation, thejammersifapplicable, etc. While
in most cases, this theory does not suggest constructive communication systems, it certainly
provides insights concerning the features that an optimal (or nearly optimal) communication
system must have. Shannon theory serves, first and foremost, as the theoretical basis for
modern digital communication engineering. That being said, much of the modern research
activityininformationtheoryevolves, notonlyaroundShannontheory,butalsoonthenever-
ending efforts to develop methodologies (mostly, specific code structures and algorithms) for
designing very efficient communication systems, which hopefully come close to the bounds
and the fundamental performance limits.
But the scope of information theory it is not limited merely to communication engineer-
ing: it plays a role also in computer science, and many other disciplines, one of them is
thermodynamics and statistical mechanics, which is the focus of these remaining lectures.
Often, information–theoretic problems are well approached from a statistical–mechanical
point of view. We will taste this very briefly in two examples of problems.
In the framework of this course, we will not delve into information theory too deeply, but
our purpose would be just to touch upon the interface of these two fields.
9.2 Entropy in Info Theory and in Thermo & Statistical Physics
Perhaps the first relation that crosses one’s mind is that in both fields there is a fundamental
notion of entropy. Actually, in information theory, the term entropy was coined in the
footsteps of the thermodynamic/statistical–mechanical entropy. Along this course, we have
seen already three (seemingly) different forms of the entropy: The first isthe thermodynamic
entropy defined, in its differential form as
which was first introduced by Clausius in 1850. The second is the statistical entropy
S = klnΩ, (9.2.2)
which was defined by Boltzmann in 1872. The third is yet another formula for the entropy
– the Gibbs formula for the entropy of the canonical ensemble:
S = k P(x)lnP(x) = k lnP(x) , (9.2.3)
which we encountered in Chapter 3.
It is virtually impossible to miss the functional resemblance between the last form above
and the information–theoretic entropy, a.k.a. the Shannon entropy, which is simply
H = P(x)log P(x) (9.2.4)
namely, the same expression as above exactly, just without the factor k and with the basis
of the logarithm being 2 rather than e. So they simply differ by an immaterial constant
factor. Indeed, this clear analogy was recognized already by Shannon and von Neumann.
The well–known anecdote on this tells that von Neumann advised Shannon to adopt this
term because it would provide him with “... a great edge in debates because nobody really
knows what entropy is anyway.”
What is the information–theoretic meaning of entropy? It turns out that it has many
information–theoretic meanings, but the most fundamental one concerns optimum compress-
ibilityofdata. Supposethat we have abunch ofi.i.d. randomvariables, x ,x ,...,x , taking
values in a discrete set, say, the components of the microstate in a quantum system of non–
interacting particles, and we want to represent the microstate information digitally (in bits)
as compactly as possible, without losing any information – in other words, we require the
ability to fully reconstruct the data from the compressed binary representation. How short
can this binary representation be?
Let us look at the following example. Suppose that each x takes values in the set
A,B,C,D , independently with probabilities
Clearly, when translating the letters into bits, the naive approach would be to say the
following: we have 4 letters, so it takes 2 bits to distinguish between them, by mapping, say
lexicographically, as follows:
A 00; B 01; C 10; D 11.
This would mean representing the list of x’s using 2 bits per–symbol. Very simple. But is
this the best thing one can do?
It turns out that the answer is negative. Intuitively, if we can assign variable–length
codewords to the various letters, using shorter codewords for more probably symbols and
longer codewords for the less frequent ones, we might be able to gain something. In our
example, A is most probable, while C and D are the least probable, so how about the
following solution:
A 0; B 10; C 110; D 111.
Now the average number of bits per symbol is:
1+ 2+ 3+ 3 = 1.75.
2 · 4 · 8 · 8 ·
We have improved the average bit rate by 12.5%. Splendid. Is this now the best one can do
or can we improve even further?
It turns out that this time, the answer is affirmative. Note that in this solution, each
letter has a probability of the form 2 ℓ (ℓ – positive integer) and the length of the assigned
codeword is exactly ℓ (for A, ℓ = 1, for B – ℓ = 2, and for C and D, ℓ = 3). In other words,
the length of the codeword for each letter is the negative logarithm of its probability, so the
average number of bits per symbol is P(x)[ log P(x)], which is exactly the
x A,B,C,D − 2
entropy H of the information source. OPne of the basic coding theorems of informationtheory
tells us that we cannot compress to any coding rate below the entropy and still expect to be
able to reconstruct the x’s perfectly. But why is this true?
We will not get into a rigorous proof of this statement, but we will make an attempt to
give a statistical–mechanical insight into it. Consider the microstate x = (x ,...,x ) and
let us think of the probability function
P(x ,...,x ) = P(x ) = exp (ln2) log [1/P(x )] (9.2.5)
1 N i − 2 i
as an instance of the canonical ensemble at inverse temperature β = ln2, where Hamilto-
nian is additive, namely, (x ,...,x ) = N ǫ(x ), with ǫ(x ) = log P(x ). Obviously,
E 1 N i=1 i i − 2 i
Z(β) = Z(ln2) = 1, so the free energy is ePxactly zero here. Now, by the weak law of large
numbers, for most realizations of the microstate x,
N i ≈ h i i h− 2 i i
so the average ‘internal energy’ is NH. It is safe to consider instead the corresponding
microcanonical ensemble, which is equivalent as far as macroscopic averages go. In the
microcanonical ensemble, we would then have:
for every realization of x. How many bits would it take us to represent x in this microcanon-
ical ensemble? Since all x’s are equiprobable in the microcanonical ensemble, we assign to
all x’s binary codewords of the same length, call it L. In order to have a one–to–one map-
ping between the set of accessible x’s and binary strings of representation, 2L, which is the
number of binary strings of length L, should be no less than the number of microstates x
of the microcanonical ensemble. Thus,
L log x : ǫ(x ) = NH = log Ω(H), (9.2.8)
(cid:12) i=1 (cid:12)
(cid:12) X (cid:12)
(cid:12) (cid:12)
but the r.h.s. is exactly related(cid:12)(up to a constant factor)(cid:12)to Boltzmann’s entropy associated
with ‘internal energy’ at the level of NH. Now, observe that the free energy of the original,
canonical ensemble, which is zero, is related to the entropy lnΩ(H) via the Legendre relation
lnZ lnΩ βE, which is
0 = lnZ(ln2) lnΩ(H) NHln2 (9.2.9)
lnΩ(H) NH ln2 (9.2.10)
log Ω(H) NH, (9.2.11)
and therefore, by (9.2.8):
L log Ω(H) NH, (9.2.12)
which means that the length of the binary representation essentially cannot be less than
NH, namely, a compression rate of H bits per component of x. So we have seen that the
entropy has a very concrete information–theoretic meaning, and in fact, it is not the only
one, but we will not delve into this any further here.
9.3 Statistical Physics of Optimum Message Distributions
We next study another, very simple paradigm of a communication system, studied by Reiss
[11] and Reiss and Huang [12]. The analogy and the parallelism to the basic concepts of
statistical mechanics, that were introduced earlier, will be quite evident from the choice
of the notation, which is deliberately chosen to correspond to that of analogous physical
quantities.
Consider a continuous–time communication system that includes a noiseless channel,
with capacity
C = lim 2 , (9.3.1)
where M(E) is the number of distinct messages (and log of this is the number of bits)
that can be transmitted over a time interval of E seconds. Over a duration of E seconds,
L information symbols are conveyed, so that the average transmission time per symbol is
σ = E/L seconds per symbol. In the absence of any constraints on the structure of the
encoded messages, M(E) = rL = rE/σ, where r is the channel input–output alphabet size.
Thus, C = (logr)/σ bits per second.
Consider now the thermodynamic limit of L . Suppose that the L symbols of
duration E form N words, where by ‘word’, we mean a certain variable–length string of
channel symbols. The average transmission time per word is then ǫ = E/N. Suppose further
thatthecodedefinesacertainsetofwordtransmissiontimes: Wordnumberitakesǫ seconds
to transmit. What is the optimum allocation of word probabilities P that would support
full utilization of the channel capacity? Equivalently, given the probabilities P , what are
theoptimumtransmissiontimes ǫ ? Forsimplicity, wewillassumethat ǫ arealldistinct.
Suppose that each word appearsN times in the entire message. Denoting N = (N ,N ,...),
P = N /N, and P = (P ,P ,...), the total number of messages pertaining to a given N is
N!
where H(P) is the Shannon entropy pQertaining to the probability distribution P. Now,
: PXi Niǫi=E
This sum is dominated by the maximum term, namely, the maximum–entropy assignment
of relative frequencies
P = (9.3.4)
where β > 0 is a Lagrange multiplier chosen such that P ǫ = ǫ, which gives
For β = 1, this is in agreement with our earlier observation that the optimum message
length assignment in variable–length lossless data compression is according to the negative
logarithm of the probability.
Suppose now that ǫ are kept fixed and consider a small perturbation in P , denoted
= (dP )lnP
= d k P lnP
!
= Tds, (9.3.6)
where we have defined T = 1/(kβ) and s = k P lnP . The free energy per particle is
given by P
f = ǫ Ts = kT lnZ, (9.3.7)
which is related to the redundancy of the code.
In [11], there is also an extension of this setting to the case where N is not fixed, with
correspondence to the grand—canonical ensemble. However, we will not include it here.