Stereo pairs in Astrophysics
Fr´ed´eric Vogt1 and Alexander Y. Wagner1
Abstract 1 Introduction
Stereoscopic visualization is seldom used in Astro-
physical publications and presentations compared to Stereoscopy consistsingivingadepthperceptionoutof
other scientific fields, e.g., Biochemistry, where it has 2D material to the viewer, and the concept behind it is
been recognized as a valuable tool for decades. We fairly simple: it requires sending distinct and carefully
put forth the view that stereo pairs can be a useful chosen images to each eye, without one eye noticing
tool for the Astrophysics community in communicat- the images intended for the other. The notion of depth
ing a truer representation of astrophysical data. Here, perception, or stereopsis, has been discussed as early
we review the main theoretical aspects of stereoscopy, as A.D. 280 by Euclid (Okoshi 1976). While there has
and present a tutorial to easily create stereo pairs us- been some experimentation using sketching techniques
ing Python. We then describe how stereo pairs pro- before 1800 (Norling 1953), the invention of photogra-
vide a way to incorporate 3D data in 2D publications phy by Niepce (Smith 1877; Perrier 1934) in the be-
of standard journals. We illustrate the use of stereo ginning of the 19th Century marked the real start of
pairs with one conceptual and two Astrophysical sci- extensive experimentation with stereoscopy. Wheat-
ence examples: an integral field spectroscopy study of stone(1838)assembledoneoftheearliestknownstereo-
a supernova remnant, and numerical simulations of a scopes,butBrewsterisusuallyattributedtheconstruc-
relativistic AGN jet. We also use these examples to tion of the first practical viewing device, now referred
make the case that stereo pairs are not merely an os- to as the Brewster stereoscope (Norling 1953).
tentatious way to present data, but an enhancement As predicted by Scripture (1899), stereoscopy en-
in the communication of scientific results in publica- countered quite a strong success in these early times,
tions because they provide the reader with a realistic when stereoscopes where made widely available, be-
view of multi-dimensional data, be it of observational cause the production of stereo pairs become easier as
or theoretical nature. In recognition of the ongoing 3D photographic techniques evolved. Darrah (1977) dis-
expansioninthecommercialsector,weadvocateanin- cusses these early ages (from 1851 to 1935) of stere-
creased use of stereo pairs in Astrophysics publications oscopy in depth, and we refer the interested reader to
andpresentationsasafirststeptowardsnewinteractive his work for a detailed overview of the various applica-
and multi-dimensional publication methods. tions of stereo pairs in those times.
Although the principle behind stereoscopy has re-
Keywords Data Analysis and Techniques – Tutorial; mained the same ever since, there have been regular
Stereoscopy – Stereo pairs improvements to the methods of production and visu-
alization. In fact, the interest in stereoscopy has been
closely linked to the development of both imaging and
Fr´ed´ericVogtandAlexanderY.Wagner
visualization techniques (Okoshi 1976), and peaks of
1Mount Stromlo and Siding Spring Observatories, Research
SchoolofAstronomyandAstrophysics,AustralianNationalUni- interest arose as new production and/or visualization
versity,CotterRoad,WestonCreek,ACT2611,Australia. tools were invented. Beside the evolution of photo-
graphic techniques, the advent of computers and their
ability to produce accurate and detailed stereo pairs
represents one such development which resulted in a
peak of interest for stereoscopy that started in the 70’.
]MI.hp-ortsa[
1v5172.7011:viXra
Several viewing devices have also been developed Stereo pairs are another type of stereoscopic solu-
over the years, with one common aim: increasing the tion that has been employed to accommodate multi-
comfort and simplicity of stereoscopy for the viewer. dimensional data sets in publications. One of the first
In comparison to individual stereographs, the develop- AstronomicalstereopairspublisheddepictedtheMoon
mentofspecializedglasses(red-blue,polarised,shutter- and was created as early as 1862 by L.M. Rutherford
type) made stereo pairs easier to visualise. Lately, new (Darrah 1977). By taking two subsequent images of
stereoscopic technologies are being integrated into con- theMoonwithasixdaysinterval,heobtainedastrong
sumerproductsatafastpace;movies,televisions,gam- enough change in orientation to induce a reasonable
ing consoles, cell phones, advertisement panels, and so feeling of depth. More recently, the advent of comput-
on. Stereoscopy has become especially popular in the ers expanded the possible applications of stereo pairs
movie industry in the past few years with the advent in Astrophysics. For example, Yahil (1980) used them
of digital 3D cinemas. One should nonetheless not for- to display the position of the galaxies in the Revised
get that stereo movies themselves are not recent: The Shapley-AmesCatalog; MartinetandMagnenat(1981)
PowerofLove,inanaglyph3D,firstairedin1922(Zone andMartinetetal.(1981)usedstereopairstoillustrate
2007). theshapeofinvariantsurfacesintheirstudyofdynam-
In the scientific community, stereoscopy has been ical problems with 3 degrees of freedom; van de Wey-
known and used in the past, but the extent to which gaert and Icke (1989) and Icke and van de Weygaert
it has been exploited in the presentation of data differs (1991) created stereo pairs to illustrate the Voronoi
fromfieldtofield. InAstrophysics,stereoscopyhasnot model they used to describe the asymptotic distribu-
been used extensively, despite the multi-dimensional tion of the cosmic mass on 10-200 Mpc scales; Rhee et
nature of many data sets. Often, a data cube is sliced al. (1991) produced stereo pairs to show a 3D map of
or projected in order to obtain 2D publishable pictures theirsampleofAbellclusters;KoutchmyandMoloden-
and graphs. The issue of displaying and publishing skii (1992) published a stereo pair of the Solar Corona
multi-dimensional data sets has been identified in the during the 1991 Solar eclipse; Sofue (1994) illustrated
past, and some interesting (non-stereoscopic) solutions thestrippingoftheLMCHIandmolecularclouds; Sel-
havebeenproposed. Cosmologistsworkingonthetime man et al. (1999a,b) created stereo pairs of the colour-
evolution of the large scale structures in the Universe magnitudediagramsoftheionizingcluster30Doradus;
using 3D movies to illustrate their simulations results Sirko et al. (2004) used stereo pairs to display the 3D
is one example (e.g. Holliman 2010). Recently, Barnes position of the blue horizontal-branch (BHB) stars dis-
andFluke(2008)describedhowdocumentsinanAdobe covered in the SDSS (York et al. 2000) spectroscopic
Portable Document Format (.pdf)arenowabletocon- survey; and Vogt and Dopita (2010) and Vogt and Do-
tain animated 3D models, and described how this can pita(2011)usedstereopairsincomplementtotheirin-
be used to create interactive 3D graphs. In addition, teractive 3D maps of the oxygen-rich material in SNR
Barnes et al. (2006) developed a 3D plotting library 1E 0102.2-7219 and SNR N132D. These examples do
specifically tailored to the needs of the Astrophysics notrepresentanexhaustivelistofalltheworkthathas
community. Flukeetal.(2006)alsodiscussandpresent been published using stereo pairs in Astrophysics, but
alternative advanced image displays which might po- illustrate the wealth of topics that can profit and make
tentially take on a more significant place within the use of this technique.
Astrophysics community in the future. Nonetheless, the use of stereo pairs in Astrophysics
Yet, stereoscopictechniquesarenotunknowntoAs- is less prevalent than in other fields. In Biochemistry,
trophysicists. Planetary scientists, for example, use for example, they have been an important tool to pub-
red-blue anaglyphs. In the case of Mars (e.g. Neukum lish the 3D shapes of molecules from the beginning of
et al. 2004; Keszthelyi et al. 2008), several probes the computer-era (e.g. Hamilton 1970; Hardman and
and remote sensing satellites were equipped with spe- Ainsworth 1973) until today (e.g Pujadas and Palau
cial stereo cameras, for example the European Space 2001; Landsberg et al. 2006; Xiang et al. 2010).
Agency Mars Express satellite and its High Resolu- WebelievethatstereopairsareavaluabletoolinAs-
tionStereoCameraExperiment(Jaumannetal.2007), trophysics too, which recent 3D innovations may help
the Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter and its High Reso- renew. Inotherwords,wearguethatstereoscopyhasa
lution Imaging Science Experiment (HiRISE) camera great but under-exploited potential for the publication
(McEwen et al. 2007), the Phoenix lander and its Sur- of multi-dimensional Astrophysical data sets and can
face Stereo Imager (SSI) (Lemmon et al. 2008) or the be a valuable complement to more standard plotting
imager for the Mars Pathfinder (MPI) mission (Smith methods, especially with today’s computing abilities.
et al. 1997). In Sec. 2, after introducing the free-viewing technique,
we discuss the various theoretical ways to construct a anaglyphs(red-blue,polarized)needtobelookedatus-
stereopair. InSect.3, wepresentourtrade-offmethod ingtheappropriateglasses;stereopairs,andautostere-
to efficiently create stereo pairs of data cubes using ograms (Tyler and Clarke 1990) require the so-called
Python. We then illustrate the unique features of free-viewing technique. This latter way of looking at
stereo pairs as compared to standard plots in three dif- stereo pairs has the advantage that it does not require
ferentexamplesinSect.4: aconceptualoneinSect.4.1, any special equipment, provided that the stereo pair
one based on observational data in Sect. 4.2 and one is in the correct format. This advantage makes it the
basedontheoreticaldatainSect.4.3,forwhichtheuse best method to visualize stereo pairs in publications,
of stereo pairs provides critical scientific information. as a majority of the readers accessing the article in its
Wediscusstherolethatstereopairscanplayregarding online or printed version will be able to directly get a
future developments of 3D visualization techniques in feeling of depth. With the left and right images side-
Sec. 5, and summarize our conclusions in Sect. 6. by-side, it is up to the reader to have each eye looking
at one image only, thus recreating the 3D feeling. Ob-
viously, this requires the reader to be familiar with the
2 A theoretical overview of stereo pairs technique. However, the extended usage of stereo pairs
in other fields, as mentioned in Sect. 1, gives us confi-
Several terms, such as stereoscopy, stereopsis, stereo dencethatthisfactshouldnotrepresentanobstacleto
pairs and stereograms, are used throughout the liter- the popularization of stereo pairs in Astrophysics. The
ature, sometimes with slightly different meanings. To weboffersavastresourceofexamplesfortrainingone’s
avoidconfusioninthisarticle,wereferto; stereopsis as ability to see the 3D images from stereo pairs rapidly,
the depth perception reconstructed by the brain, stere- andmanywebsitesprovidetutorialsandsuggestionson
oscopy as the science of inducing depth perception us- how to make it work 1.
ing2Dmaterialofanytype,stereograms asanytypeof There are two ways to look at stereo pairs : par-
image capable of inducing a depth feeling when viewed allel and cross-eyed. The names refer to the required
with the proper material, and stereo pair as a specific orientation of the eyes, which depends on the position
typeofstereogram,wherethelefthandside(theimage of the LHS and RHS images within the pair: parallel
for the left eye; LHS) and right hand side (the image viewing requires the LHS image to be on the left (and
fortherighteye; RHS)imagesarelocatedside-by-side. the RHS image on the right) while cross-eyed requires
them to be swapped. Whether one technique is more
2.1 Visualizing a stereo pair: the free-viewing comfortablethantheotherisamatterofpersonalopin-
technique ion and training. In Fig. 1, we present for comparison
two stereo pairs of the same object - two intersecting
At any time, our brain interprets the simultaneous im- spheres of different radius - from the same viewpoint.
ages from each of our eyes, combines them and auto- The top pair is designed for parallel viewing, while the
matically reconstructs a 3D image. The reconstruction bottom one requires the cross-eyed technique to be vi-
algorithm is completely unconscious, and it feels nat- sualized properly.
ural to see our environment in 3D. If one looks at a Looking at a stereo pair for the first time can be
structure at a distance of ∼60 cm for example, it will quitechallengingandthereexistsseveralwaystomake
beseenbytherighteyeasifithadbeenrotatedby∼5 it work. After experimenting with some students and
degrees as compared to the left eye’s view. Hence, the astronomers of the Mount Stromlo Observatory, many
very same 3D feeling can be achieved by sending two havingnopreviousexperiencewithstereopairs,wepro-
different 2D pictures of the same object to the left and vide some suggestions that might help when looking at
right eye, if the pictures are taken from two different a stereo pair for the first time :
view angles. As long as the brain believes that it is
Parallel viewing : Holding the printed page in front
looking at a real object, its automatic 3D reconstruc-
ofyou,lookatthehorizon. Onceinfocus,liftupthe
tion algorithm will work. The main challenge is to be
page so that the stereo pair reaches the level of your
able to provide a different image to each eye without
eyes, but without adjusting the focus onto the page
the other noticing it.
- the focus remains at the horizon, however, your
As we mentioned previously in Sect. 1, several tech-
attention is on the page. If done correctly, the left
niques exist to achieve this goal, such as stereoscopes,
and right images will merge into a central 3D image
glasses, or auto-stereoscopic screens (for which no
glasses are required). Depending on the visualization
it.ch/TheMolecularLevel/0Help/StereoView.html#con
more comfortable with the cross-eyed technique to ob-
tain a 3D impression of every stereo pairs within this
article. Generally,stereopairsinBiochemistrypublica-
tions are of the parallel type, a tradition which is most
likely a remnant of the necessity to accommodate the
useofviewingdevicesinthe70’s,asdescribedbySmith
(1971). There is however no fixed rules, and the stereo
pair constructed by Sirko et al. (2004) of the position
of BHB stars in the SDSS spectroscopic survey is for
example a cross-eyed pair.
2.2 Constructing a stereo pair: the Toe-in and Offset
There exist two main techniques to build a stereo pair,
Fig. 1 : Parallel (top) and cross-eyed (bottom) stereo
dependingontheprojectionmethodusedtoobtainthe
pairs of two intersecting spheres of different radii.
left and right images. The first one, known as the Toe-
in method, mimics the human eyes’ behaviour, and is
inthatsensethemostobvioustechnique. Theconcept,
of the double sphere. If your eyes focus on the page
illustrated in Fig. 2, is as follows : the LHS and RHS
when you movie it up, try to relax them. If you find
projections of the 3D scene are created by projecting
it difficult to see the 3D image (so that you can read
it along two view vectors rotated by δ =∼2-5◦ along
the axis labels), it might help to convince yourself 0
the azimuthal angle. The value of δ is somewhat ar-
that you are looking at something real. 0
bitrary, and a higher angle will result in an increased
Cross-eyed viewing : Place the printed page on a
depthperceptionfortheviewer. Ourownexperimenta-
flat surface, and position your head straight above
tions,aswellasvariousonlinetutorials,indicatethata
thestereopair. Bringonefingerinbetweenthepage
value of δ =5◦ works well. This freedom in the choice
and your eyes, so that its tip is located just below 0
of δ is also reflected in Biochemistry stereo pairs, for
the pair, in the middle. Focusing on your finger tip 0
which several values are being used throughout the lit-
will merge the background left and right images into
erature;2◦ (Hayman1987),3◦ (BerryandBaker2010),
a central 3D one. If they do not merge properly, try
5◦ (Robinson 1989; Stockert 1994), 6◦ (Hayman 1987;
adjustingtheheightofyourfinger. Thelaststepcon-
Stockert 1994) and 10◦ (Stockert 1994).
sist in removing the finger while keeping the central
3D image of the stereo pair, and might require some
concentration/practice.
For both techniques, the alignment of the head is
important - a slight rotation will have for consequence
that the LHS and RHS will not overlap properly when
merging them. With some experience, stereo pairs can
be viewed on paper as well as on a computer screen.
Our own experience as well as that of astronomers and
students at the Mount Stromlo Observatory show that
getting the eyes in the correct position becomes eas-
ier with practice, ultimately becoming almost an auto-
matic adjustment.
Inthisarticle,weshallonlyusestereopairsdesigned Fig. 2 : Geometry for the construction of Offset (left)
for parallel viewing, which is the most comfortable and and Toe-in (right) stereo pairs. LHS and RHS projec-
natural technique for most of the people we have asked tions of the original 3D data set are created along two
around us. Note that looking at a stereo pair with different view vectors.
the wrong technique will have the consequence of re-
verting the depth axis (i.e. flipping the object back to ThereareseveralissueswiththeToe-inmethod,one
front). While using the appropriate viewing technique of the principal being vertical parallax due to keyston-
is recommended, this fact nevertheless enables people ing. Because the projections are taken at an angle,
successive planes perpendicular to the viewer will be from 3.5 cm to 5 cm depending on the stereo pair, and
slightlydistorted. ThedistortionisinvertedintheLHS it is a matter of personal opinion as to which value is
and RHS images. As a result, when merging the two most comfortable. Increasing the inter-image distance
images, there will be a mismatch in the outer points, above 6 cm is not advisable, as the stereo pair might
resulting in a blurred image. It should be noted that become harder to visualize for people with a smaller
keystoningiscloselyrelatedtothedistanceofthecam- interpupillary distance than average.
era to the object, and is more important when being
close from the 3D scene. The second issue with the
Toe-in method lies in the fact that the eyes will have 3 Constructing a stereo pair : a
to adjust from a convergent to a divergent position in Python/Matplotlib solution
order to scan the depth dimension. For extended ob-
jectsthiscanresultinstrongdiscomfortfortheviewers, For stereo pairs to be recognized as a valuable tool by
and even an impossibility to merge the left and right the Astrophysics community requires them to be ex-
images if the converging/diverging angle becomes too tremely easy to create, implement and link to the data
important. Woods et al. (1993) discuss the various dis- set. Let us consider the 3D data set used to produce
tortions present in stereo pairs in great details, and we Fig. 1, which can be seen as a cloud of points in 3D
refertheinterestedreadertohisarticleformoredetails. space. Thereexistmanymethodsinordertoeasilypro-
TheOffset(orOff-axis)methodaddressesandsolves duce stereo pairs from such a data cube, and it would
the problems of the Toe-in projection, and is in that be impossible to list them all here. Some commercial
sense sometimes considered to be more correct. In this softwarepackagescanproducestereopairswithasingle
case, the LHS and RHS cameras look at the 3D scene mouseclick-thestereopairsshowninSec.4.3werefor
in parallel directions, and offset by a distance η. This example produced with the VisIt software. Alterna-
method does not create any keystoning, and ensures tively, many scientists have developed their own soft-
that the eyes remain in the same position when scan- ware, specifically tailored to their own data type and
ning the depth dimension of the reconstructed 3D pic- format. Such customized or commercial software are
ture. An illustration of the method is shown in Fig. 2. capable of creating excellent stereo pairs, and are usu-
One of the inherent drawbacks of this method is that allydesignedwellenoughnottohavetoosteeplearning
the outside regions of the LHS and RHS fields do not curves.
overlap - and hence must be taken off the final image. Here, we propose an alternative, off-the-shelf, effi-
ChoosingbetweentheToe-inandtheOffsetmethod cient way to produce stereo pairs using the program-
to create stereo pairs is entirely up to the creator of ming language Python. This method, which we will
the pair. As we will discuss in the next Section, the refer to as the simplified Toe-in (sTi) is based on our
Toe-in method can provide excellent stereo pairs un- own experimentation, and isextremelystraightforward
der certain circumstances ; the stereo pairs shown in toimplement, evenforpeoplewithlittle/noexperience
Fig. 1 have for example been created using the Toe-in with this language. Furthermore, creating stereo pairs
projection method, and in the Biochemistry literature, withPythongrantsaccesstoalargecollectionofnon-
many tutorials describing the creation of stereo pairs plottingmodulestoworkonthedatacubebeforehand.
use the Toe-in method (e.g. Hayman 1987; Robinson This provides the more advanced user with the free-
1989; Stockert 1994; Berry and Baker 2010). Further- dom to potentially reduce, sort, fit and clean the data
more, sometimes, intrinsic limitations of the software setbeforecreatingastereopair-astrongadvantageas
orprogramminglanguageusedtocreatethestereopair compared to commercial software which often requires
might require a trade-off between feasibility and qual- specific input, and does not enable direct data interac-
ity, as we will show in Sec. 3. tion.
Thelaststeprequiredtoconstructastereopaircon- Our sTi method is based on the Toe-in projection
sists in placing the LHS and RHS images side-by-side. described previously, but accounts for current limita-
The distance between the two images is not critical. tion in the Matplotlib plotting module, in which
This reflect the fact that the interpupillary distance several projection parameters are currently hard-coded
is not uniform across the population, but varies with and cannot be accessed easily. The required functions
age, gender, and race. Specifically, Dodgson (2004) are located within the mplot3d toolkit2, and are de-
mentions a mean interpupillary distance of 63 mm for signed to create a 2D projection out of a 3D scene.
adults, withthevastmajoritylyingwithina50-75mm
range. In this article, we have used point-to-point sep-
2see the online documentation for a detailed description :
arations (between the LHS and RHS images) ranging
Specifically, the Axes3D instance, creating the plot- • easiertoimplementinPythonthantheproperToe-
ting area, takes in two parameters, the elevation θ and in method (which requires the modification of the
the azimuth φ, both in degrees. Creating an sTi stereo source code).
pair is then a 3-steps process :
The hard-coded parameters within mplot3d cause
1: Createtwoside-by-side(using subplot)plots, each novisibleverticalparallaxorothervisualdefectsinsTi
with the Axes3D instance. stereo pairs.
2: For a viewpoint located at (φ 0 ;θ 0 ), set the left plot Wehaveaskedsomestudentsandastronomersatthe
viewpoint to (φ 0 −2.5◦;θ 0 ) and the right plot view- MountStromloObservatorytotestoursTistereopairs.
point to (φ 0 +2.5◦;θ 0 ) NoneofthemfoundthesTipairsmoretiringordifficult
3: Printthedatausingtheappropriatemplot3dfunc- to visualize, with a very satisfactory depth impression.
tion, such as scatter3D for a cloud of points, or Most of them also noted that even if the depth percep-
contour3D for isosurfaces. tion in sTi pairs is degraded beyond |θ | ∼ 50◦ com-
pared to Toe-in pairs, it does not vanishes completely.
This method is a trade-off : Toe-in or Offset stereo
pairs cannot presently be created with Matplotlib Inthatsense,oursuggestedsTimethodcanbeusedfor
easily, unlike sTi stereo pairs. Especially, implement- any viewpoint with satisfactory depth impression and
ing the Toe-in method requires the modification of the reasonable comfort for the viewer.
source code of the Axes3d function3.
But the sTi simplicity comes at a price. For view-
points with no elevation (θ = 0◦), the sTi method 4 Application examples for stereo pairs
is identical to the Toe-in technique. However, errors
both in the LHS/RHS images orientation, as well as We illustrate the role that stereoscopy, in the form
in their azimuthal separation, are introduced with in- of stereo pairs, can play in a publication with three
creasing values of |θ |. For completeness, we describe examples; conceptual, observational, and theoretical.
those issues in detail in the Appendix A, and compare Clearly, the range of applications for stereoscopy in
sTi stereo pairs with Toe-in and Offset stereo pairs for Astrophysics is much larger than those we are about
different elevations. The comparisons show that the to present, and the publications mentioned in Sec. 1
sTi method delivers very similar results to the Toe-in highlight the fact that stereo pairs can be used for al-
methodforelevationashighas|θ |∼50◦. Beyondthis most any type of multi-dimensional data set, e.g., 3D
limit, the depth perception is reduced compared to the maps and structures, 3D iso-surfaces, N-body simula-
Toe-in method. Comparing with the Offset method re- tions and trajectories, cosmological simulations, mag-
veals that the 3D structure of the object is increased netic and other field maps, 3D function fitting, color-
and better revealed in the sTi method, which makes magnitude diagrams, hydrodynamic simulations and
the latter more suitable for the publication of multi- complex (e.g. turbulent) structures.
dimensionaldatasets. Inotherwords, iftheobjectap-
pears, with the Offset technique, to be popping out of 4.1 Conceptual example: intersecting spheres
the screen, it does not contain itself much depth infor-
mation. Peterka et al. (2009) reached a similar conclu- As mentioned in Section 1, stereoscopy, in this case in
sion when building a stereoscopic movie of 3D simula- theformofstereopairs,isdifferentfromstandardplots
tions of a core-collapse supernova (Blondin et al. 2003) inthatittransmitsafeelingofdepthtotheviewer. Let
: ” [The Offset technique] ... created a plausible fac- us illustrate this advantage with a practical example.
simile of 3D. However, the trained observer noticed the In Fig. 3, we present three stereo pairs of the same
flatnessinthecenterofthesphere,andwedidnotwant object, two intersecting spheres of different radius. In
torelyon2Ddepthcuessuchaslightingandshadingto each case, the two spheres’ symmetry axis is in the XZ
convey 3D information.” Hence, the Toe-in, and in our plane, and tilted by 45 degrees with respect to the Z
casethesTitechnique,isrecommendedforthecreation axis.
of stereo pairs in Astrophysics. It is: Several observations can be made at this point.
First, stereo pairs work both in color or greyscale. Sec-
• more efficient at providing a depth structure to the
ond, stereo pairs provide the reader with a true feeling
data as compared to the Offset method.
of depth, and unambiguously convey the orientation of
thestructure. Inthecaseofthisdouble-sphere,theuse
3We hope to eventually include our source code update in an
ofastereopairremovestheambiguitythatariseswhen
upcoming release of Matplotlib. In the meantime, a copy of
ourmodifiedAxes3dfunction,thatenablesthecreationofToe- lookingatasingleimageonly,inwhichcasethespheres
instereopairs,canbeobtainedfromfvogt@mso.anu.edu.au could be seen as being oriented in the XZ or YZ plane.
4.2 Observational example : SNR N132D in the LMC
Vogt and Dopita (2011) used the Wide Field Spec-
trograph (Dopita et al. 2007, 2010) at Siding Spring
Observatory to image the Young Supernova Remnant
(YSNR) N132D located in the Large Magellanic Cloud
(LMC).Theinitialdatacubeaxisunitsare(X[arcsec],
Y[arcsec],λ[˚A]),andbystudyingthe[OIII]forbidden
line at λ5007 ˚A, and its blue- and red-shifted features,
they can identify the oxygen-rich knots in the YSNR,
and obtain their radial velocities. The data cube axes
are then transformed to (X[arcsec], Y[arcsec], v [km
s−1]). AssumingadistancetotheLMCof50kpc(from
van den Bergh 1999), and an age of ∼2500 years, they
transformed their third data cube axis to a spatial di-
mension. Thus, they obtained an accurate 3D spatial
mapwithaxes(X[pc],Y[pc],Z[pc])oftheoxygen-rich
filaments in SNR N132D. Stereo pairs of this 3D map
are shown in Fig. 4.
Fig. 3 : Stereopairsoftwointersectingspheresofdif-
ferentradius, showninblackandwhite(top)andcolor
(middleandbottom). Ineachcase,thetwospheresori-
entation axis is in a XZ plane, and tilted at 45 degrees
with respect to the Z axis. The orientation is best re-
vealed in the 3D reconstruction using the free-viewing
technique.
The use of colors may also help lift the orientation de-
generacy: inthebottompair,plottingthegreensphere Fig.4 : 3Dstereoscopicmapsoftheoxygenrichejecta
above thepinkonedoessuggestthattheaxisliesinthe in SNR N132D, viewed from the NNE and +10◦ eleva-
XZ plane. However, in some cases, it might not always tionwithrespecttotheplaneofthesky(top),andfrom
be possible to define the order in which the objects are theNNWand+10◦ elevation(bottom). Thescalesare
plotted (or printed) by color. In the middle pair, we given in pc. Adapted from Vogt and Dopita (2011).
have intentionally plotted the pink sphere above the
green, which then suggest, when looking at only one of Stereo pairs are one very useful way to fully under-
the image, that the rotational axis lies in a YZ plane. stand the true nature of this SNR. Vogt and Dopita
In that case, stereo viewing is perfect to correct this (2011) have used projections of their 3D map, that
wrong feeling. In 3D, the middle pair looks essentially showed the clumpy structure of the ejecta, as well as
identical to the bottom one, with the rotational axis hints of the ring-like structure of the ejecta. They also
lying in the XZ plane (i.e. the big, green sphere is on created an interactive 3D map, that enables the reader
top in all three cases). While this example is rather to zoom, pan, rotate and fly around and through their
simple, it nevertheless illustrates some key advantages 3D map. Stereo pairs, together with those others visu-
thatstereopairshaveoversingleprojectedimages. We alization methods, confirmed the presence of the ring
reinforce this point with stereo pairs of more complex structure, and ruled out any perspective effects due to
shapes presented in the next sections. theprojectionofthe3Dmapona2Dplane. Thestereo
pairsareveryefficientinshowing thisringtothereader,
comparedto,e.g.,amontageofslices. Thisisabigad-
vantageinthecaseofSNRN132D,forwhichtheactual
shape of the ejecta has been subject to interpretation
since the discovery of the remnant (see Lasker 1980;
Morse et al. 1995; Vogt and Dopita 2011). Everyone
can see the ring, and the impression of depth given by
stereopairsisavaluablecomplementtotheinteractive
3D map.
Those stereo pairs have been created with Python
usingthesTitechniquedescribedinSect.3. Thewhole
code, that takes as an input the data cube in a .fits
format,containslessthan50lines,ofwhichonly10are
actually responsible for plotting the data.
4.3 Theoretical example: relativistic AGN jets and
fractal clouds
Stereopairscanalsobeusedforthevisualizationofthe-
oretical data sets. In this example, we use stereoscopy
to reveal the structure of a simulated relativistic Ac-
tive Galactic Nucleus (AGN) jet (Wagner and Bicknell
2011). The jet simulations were grid-based hydrody-
namicsimulationswhichproducedmultivariatedataof
Fig. 5 : Volume rendered side view of a simulated
thermodynamic quantities, e.g., density, temperature,
relativistic AGN jet.
pressure, velocitycomponentsandtracers, asfunctions
of 3 rectilinear spatial coordinates. The resolution of
the simulations was 5123 cells, each cell representing
a physical volume of (2pc)3. Volume rendered images
of the double jet structure are shown in the two stereo
pairs, Fig. 5 and Fig. 6. In these renderings, the ray-
traced variable was proportional to the 1.8th power of
the density and the tracer variable of the jet, which is
a measure of the radio emissivity of a jet plasma.
Figure 5 shows that stereo pairs do not necessarily
need to be made up of square images. In this case, the
upright rectangular stereo pair allows one to inspect
the 3D structure of the jet along the full length of its Fig. 6 : Edge-onviewofthesamesimulatedjetshown
propagation axis. In particular, one can see the defor- in Fig. 5.
mationsofthecentraljetstreamasitbecomesunstable
duedecelerationandentrainmentinthelobes(Bicknell
1984). The structure of the jet lobes along the line of et al. 2000). The stereo pairs were produced with the
sight is also clearer in the stereo pairs than in either of VisIt software, developed at the Lawrence Livermore
the2Dimagesontheirown. Intheedge-onstereopairs National Laboratory4. VisIt has a built-in stereo out-
of Fig. 6, the use of stereoscopy enables one to iden- put.
tify the locations of lower and higher concentrations of As a further example for the visualization of theo-
jet plasma within the volume of the lobe. Globally, retical data benefiting from stereoscopy, Fig. 7 shows a
one obtains a less ambiguous picture of the true shape stereopairoffractalclouds. Theseweregeneratedwith
and structural characteristics of the complex flow. The the procedure outlined by Lewis and Austin (2002).
viewer obtains a strong sense of depth in the image, The procedure creates a spatially fractal distribution
despite the contracted view at small angles of the line incloudpixelsthatsimultaneouslyobeysasingle-point
of sight to the jet axis. The relativistic AGN jet sim-
ulation were performed with the FLASH code (Fryxell
log-normal probability density function in cloud den- available on the market. The idea of 3D television
sity. Oncertainscales,fractalstructureandlog-normal is rather old, with early experiments on stereo TV as
single point statistics are characteristic of atmospheric early as 1920, and the first 3D TV broadcast occurring
(Barker et al. 1996) and interstellar (Federrath et al. in 1980 (Onural et al. 2006). Yet, very recently, the
2009) clouds, and 3D data sets such as those depicted rapid re-appearance of 3D televisions (and 3D hand-
in Fig. 7 may be used as initial conditions in hydrody- held devices) lead Sherman et al. (2010) to state that
namicalsimulations(Saxtonetal.2005;Sutherlandand immersive 3D visualization technologies are now well
Bicknell 2007). Such fractal structures usually prove in the so-called slope of enlightment within the Hype’s
difficult to visualize. The use of stereo pairs provides cycle(FennandRaskino2008)ofnewtechnologies,the
an enhanced depth perception and thereby a clearer last step before reaching a more productive phase. So
view of the relative positions of the clouds. The fractal far, one of the main issues slowing down the expansion
outlines are more obvious, even interior to the clouds. of 3D television on the market is most probably the
lack of 3D content to be displayed on those devices, a
key factor for success (Sharif et al. 2011). This is also
true for scientific applications of this technology, and
a wider usage of stereo pairs may help scientists iden-
tify in what ways 3D TV could soon play a significant
role in their research. Once the need will have been
clearlyandwidelyidentified,thereisnodoubtthatthe
yet missing standardized application programming in-
terface(API)andsoftwarelinksbetweenscientificdata
Fig. 7 : Stereo pair of fractal clouds, viewed from sets and already existing hardware will be rapidly im-
within. plemented. In short, we believe that stereo pairs, an
oldandwelldocumentedtool(whichcannowbeeasily
implemented),couldhelpscientistskeepanopenmind,
and potentially shape the future of multi-dimensional
data visualization and analysis.
5 Future prospects for stereoscopy
In the previous Sections, we have described how stere-
oscopy, in the form of stereo pairs, can be a power-
ful tool for publishing multi-dimensional data sets. As
Wehavediscussedtheconceptofstereopairsandhigh-
of today, stereoscopy is the most widely accepted tech-
lighted their potential benefits for the Astrophysics
nique for the capture and display of 3D content (Sharif
community. First, we presented the free-viewing tech-
et al. 2011), whereas other methods, such as hologra-
nique and provided advice to easily visualize both par-
phy (e.g. Smith 1975; Ackermann and Eichler 2007),
allel and cross-eyed stereo pairs for the first time. We
are considered very promising, but, as of now, harder
then argued that stereo pairs can be easily produced
toimplementonalargescale. Inthatsense,webelieve
andreproducedonacomputerscreenoronprintedma-
that stereo pairs can play a major role in the future
terialwithmostoftheusualprogramminglanguagesor
of data visualization in Astrophysics (and any field of
software used nowadays within the Astrophysics com-
Science), by providing researchers today with a simple
munity. In particular, we have introduced and de-
way to explore, discover, imagine, identify, and share
scribed an alternative, off-the-shelf, easy way to pro-
new stereoscopy-based analysis methods of their data,
duce high quality stereo pairs with Python, which we
methods that will then be ready for implementation in
refer to as the simplified Toe-in method. This tech-
exquisite interactive, immersive, high-end visualization
nique adapts the official Toe-in procedure taking into
tools tomorrow.
accountthecurrentlimitationof Pythonplottingabil-
Such immersive 3D visualization technologies, both
ities,withoutaffectingonthequalityofthestereopairs.
for the scientific and non-scientific community, still ap-
Specifically, no vertical parallax can be detected in the
pears rather cubersome to use and implement, and of-
resulting stereo pairs. Testing our sTi stereo pairs on
ten require off-the-shelf, custom software and setup.
severalstudentsandastronomersattheMountStromlo
But technology is moving at a fast pace. For exam-
Observatoryrevealedthattheyrepresentagoodtrade-
ple, working with and sharing data sets in 3D on tele-
off, by being able to convey a satisfactory feeling of
visions and hand-held devices might become common-
depth from any viewpoint, and by being as effective
place fairly soon, as such devices are already easily
as standard Toe-in stereo pairs with an elevation lower We thank the referee for his/her comments that
that |θ |∼50◦. The tests also revealed that sTi stereo helped greatly improve this paper. This research has
pairs provide more depth structure around the data it- made use of NASA’s Astrophysics Data System. Part
self as compared to their equivalent Offset stereo pairs, ofthisresearchwasundertakenontheNCINationalFa-
andthatthesTimethodisinthatrespectmoreappro- cility at the Australian National University and some
priate for creating stereo pairs in Astrophysics, a fact software used in this work were in part developed by
already observed by Peterka et al. (2009). the DOE-supported ASC / Alliance Center for Astro-
We have then used three examples, one idealized physical Thermonuclear Flashes at the University of
and two realistic, with which we have presented var- Chicago.
ioustypesofstereopairs,highlightedseveralaspectsof
stereoscopic visualization, and identified the main ben-
efitsofusingstereopairsasacomplementtomorestan- References
dard plotting techniques in a publication. First, they
are a polyvalent tool that is adaptable to one’s needs; Ackermann,G.K.,Eichler,J.: Holography: aPracticalAp-
proach. Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Wein-
their shape, size, and color can be adapted to best re-
heim (2007)
veal the 3D data set without impacting the ability to
Barker, H.W., Wiellicki, B.A., Parker, L.: A Parametriza-
transmit a depth perception to the viewer. Second,
tion for Computing Grid-Averaged Solar Fluxes for In-
they profit any multivariate data set, observational or homogeneous Marine Boundary Layer Clouds. Part II:
theoretical, and potentially benefit different genres of Validation Using Satellite Data. Journal of Atmospheric
studies (e.g., of both the theoretical and observational Sciences 53, 2304-2316 (1996)
kind). Third,theygreatlyfacilitatethecommunication Barnes, D.G., Fluke, C.J., Bourke, P.D., Parry, O.T.: An
Advanced, Three-Dimensional Plotting Library for As-
ofcomplex3Dshapes. Especially,whereatextdescrip-
tronomy.PublicationsoftheAstronomicalSocietyofAus-
tionmightbesubjecttointerpretation,stereopairscan
tralia 23, 82-93 (2006)
force upon the viewer a unique view of the data set,
Barnes, D.G., Fluke, C.J.: Incorporating interactive three-
thereby avoiding misconceptions. This is possibly the dimensional graphics in astronomy research papers. New
main factor that should dictate the use of stereoscopy Astronomy 13, 599-605 (2008)
in publications and presentations. van den Bergh, S.: The Magellanic Clouds, Past, Present
For all these reasons, stereo pairs should be consid- and Future - A Summary of IAU Symposium No. 190.
New Views of the Magellanic Clouds 190, 569 (1999)
ered a valuable tool for the Astrophysics community -
Berry,C.,Baker,M.D.: InsideProteinStructures,Teaching
a field where most data sets are multidimensional and
in Three Dimensions. Biochemistry and Molecular Biol-
multivariate, and where stereo pairs can be applied to
ogy Education 38, 425-429 (2010)
manydifferentsub-topics,butalwayswiththecommon Bicknell,G.V.: Amodelforthesurfacebrightnessofatur-
aim of simplifying, clarifying, and eliminating miscon- bulentlowMachnumberjet.I-Theoreticaldevelopment
ceptions. The evolution of informatics has made stereo andapplicationto3C31.Astrophys.J.286,68-87(1984)
pairs aesthetic, useful, and straightforward to produce. Blondin, J.M., Mezzacappa, A., DeMarina, C.: Stability of
Standing Accretion Shocks, with an eye towards Core-
We are convinced that they have a promising future,
Collapse Supernovae. Astrophys. J. 584, 971-980 (2003)
given the rapid evolution of 3D visualization hardware
Darrah, W.C.: The World of Stereographs. Land Yacht
and techniques, e.g. 3D televisions. Although we still
Press, Nashville, Tennessee (1977)
lack a standardized API and user-friendly software to Dodgson,N.A.: Variationandextremaofthehumaninter-
couple the stereo images to the display devices, these pupillary distance. Proc. SPIE 5291: Stereoscopic Dis-
will likely be provided as soon as the need is identified. plays and Virtual Reality Systems XI, 36-46 (2010)
Dopita,M.,Hart,J.,McGregor,P.,Oates,P.,Bloxham,G.,
Sharing astrophysical data sets in 3D on hand-held de-
Jones,D.: TheWideFieldSpectrograph(WiFeS).Astro-
vices might sound futuristic. Nonetheless, stereo pairs
phys. Space Sci. 310, 255-268 (2007)
can already be easily stacked into a movie, and played
Dopita, M., Rhee, J., Farage, C., McGregor, P., Blox-
duringatalkinalecturetheatreequippedwith3Dpro- ham, G., Green, A., Roberts, B., Nielson, J., Wilson, G.,
jection abilities, enabling the audience to experience a Young, P., Firth, P., Busarello, G., Merluzzi, P.: The
glimpse of the 3D future for Astrophysics. In conclu- WideFieldSpectrograph(WiFeS):PerformanceandData
sion,weareconvincedthattheideasconceivedthrough Reduction. Astrophys. Space Sci. 327, 245-257 (2010)
Federrath, C., Klessen, R.S., Schmidt, W.: The Fractal
the ongoing 3D trend currently occurring in the non-
Density Structure in Supersonic Isothermal Turbulence:
scientificcommunitycanandoughttobeusedinAstro-
Solenoidal Versus Compressive Energy Injection. Astro-
physics. Stereo pairs are a good way to start opening
phys. J. 692, 364-374 (2009)
our minds today. Fenn, J., Raskino, M.: Mastering the Hype Cycle; How to
ChoosetheRightInnovationattheRightTime.Harvard
Acknowledgements Business Press, Boston (2008)
Fryxell, B., Olson, K., Ricker, P., Timmes, F.X., Zin- Martinet, L., Magnenat, P., Verhulst, F.: On the Number
gale, M., Lamb, D.Q., MacNeice, P., Rosner, R., Tru- ofIsolatingIntegralsinResonantSystemswith3-Degrees
ran, J.W., Tufo, H.: FLASH: An Adaptive Mesh Hydro- of Freedom. Celestial Mechanics 25, 93-99 (1981)
dynamics Code for Modeling Astrophysical Thermonu- McEwen,A.S.,Eliason,E.M.,Bergstrom,J.W.,Bridges,N.T.,
clear Flashes. Astrophys. J. Suppl. Ser. 131, 273-334 Hansen,C.J.,Delamere,W.A.,Grant,J.A.,Gulick,V.C.,
(2000) Herkenhoff,K.E.,Keszthelyi,L.,Kirk,R.L.,Mellon,M.T.,
Fluke, C.J., Bourke, P.D., O’Donovan, D.: Future Direc- Squyres, S.W., Thomas, N., Weitz, C.M.: Mars Re-
tionsinAstronomyVisualization.PASA23,12-24(2006) connaissance Orbiter’s High Resolution Imaging Science
Hamilton, W.C.: The Revolution in Crystallography. Sci- Experiment (HiRISE). Journal of Geophysical Research
ence 169, 133-141 (1970) (Planets) 112, 5 (2007)
Hardman, K.D., Ainswort, C.F.: Binding of Nonpolar Morse, J.A., Winkler, P.F., Kirshner, R.P.: Spatially Re-
Molecules by Crystalline Concanavalin-A. Biochemistry solved Kinematics and Longslit Spectroscopy of the
12, 4442-4448 (1973) Young, Oxygen-Rich Supernova Remnant N132D in the
Hayman,H.J.G.: TheMountingofStereoSlidesforProject- Large Magellanic Cloud. Astron. J. 109, 2104 (1995)
ingMolecularModels.JournalofChemicalEducation64, Neukum, G., Jaumann, R., Hoffmann, H., Hauber, E.,
1041-1042 (1987) Head,J.W.,Basilevsky,A.T.,Ivanov,B.A.,Werner,S.C.,
Holliman,N.: Cosmicorigins: experiencesmakingastereo- van Gasselt, S., Murray, J.B., McCord, T., HRSC Co-
scopic3Dmovie.Proc.SPIE7524: StereoscopicDisplays Investigator Team: Recent and episodic volcanic and
and Applications XXI, (2010) glacial activity on Mars revealed by the High Resolution
Icke,V.,vandeWeygaert,R.: Thegalaxydistributionasa Stereo Camera. Nature 432, 971-979 (2004)
Voronoi foam. Q. J. R. Astron. Soc. 32, 85-112 (1991) Norling, J.A.: The Stereoscopic Art - A Reprint Journal of
Jaumann, R., Neukum, G., Behnke, T., Duxbury, T.C., the Society of the Motion Picture and Television Engi-
Eichentopf, K., Flohrer, J., Gasselt, S.V., Giese, B., neers ITS 60, 268-308 (1953)
Gwinner, K., Hauber, E., Hoffmann, H., Hoffmeister, A., Okoshi, T.: Three-Dimensional Imaging Techniques. Aca-
Ko¨hler, U., Matz, K.-D., McCord, T.B., Mertens, V., demic Press Inc., New York, New York (1976)
Oberst, J., Pischel, R., Reiss, D., Ress, E., Roatsch, T., Onural, L., Sikora, T., Ostermann, J., Smolic, A., Civan-
Saiger, P., Scholten, F., Schwarz, G., Stephan, K., lar, M.R., Watson, J.: An Assessment of 3DTV Tech-
Wa¨hlisch, M., the HRSC Co-Investigator Team1: The nologies. NAB BEC Proceedings, 456-467 (2006)
high-resolution stereo camera (HRSC) experiment on Perrier,G.: LeCentenairedeNiepce.L’Astronomie48,77-
Mars Express: Instrument aspects and experiment con- 86 (1934)
ductfrominterplanetarycruisethroughthenominalmis- Peterka, T., Ross, R., Yu, H., Ma, K., Kooima, R., Gi-
sion. Planet. Space Sci. 55, 928-952 (2007) rado, J.: Autostereoscopic Display of Large-Scale Scitifc
Keszthelyi, L., Jaeger, W., McEwen, A., Tornabene, L., Visualization. Proc. SPIE 7237: Stereoscopic Displays
Beyer, R.A., Dundas, C., Milazzo, M.: High Resolution and Applications XX (2009)
ImagingScienceExperiment(HiRISE)imagesofvolcanic Pujadas, G., Palau, J. : Molecular mimicry of substrate
terrains from the first 6 months of the Mars Reconnais- oxygenatomsbywatermoleculesintheβ-amylaseactive
sance Orbiter Primary Science Phase. Journal of Geo- site. Protein Science 10, 1645-1657 (2001)
physical Research (Planets) 113, 4005 (2008) Rhee, G.F.R.N., van Haarlem, M.P., Katgert, P.: A study
Koutchmy,S.Molodenskii,M.M.: Three-dimensionalimage of the elongation of Abell clusters. II - A sample of 107
of the solar corona from white-light observations of the rich clusters. Astron. Astrophys. Suppl. Ser. 91, 513-554
1991 eclipse. Nature 360, 717-719 (1992) (1991)
Landsberg, M.J., Moran-Jones, K., Smith, R.: Molecular Robinson, T.: Making Stereo Pair Views with Molecular
recognition of an RNA trafficking element by hetero- Editor. Journal of Chemical Education 66, A62 (1989)
geneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein A2. Biochemistry 45, Saxton, C.J., Bicknell, G.V., Sutherland, R.S., Midgley, S.:
3943-3951 (2006)
Interactions of jets with inhomogeneous cloudy media.
Lasker,B.M.: StudiesofN132D-Asupernovaremnantin
Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 359, 781-800 (2005)
theLMC.II-Therapidlymovingmaterial.Astrophys.J.
Scripture, E.W.: Anaglyphs and Stereoscopic Projection.
237, 765-768 (1980)
Science 10, 185-187 (1899)
Lemmon, M.T., Smith, P.H., Shinohara, C., Tanner, R.,
Selman, F., Melnick, J., Bosch, G., Terlevich, R.: The ion-
Woida,P.,Shaw,A.,Hughes,J.,Reynolds,R.,Woida,R.,
izing cluster of 30 Doradus. I. Internal reddening from
Penegor, J., Oquest, C., Hviid, S.F., Madsen, M.B.,
NTTphotometryandmulti-objectspectroscopy.Astron.
Olsen,M.,Leer,K.,Drube,L.,Morris,R.V.,Britt,D.T.:
Astrophys. 341, 98-109 (1999)
The Phoenix Surface Stereo Imager (SSI) Investigation.
Selman,F.,Melnick,J.,Bosch,G.,Terlevich,R.: Theioniz-
Lunar and Planetary Institute Science Conference Ab-
ingclusterof30Doradus.III.Star-formationhistoryand
stracts 39, 2156 (2008)
initial mass function. Astron. Astrophys. 347, 532-549
Lewis,G.M.,Austin,P.H.: AnIterativeMethodforGener-
ating Scaling Log-Normal Simulations. 11th Conference
Sharif, L., Sharif, N., Ahmed, M.: 3-D Television. Interna-
on Atmospheric Radiation, 123-126 (2002)
tional Journal of Research and Reviews in Information
Martinet, L., Magnenat, P.: Invariant surfaces and orbital
Sciences 1, 39-41 (2011)
behaviour in dynamical systems with 3 degrees of free-
dom. Astron. Astrophys. 96, 68-77 (1981)
Sherman, W.R., O’Leary, P., Whiting, E.T., Grover, S., York , D.G., Adelman , J., Anderson , Jr., J.E., Anderson
Wernert,E.A.: IQ-Station: ALowCostPortableImmer- , S.F., Annis , J., Bahcall , N.A., Bakken , J.A., Bark-
sive Environment. Proceedings of the International Sym- houser , R., Bastian , S., Berman , E., Boroski , W.N.,
posium on Visual Computing 2, 361-372 (2010) Bracker , S., Briegel , C., Briggs , J.W., Brinkmann , J.,
Sirko, E., Goodman, J., Knapp, G.R., Brinkmann, J., Brunner , R., Burles , S., Carey , L., Carr , M.A., Cas-
Ivezi´c, Zˇ., Knerr, E.J., Schlegel, D., Schneider, D.P., tander,F.J.,Chen,B.,Colestock,P.L.,Connolly,A.J.,
York, D.G.: Blue Horizontal-Branch Stars in the Sloan Crocker,J.H.,Csabai,I.,Czarapata,P.C.,Davis,J.E.,
Digital Sky Survey. I. Sample Selection and Structure in Doi , M., Dombeck , T., Eisenstein , D., Ellman , N.,
the Galactic Halo. Astron. J. 127, 899-913 (2004) Elms , B.R., Evans , M.L., Fan , X., Federwitz , G.R.,
Smith, J.: The discoverer of photography. Nature 16, 501 Fiscelli,L.,Friedman,S.,Frieman,J.A.,Fukugita,M.,
(1877) Gillespie,B.,Gunn,J.E.,Gurbani,V.K.,deHaas,E.,
Smith, I.: Stereoviewing: Visual Aids for Stereochemistry Haldeman,M.,Harris,F.H.,Hayes,J.,Heckman,T.M.,
andMacromolecularStructures.RoyalInstituteofChem- Hennessy , G.S., Hindsley , R.B., Holm , S., Holmgren
istry Reviews 4, 19-33 (1971) , D.J., Huang , C.-h., Hull , C., Husby , D., Ichikawa
Smith,H.M.: PrinciplesofHolography.JohnWiley&Sons, , S.-I., Ichikawa , T., Ivezi´c , Zˇ., Kent , S., Kim , R.S.J.,
New York (1975) Kinney,E.,Klaene,M.,Kleinman,A.N.,Kleinman,S.,
Smith, P.H., Tomasko, M.G., Britt, D., Crowe, D.G., Knapp , G.R., Korienek , J., Kron , R.G., Kunszt , P.Z.,
Reid, R., Keller, H.U., Thomas, N., Gliem, F., Ruef- Lamb , D.Q., Lee , B., Leger , R.F., Limmongkol , S.,
fer, P., Sullivan, R., Greeley, R., Knudsen, J.M., Mad- Lindenmeyer,C.,Long,D.C.,Loomis,C.,Loveday,J.,
sen, M.B., Gunnlaugsson, H.P., Hviid, S.F., Goetz, W., Lucinio , R., Lupton , R.H., MacKinnon , B., Mannery
Soderblom, L.A., Gaddis, L., Kirk, R.: The imager for ,E.J.,Mantsch,P.M.,Margon,B.,McGehee,P.,McKay
MarsPathfinderexperiment.J.Geophys.Res.102,4003- , T.A., Meiksin , A., Merelli , A., Monet , D.G., Munn
4026 (1997) ,J.A.,Narayanan,V.K.,Nash,T.,Neilsen,E.,Neswold
Sofue,Y.: FateoftheMagellanicStream.Publ.Astron.Soc. ,R.,Newberg,H.J.,Nichol,R.C.,Nicinski,T.,Nonino
Jpn. 46, 431-440 (1994) ,M.,Okada,N.,Okamura,S.,Ostriker,J.P.,Owen,R.,
Stockert, J.C.: Stereoscopy of Computer-Drawn Molecular Pauls,A.G.,Peoples,J.,Peterson,R.L.,Petravick,D.,
Structures. Biochemical Education 22, 23-25 (1994) Pier,J.R.,Pope,A.,Pordes,R.,Prosapio,A.,Rechen-
Sutherland, R.S., Bicknell, G.V.: Interactions of a Light macher , R., Quinn , T.R., Richards , G.T., Richmond
Hypersonic Jet with a Nonuniform Interstellar Medium. , M.W., Rivetta , C.H., Rockosi , C.M., Ruthmansdor-
Astrophys. J. Suppl. Ser. 173, 37-69 (2007) fer , K., Sandford , D., Schlegel , D.J., Schneider , D.P.,
Tyler, C.W., Clarke, M.B.: Autostereogram. SPIE Confer- Sekiguchi , M., Sergey , G., Shimasaku , K., Siegmund
ence Series 1256, 182-197 (1990) ,W.A., Smee,S., Smith,J.A., Snedden,S., Stone,R.,
Vogt,F.,Dopita,M.A.: TheCasA-likeSNR1E0102.2-7219 Stoughton , C., Strauss , M.A., Stubbs , C., SubbaRao
in the Small Magellanic Cloud: An Asymmetric Bipolar , M., Szalay , A.S., Szapudi , I., Szokoly , G.P., Thakar
Explosion. Astrophys. J. 721, 587-606 (2010) , A.R. Tremonti , C., Tucker , D.L., Uomoto , A., Van-
Vogt, F., Dopita, M.A.: The 3D structure of N132D in the denBerk,D.,Vogeley,M.S. Waddell,P.,Wang,S.-i.,
LMC: a late-stage young supernova remnant. Astrophys. Watanabe , M., Weinberg , D.H., Yanny , B., Yasuda
Space Sci. 331, 521-535 (2011) ,N.: TheSloanDigitalSkySurvey: TechnicalSummary.
Wagner, A.Y., Bicknell, G.V.: Relativistic Jet Feedback in Astron. J.120, 1579-1587 (2000)
Evolving Galaxies. Astrophys. J. 728, 29 (2011) Zone, R.: Stereoscopic cinema and the origins of 3-D film,
van de Weygaert, R., Icke, V.: Fragmenting the universe. 1838-1952.TheUniversityPressofKentucky,Lexington,
II-VoronoiverticesasAbellclusters.Astron.Astrophys. Kentucky (2007)
213, 1-9 (1989)
Wheatstone,C.: ContributionstothePhysiologyofVision.
ParttheFirst.OnSomeRemarkable,andHithertoUnob-
served,PhenomenaofBinocularVision.RoyalSocietyof
London Philosophical Transactions Series I 128, 371-394
Woods, A., Docherty, T., Koch, R.: Image Distortions in
Stereoscopic Videa Systems. Proc. SPIE 1915: Stereo-
scopic Displays and Applications IV, 36-48 (1993)
Xiang, K., Nagaike, T., Xiang, S., Turgay, K., Beh, M.M.,
Manley, J.L, Tong, L: Crystal structure of the human
symlekin-Ssu72-CTD phosphopeptide complex. Nature
467, 729-733 (2010)
Yahil, A., Sandage, A., Tammann, G.A.: The velocity field
of bright nearby galaxies. III - The distribution in space
of galaxies within 80 megaparsecs - The north galactic
density anomaly. Astrophys. J. 242, 448-468 (1980)
This2-columnpreprintwaspreparedwiththeAASLATEXmacros
v5.2.
A Simplified Toe-in, Toe-in and Offset : a comparison of different stereo pairs creation methods
with Python.
We have introduced the simplified Toe-in (sTi) method, described in Sect. 3, as an alternative to the official
Toe-in and Offset methods for creating stereo pairs. The sTi method accounts for the current limitations of
Matplotlib, the Python plotting library. The main limitation lies in the fact that the viewpoint towards a 3D
plot is defined by only two parameters, the azimuth φ and the elevation θ. This makes it impossible to create
proper Toe-in or Offset stereo pairs directly, for reasons highlighted below (see Appendix A.1). Nonetheless, our
sTistereopairsprovideanexcellentdepthperception, especiallywhen−50◦ ≤θ ≤50◦, andarenotmoredifficult
or tiring to visualize as compared to their equivelent Toe-in stereo pairs, according to our small survey of Mount
Stromlo students and astronomers.
In Appendix A.4, we provide a comparison chart of sTi, Toe-in and Offset stereo pairs for varying elevations.
But let us start by describing the issues of sTi stereo pairs, and the required Python code updates to create
Toe-in and Offset stereo pairs.
A.1 sTi stereo pairs
AswedefinedinSec.3, theLHSandRHSprojectionviewpointsforthesTimethodarelocatedatS
), with 2.5◦ ≤δ
≤5◦ the opening angle in between the LHS and RHS viewpoint. A schematic
of the situation in shown in Fig. 8, which shows the location of the viewpoints on the visualization sphere. By
default in Matplotlib, the sphere is centred on the middle of the data set, and its radius is ten times the size of
the data set.
This definition of the sTi LHS and RHS viewpoints makes it easy to use the Axes3D instance, which can take
the elevation and azimuth as parameters. However, it introduces two mistakes compared to the official Toe-in
method :
1. The distance in between the S and S points, measured along the Great Circle to which they belong (the red
line in Fig. 8), is decreasing with increasing elevation.
2. The orientation of the LHS and RHS views, which by default are oriented towards the z-axis (i.e. along the
orange lines) is :
• not parallel between the LHS and RHS viewpoints.
• not perpendicular to the red great Circle (as it ought to be).
• varying with elevation.
In other words, with increasing elevation, the sTi LHS and RHS projection points will move along the orange
lines,slowlymergingtowardseachother-thecauseofthediminishingfeelingofdepthbeyond±50◦. Themismatch
intheviewrotation, increasingfrom0toδ /2atθ =90◦ foreachview, ishoweversmallenoughatanyelevation
not to be very noticeable.
A.2 Toe-in stereo pairs
ToproduceToe-instereopairs, wehaveupdatedthesourcecodeoftheAxes3dinstanceofthemplot3dtoolkit,
so as to be able to rotate the projection orientation around the view axis. Using spherical trigonometry, one can
show that for a central viewpoint P(φ ;θ ), the LHS and RHS projection need to be made from the position
) with a respective rotation of (cid:15)
and −(cid:15)
around the view axis, where :
(cid:20) (cid:21)
(cid:20)(cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:21)
The T and T viewpoints are shown in Fig. 8. They will move along the light blue lines, always keeping a
fixed δ separation at any elevation, as measured along the Great Circle they belong to (dark blue line). The
Fig. 8 : Global (left) and close-up (right) schematics depicting the LHS and RHS camera positions for both an
sTi(pointsS andS )andToe-in(pointsT andT )stereopair. TheviewpointsassociatedwiththesTimethod
(resp. Toe-in method) move along the orange (respect. light blue) line with varying elevation.
rotationerror±(cid:15) oftheviews(initiallyorientedalongthepurpleline, butwhichiscorrectedbytheintroduction
of a rotation matrix within the plotting source code) increases with elevation, and is as high as 90◦ for θ =90◦.
Because the sTi viewpoints converge towards each other at high elevations, their respective projection’s rotation
errorremainssmall(∼δ /2)comparedtotheToe-inprojections-andhenceforhighelevationswedonotrequire
an update of the plotting source code to produce comfortable sTi stereo pairs!
A.3 Offsets stereo pairs
Implementing the Offset method is more complicated in Python, and requires much more involved modifications
of the plotting code. Instead, we adopted the following, more simplistic, approach. We applied the following
transformation to our data cube :
where η is a scale factor defining the intensity of the offset. In words, we apply a linear translation to the data,
perpendicular to the view axis. This method has the disadvantage to disconnect the data from the axes, however,
it is enough to get an idea of the quality of Offset stereo pairs (and observe that the data itself has less depth
content than in Toe-in stereo pairs).
A.4 Comparison table : sTi vs Toe-in vs Offset stereo pairs
In Fig. 9 and Fig. 10, we present stereo pairs produced with Python using the sTi, Toe-in, and Offset method
describedpreviously. Furthermore,wealsoincludeacontrol stereopair,wherewehavesetidenticalLHSandRHS
images, and that consequently contains no depth information at all. We are aware that by looking long enough at
those stereo pairs, the brain will start inducing a wrong depth perception, not directly present in the image5; the
control stereo pair hence tests that one does not guess, rather than see, depth information. All stereo pairs have
been produced at an azimuth φ =45◦, and varying values for the elevation θ ∈[0◦;20◦;50◦;80◦]. In every case,
the green (big) sphere is on top, and the symmetry axis of the system lies in the XZ plane.
Comparing the Offset and Toe-in stereo pairs first, one notices that, as expected, the double sphere structure
appears to hover over the axes (located further away) in the former ones. This a direct consequence of our
5havingthestereopairsincolormightalsoinducesomeadditionaldepthperceptionforthiscomparativestudy,butwedecidedthat
theymighthelpthenon-experiencedstereopairsusertosee andfeel ourconclusions-themainaimofthisAppendix.
Fig. 9 : STi,Toe-in,Offsetandcontrolstereopairsforanazimuthφ =45◦ andelevationsθ =0◦ andθ =20◦.
simplistic implementation of the Offset method - it is accurate for the data points, but not for the background
axes. Nonetheless, focusing on the double-sphere structure itself, it has noticeably less depth elongation in the
case of the Offset method. In the Toe-in stereo pairs, not only do the axes wrap around the data points nicely,
but the data points themselves appear with a strong feeling of depth. In that sense, we believe the Toe-in method
to be much more appropriate for the publication of Astrophysical data cubes, as it provides more depth structure
to the data itself.
Comparing the sTi stereo pairs with their equivalent Toe-in pairs, it can be seen that depth perception within
the sTi image is gradually degraded as the elevation increases. As mentioned above, this is due to the fact that
the LHS and RHS sTi projection viewpoints gradually move towards each other at higher elevation. Nonetheless,
some degree of depth perception is present, even as high as θ = 80◦. The different orientation of the LHS and
RHSimagesarealsostayingsmall,andhencedonotneedtobecorrectedbyanymodificationoftheMatplotlib
source code. In summary, our suggested sTi plotting method, if theoretically not correct, nevertheless appears in
practice to provide (very) satisfactory results, and can be directly implemented using Python, Matplotlib and
mplot3d.
The experienced Python user might find it easy to update his source code to create correct Toe-in stereo pairs.
We intend to include our code update in future releases of Matplotlib. Until we manage to do so, we are
happy to provide our source code modifications to the interested user directly (which does not require extensive
knowledge of Python to be implemented); simply contact F.V. at fvogt@mso.anu.edu.au.
Fig. 10 : Idem as Fig. 9, but for θ =50◦ and θ =80◦