]hcem-tats.tam-dnoc[
1v8743070/tam-dnoc:viXra
Stochastic Models of Evolution in Genetics, Ecology
and Linguistics
R. A. Blythe
SUPA, School of Physics, University of Edinburgh, Mayfield Road, Edinburgh EH9
A. J. McKane
School of Physics and Astronomy, University of Manchester, Manchester M13 9PL
Abstract. We give a overview of stochastic models of evolution that have found
applications in genetics, ecology and linguistics for an audience of nonspecialists,
especially statistical physicists. In particular, we focus mostly on neutral models in
which no intrinsic advantage is ascribed to a particular type of the variable unit, for
example a gene, appearing in the theory. In many cases these models are exactly
solvable and furthermore go some way to describing observed features of genetic,
ecologicaland linguistic systems.
Stochastic Models of Evolution in Genetics, Ecology and Linguistics 2
1. Introduction
The distinguishing feature of statistical mechanics as a theory of many-body physics
is that it has probabilistic notions at its core. At equilibrium, the principle of equal
a priori probabilities is invoked as a means to identify the typical behaviour of a
system as a whole. Out of equilibrium, the evolution of a system is usually couched
in terms of stochastic dynamics, as a glance at many articles in this journal will
confirm. Theprocedureofstochasticmodellingisnot,ofcourse, restrictedtophysics. In
particular, stochastic models have played a pivotal role in understanding the dynamics
of evolutionary systems and as such one sees many similarities in the approaches and
methods that have been used to those employed by statistical physicists. The most well-
established discipline for which this is the case is population genetics, i.e., the study of
gene frequencies among a population of reproducing individuals. More recently, models
very similar to those that arise in the population genetics arena have also been applied
in ecology (where the frequencies of particular species in an ecosystem are of interest)
and language change (where now the focus is on frequencies of linguistic variants used
by a community of speakers). In this article, it is our aim to introduce key concepts
and results from these fields to practitioners in statistical mechanics in order to further
cross-fertilisation between them.
Mostly, we will concentrate on the application to population genetics: due to this
discipline’s age, most of the mathematical literature describing the stochastic models of
interest are couched in terms of the language of population genetics. We shall therefore
begin by introducing the relevant terminology. In the simplified mathematical models
we shall be describing, a gene is taken to mean a variable unit that codes for a specific
trait (such as eye colour), and different variants of the gene (coding in this example
for different eye colours) are called alleles. Changes in allele frequency can occur as a
consequence ofthreeprocesses. First,thereisreproduction, inwhichoffspringorganisms
acquire copies of alleles from their parents. Secondly, in the copying process, random
mutations can occur which may change one allele to another, or create a completely new
allele. Finally, for whatever reason, organisms carrying one allele may end up having
more offspring than another: this is selection.
The simplest stochastic model of an evolving population dates from the 1930’s and
was introduced independently byRonaldFisher [1]andSewall Wright [2]. Inthis model,
the number of organisms is taken to be constant from one generation to the next, and
each instance of a gene in one generation is an exact copy of one randomly chosen with
replacement from the previous generation. Such a process could be realised in a number
of ways. Let us consider first of all haploid organisms which carry only one instance of
each gene and (possibly) reproduce asexually. A new generation could then be formed
by each of the organisms producing an infinite number of gametes (e.g., seeds) before
dying; then, a random fixed-size sample of these gametes survive to become offspring
organisms. More often, geneticists focus on diploid organisms which carry two copies
of each gene and reproduce sexually. Now, each organism produces two infinite sets of
Stochastic Models of Evolution in Genetics, Ecology and Linguistics 3
gametes, oneforeachallelecarriedbytheparent. Then, afterdying, thenext generation
is formed by combining the requisite number of randomly-chosen gamete pairs. Either
way, the mean number of offspring that any individual has in the following generation
is one, and so there is no selection: this is a neutral model. Furthermore the fact that
the allele instances present in one generation are a random sample of those present in
the previous generation means that allele frequencies fluctuate through sampling effects
alone. Thesefluctuationsarecalledgenetic drift and—intheabsenceofanymutations—
over time cause permanent extinction of one or more alleles: The steady state of such a
model is one in which only a single allele remains: this allele is then said to have fixed
in the population.
A haploid, or randomly-mating diploid population evolving in this way is often
referred to as an ideal population. In reality, individuals do not mate at random,
and there is often a preference, or requirement, for mating to occur between or within
different classes of individuals. Most obviously, in sexually reproducing organisms,
females can mate only with males; other factors, such as individuals’ geographical
locations and age (when one has overlapping generations) may also lead to deviations
from non-ideal behaviour. Nevertheless, in some cases it is found that the predictions
of the ideal model are relevant if one replaces the actual size of the population with an
effective size, which can be thought of as a number of breeding individuals. We will
discuss this procedure in more detail later in this article.
Neutral theories in population genetics (as well as in the ecological and linguistic
applications—see below) seem to have a far greater realm of validity that might naively
beexpected. Theidea thatmanygeneticmutationsareeffectively neutral, thatisdonot
significantly affect thefitness ofthecarrier, was pioneered byMotooKimura [3,4]. Thus
changes in their frequency are due to chance, rather than selection. This is not to deny
that natural selection has an important role in the development of morphological and
behavioural characteristics, only that random genetic drift has a more significant effect
that had hitherto been envisaged. The relationship of the neutral theory to selection
was explored further with the introduction of the concept of “near-neutrality”[5, 6], in
which the extent to which genes are affected by drift and selection is a function of the
effective size of a breeding population.
In ecology the concept of neutrality is more recent, and is frequently associated
with Stephen Hubbell, who has developed and popularised the concept during the last
decade [7]. The idea of neutrality in ecology can be explained by imagining a set of
similar species in a local community, trees in a forest, for example. When a particular
tree dies, it is replaced by an “offspring” of one of theother trees in the forest—picked at
random. This is similar to the Wright-Fisher model, except that now individuals (trees)
are the fundamental entities, not genes, and they come in different species, rather than
as different alleles. As in the genetic case, successive random events will eventually
lead to the extinction of one species by chance, and then another, until eventually only
one will remain. That this does not happen is postulated to be due to new individuals
occasionally being introduced from outside the local community by immigration. The
Stochastic Models of Evolution in Genetics, Ecology and Linguistics 4
distribution of species abundances calculated from neutral theory gives a remarkably
good fit to data [8], however the extreme simplicity of the model has made it very
controversial. Some ecologists see it as a good “zeroth-order approximation” on which
to build a more complete description [9], while others believe some other kind of starting
point is required [10, 11].
The analogies to a model of language change [12, 13, 14, 15, 16] are a little more
abstract. Here, there is a retained memory of usages of a particular variant of a
linguistic variable (such as a vowel sound or grammatical structure); when a variant is
reproduced, itsretentioninaspeaker’smemorydisplacesarecordofanearlierutterance.
Thus a speaker’s perception of the frequency with which a particular variant is used—
which in the quantitative version of the model which has been developed [17], is taken
as the frequency with which that same speaker produces that variant—also exhibits
genetic-drift-like fluctuations over time. The imitation of linguistic variables according
to usage frequencies experienced by individual speakers falls within a paradigm referred
to as the usage-based model in linguistics [18] (this to it distinguish from theories in
which aspects of the grammar come “pre-programmed”). Investigations of the model of
language change introduced in [17] have only just begun, but it is already clear that the
structure of the network of speakers, shaped by both geography and social interactions,
is important in determining the time needed for a particular variant to become fixed.
In some cases, such as in new dialect formation [19, 20], fixation of linguistic variants
has been seen to occur on the timescale of a human generation: it is apparently possible
that this may occur entirely through random effects, without the need to invoke any
selection mechanism [21].
In the next section of this article, we present a precise definition of the model
of neutral genetic drift in an ideal population, along with the non-ideal generalisation
of a subdivided populations. We also demonstrate concretely the relationship to the
ecological and linguistic models just described. Then, in Sections 3 and 4 we describe
two complementary analytical approaches. The first starts with a master equation and
leads to a diffusion approximation for allele frequencies; this type of approximation
was popular in the 1950s, largely through Kimura’s efforts. Although implicitly used
previously, the1980ssawtheformalisationofanapproachcalledthecoalescent, inwhich
the statistical properties of the ancestry of a present-day population yield additional
insights into the population dynamics. Finally, in Sections 5 and 6 we review some of
the special features of non-ideal and non-neutral evolution respectively, before making
general remarks in the conclusion, Section 7.
2. Genetic drift: the Wright-Fisher and Moran models
2.1. The Wright-Fisher model
The simplest, and most widely known [22, 23, 24, 25], model of random genetic drift
is the Wright-Fisher model [1, 2]. Suppose we have a population of individuals in
Stochastic Models of Evolution in Genetics, Ecology and Linguistics 5
t (cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1) (cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1) t+1
(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1) (cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1) (cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1) (cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)
(cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1)(cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1)(cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:0)(cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:0)(cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1)(cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:1)
Figure 1. Wright-Fisher‘beanbag’populationgenetics. Thepopulationingeneration
t+1isconstructedfromgenerationtby(i)selectingagenefromthecurrentgeneration
at random; (ii) copying this gene; (iii) placing the copy in the next generation;
(iv) returning the original to the parent population. These steps are repeated until
generation t+1 has the same sized population as generation t.
generation t who mate randomly to produce the new generation t+1. We focus on one
particular gene which may be in one of two states (alleles) which we call A and B. The
Wright-Fisher model is based on the idea of the gene poolof the t generation individuals
beingsampledtogivethegeneticstructureofthet+1generation. Inreality, asdiscussed
in section 1 individuals are diploid, but for convenience we assume that individuals are
haploid, that is, there is one-to-one correspondence between individuals and genes. The
processofconstructing thenewgenerationfromthecurrentoneisanalogoustosampling
coloured balls—representing different alleles (types of gene)—from a bag or urn. The
steps in the process are illustrated in Fig. 1.
Suppose that in generation t there are n′ A alleles and (N n′) B alleles. We
wish to sample this gene pool N times (with replacement) in order to create the new
generation t + 1. The probability that in N trials of sampling the pool will get n A
alleles is simply given by the binomial distribution:
pnpN−n, (1)
where p (n′) is the probability of picking an A (= n′/N) and p (n′) is the probability
of picking a B (= (N n′)/N). So the probability that there is a transition from the
original state (characterised by n′ A alleles) to the new state (characterised by n A
alleles) is given by
N n′ n n′ N−n
p nn′ = 1 . (2)
n! N! − N!
It should be noted that many mathematicians will write p n′n when they are referring to
the transition probability from the state n′ to the state n, whereas we follow the usual
convention in physics and denote this by p nn′. This makes much of the matrix algebra
more natural—involving post-multiplication of vectors, rather than pre-multiplication.
Stochastic Models of Evolution in Genetics, Ecology and Linguistics 6
What we wish to calculate is the probability of finding n A alleles in generation
t, given that there were n initially. We denote this probability by P(n,t n ,0), which
we will frequently abbreviate to P(n,t), taking the initial condition as given. Since the
construction of the gene pool at generation t+1 only depends on the state of the gene
pool in generation t, and not on its state in earlier generations, the process is Markov.
Theoretical biologists, like mathematicians, prefer to model such processes in terms of
Markov chains. Thus they define firstly, a probability vector
 P(2,t) 
and secondly a transition matrix
p p ...
=  p 21 p 22 ...  .
P . . . . ..
The evolution of the system is then given by the matrix equation
Note that the sum of the components of the probability vector must add up to 1, and
the sum of the entries in any one column of the transition matrix must add up to 1
(since n P(n,t) = 1 and n p nn′ = 1). Matrices whose column entries add up to 1
are known as stochastic matrices, although the convention of writing the initial state as
the index on the left means that in the literature the statement is usually that the row
entries add up to unity. It is now straightforward to formally express the state of the
system in generation t in terms of this initial state:
P − PP − P
Clearlythelargetbehaviourwillbedominatedbythelargest(inmagnitude)eigenvalues
of and their corresponding eigenvectors. The eigenvalues of the Wright-Fisher model
are known [26], and are given by
N r!
λ = , r = 0,...,N . (5)
Some simple deductions may be made from the Wright-Fisher model formulated
as a Markov chain. For instance, we may ask what the system looks like after a large
number of generations. If it tends to a stationary state, and if we call this stationary
probability vector P∗, it follows that P∗ = P∗. That is, P∗ is a right eigenvector of
with eigenvalue 1. Intuitively it seems clear that the final state is either all A (the
A allele has become fixed) or all B (the B allele is fixed). This would correspond to a
Stochastic Models of Evolution in Genetics, Ecology and Linguistics 7
stationary state given by
.
Here Π is the probability that allele A will eventually become fixed. If we calculate
P∗ using the above expression, we find that it is indeed equal to P∗, confirming that
P∗ is of this form.
Another simple deduction is that the expected number of A alleles does not change
from one generation to the next:
since n np nn′ = Np 1 = n′. In particular, n(t) = n(0) = n 0 . We can use this result
to determine Π in Eq. (6). To do this we note from Eq. (6) that as t only two
states are possible: n = N (with probability Π) and n = 0 (with probability 1 Π).
t→∞h i − ⇒
This gives the explicit form for P∗ and also tells us that the probability that eventual
fixation of A will occur is n /N.
2.2. The Moran Model
Statistical physicists are not used to formulating stochastic processes in the way
described above for the Wright-Fisher model; they usually use continuous time master
equations and define transitions for a single stochastic step rather than for N bundled
together[27]. AvariantoftheWright-Fisher model, whichiscloserinspirittostochastic
processes considered by statistical physicists, was introduced by Moran [28]. This model
does not have a fixed “previous generation” from which N genes are sampled (with
replacement) to form the next generation. Instead, genes are chosen to die one at a
time, and replaced by new ones which are A with probability p and B with probability
p . These probabilities are calculated from the state of the system prior to the death of
the chosen individual: p (n) = n/N and p (n) = (N n)/N, where n is the number of
A alleles just before the combined birth-death event.
The Moran model does not have non-overlapping generations, as in the Wright-
Fisher model: after N sampling events in the Moran model, each gene need not have
been replaced, and several might not have survived very long at all. It is therefore said
to have overlapping generations. Due to the impossibility of unambiguously identifying
a “generation” in this case, a generation in the Moran model is frequently defined as
Stochastic Models of Evolution in Genetics, Ecology and Linguistics 8
the period over which a single sampling event takes place. This is a confusing use of the
word “generation”, but at least it is well defined. So, in one generation the population
of A may go up by one (if a B is chosen to die, and an A is chosen to be born) or down
by one (if an A is chosen to die, and a B is chosen to be born). The number of A alleles
will remain unchanged if both an A is chosen to die and to be born, and also if a B is
chosen to die and to be born. This gives the transition matrix to be
1 n p (n), if n′ = n+1
 (cid:16)n p ((cid:17)n)+ 1 n p (n), if n′ = n
n(cid:17)p
(cid:16)0, (cid:17) otherwise,
from which it follows
that
n′ p n′n = 1.
The explicit expressions for the non-zero elements of the transition matrix of the
Moran model are therefore
(cid:18) (cid:19)(cid:18) (cid:19)
(cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18) (cid:19)
p = 1 . (10)
(cid:18) (cid:19)(cid:18) (cid:19)
The transition matrix (9) for the Moranmodel is much simpler thanfor the Wright-
Fisher model, being tri-diagonal. Therefore it is not surprising that the eigenvalues of
the transition matrix (9) can, as for the Wright-Fisher model, found exactly [28]:
λ = 1 − , r = 0,...,N , (11)
but, unlike theWright-Fisher model, the corresponding eigenvectors arealso known [29].
The two largest eigenvalues are both unity; they have left eigenvectors (1,1,...,1) and
(0,1,...,N) and corresponding right eigenvectors (1,0,0,...,0)T and (0,0,...,0,1)T.
Clearly the last two column vectors correspond to the loss and fixation of the A allele.
The third largest eigenvalue, λ = 1 (2/N2) has the left eigenvector (0,N 1,2(N
2),...,n(N n),...,0) and right eigenvector ( (1/2)(N 1),1,1,...,1, (1/2)(N
1))T [28, 29]. This column vector governs the behaviour, after a large number of
generations, of the non-fixed states. In particular, we have, once t is sufficiently large,
1 n0 (N−1)
P(t)  . . . + 6n 0 (N − n 0 )  . . .  1 2 t (12)
where n is the initial number of A alleles. We see that the unfixed states are equally
populated except at the boundaries, in agreement with graphical representations of
the pdf displayed in, e.g., [2, 23], which show it to be essentially flat away from the
boundaries after many generations.
Stochastic Models of Evolution in Genetics, Ecology and Linguistics 9
2.3. Mutations in the Wright-Fisher and Moran Models
So far we have been considering situations where the change in composition of the
populationiscausedbypuregeneticdrift—randomnesswithnounderlyingdeterministic
behaviour. We now include the effects of mutation: an A allele may mutate with a
probability of u to a B allele, and a B allele may mutate with a probability of v to an
A allele. These are probabilities per generation, so once again these quantities in the
Wright-Fisher model will differ from those in the Moran model by a factor of N.
To include mutation, one chooses an allele from the current population to die, and
replaces it with one of a type chosen also with a probability proportional to the current
population sizes. This is as in the original models. The mutational stage is inserted
at the end of the process, so the chosen successor is allowed to mutate before being
introduced into the system to define the new population. In other words, when we pick
an allele to be the “parent” of a “child” in the next generation, the offspring can mutate
with the probabilities u or v. For instance, if an A allele is chosen, there is a probability
of (1 u) that the replacement allele is also an A and of u that it is a B. So, with
mutation added,
(cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18) (cid:19)
(cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18) (cid:19)
The transition matrices for the Wright-Fisher and Moran models are again found from
Eqs. (1) and (9), but using p and p given by Eqs. (13) and (14). So for instance, the
non-zero elements of the transition matrix for the Moran model are
p = (1 u) 1 +v 1 ,
− − N N − N
(cid:18) (cid:19)(cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18) (cid:19)
n 2 n 2 n n
− N − − N N − N
(cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18) (cid:19)(cid:18) (cid:19)
p = (1 v) 1 +u . (15)
(cid:18) (cid:19)(cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18) (cid:19)
Allowing for the possibility of mutation means that the expected number of A
alleles is no longer conserved. For the Wright-Fisher model this can be calculated as in
Eq. (7), but now
h i − h i −h i
For the Moran model we calculate n np nn′ directly from Eq. (15) and find that
n(t+1) = n(t) +v 1 h i u h i , (18)
h i h i − N !− N !
Stochastic Models of Evolution in Genetics, Ecology and Linguistics 10
which is of the same form as Eq. (17), apart from the factors of N dividing the
mutation probabilities. Eqs. (17) and (18) give the number of A alleles in an infinite
population, where no fluctuations are present. Written in terms of allele frequencies,
a = n(t) /N and b = 1 a , Eq. (17) is nothing else but the deterministic equation
for mutational change, a = (1 u)a +vb , found in many textbooks on population
genetics [22, 23, 24].
This difference equation for a may be easily solved by writing a = v/(u+v)+c ,
so that c = (1 u v)c . The equation for c can be solved iteratively to give
c = (1 u v)tc , which yields
a = +(1 u v) a
(cid:20) (cid:21)
= 1 (1 u v) +a (1 u v) . (19)
Since 0 < 1 u v < 1, a v/(u+v) as t .
The addition of mutations also means that neither the A nor the B allele can
become fixed—there is always the possibility of an allele being created by mutation,
even if there are currently none present in the population. Thus the behaviour of both
theWright-FisherandMoranmodelswithmutation,afteralargenumber ofgenerations,
is more complicated to obtain. Nevertheless, the eigenvalues of the transition matrices
are known. For the Wright-Fisher model [26]:
N r!
λ = (1 u v) , r = 0,...,N , (20)
r − − r!Nr
and for the Moran model [24]
λ = 1 (u+v) (1 u v) − , r = 0,...,N . (21)
The Moran model with mutation can be solved analytically [30, 31]. In addition,
approximate methods exist, such as the diffusion approximation discussed in Section
3, which describe these models well. Finally, all of the models can be generalised
to the cases with two sexes and diploid individuals [29]. These models are more
complicated, butdonotinourviewmaketheunderlyingideasortheconnectionbetween
different approaches any clearer. For all these developments we refer the reader to the
literature on the subject [29, 23, 25, 24]; meanwhile, in Section 5 we shall examine how
sexual reproduction and diploidy are handled in models that are more easily studied
analytically.
2.4. Migration between Islands
In the models of genetic drift considered so far, new individuals were produced from
their “parents” randomly. If the organisms had been diploid, we would have said that
the mating was random. This randomness assumption may model some situations, for
example, if sperm is released into a pond or lake by a group of male fish in order to
fertilise eggs laid by females nearby. However, there are many instances where mating is
Stochastic Models of Evolution in Genetics, Ecology and Linguistics 11
notrandom. Oneofthemostinterestingiswhengroupsofindividualsaregeographically
separated. Then, if there is little migration between the populations, so that they are
effectively isolated, stochastic effects mean that they will develop in different ways. For
instance, some alleles may be lost in some of the populations, but not in others.
Models which describe the population genetics of subdivided populations which are
partly isolated from each other are called “island models” and were first investigated
by Wright [2]. The island populations themselves are referred to as demes. In early
models, migration between demes was essentially independent of the distance between
the islands which contained them, that is, each deme interchanged genes equally with
every other deme. More elaborate models soon followed, such as stepping stone models,
where the rate of migration between demes is a function of the distance between the
islands [32, 33, 34]. These models can be generalised by defining a migration matrix,
g , which specifies the probability that, if an individual in deme j has had an offspring,
the later immediately migrates to deme i (so that it has arrived at the start of the next
generation).
The inclusion of migration into the models so far considered in this section is
in principle straightforward, but in some cases the matrix of transition probabilities
becomes cumbersome to write down. There are also potentially several different models
which can be constructed depending on the order in which the various processes of
birth, mutation and migration take place, how many migrants are permitted into and
out of each deme, and so on. The introduction of migration into Moran-type models
is, as expected, easier to formulate and seems more natural to statistical physicists.
In the usual spirit of this approach, migrations will be considered as single events, for
instance, a migration of a gene from deme j to deme i. This is in contrast to many other
approaches to stochastic models of migration, including one introduced by Moran [35],
where a fixed number of individuals are chosen to migrate from one deme to another.
We shall consider the class of models for which migration can be characterised through
the matrix g defined above: this class includes the simple cases considered by early
workers, such as uniform migration rate between all demes or stepping stone models.
The number of demes will be taken to be L and we will assume that they will each
consist of N genes. For simplicity we will assume that the mutation rates will be the
same on each island. In other words, each island will be an exact copy of the systems
considered previously in this section, but coupled together by migration processes.
To illustrate the basic idea, suppose that there are only two islands, not L as
assumed above. Since each island contains exactly N genes, only two integers are
required to specify the state of the system: n and n , where n is the number of A
alleles in deme i, where i = 1,2. We begin with the basic Moran model of section 2.2
where only the birth/death process is considered. When migration is added, a “death”
is not necessarily followed by a “birth”—it can be followed by a migration event. The
algorithm we use is as follows. First, we randomly pick a “parent”, or gene to be
copied, from deme i with probability f . Suppose this parent is on island 2. Then with
probability g a migration event takes place, which entails a death on island 1, and the
Stochastic Models of Evolution in Genetics, Ecology and Linguistics 12
copied gene from island 2 occupying the space that was left behind. With probability
g = 1 g we assume that no migration event takes place and a death takes place on
island 2, with the copied gene from island 2 replacing it. Note that the total probability
per generation that anindividual migrates fromdeme i to deme j per generation is g f .
Since N is fixed for each deme, if B increases by 1 on island i, this is equivalent to
A decreasing by 1 on island i. So the four independent transition probabilities are given
p = f (1 g ) 1 +f g 1 ,
(n1+1,n2)(n1,n2) 1
(cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18) (cid:19)
p = f (1 g ) 1 +f g 1
(n1−1,n2)(n1,n2) 1
(cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18) (cid:19)
p = f (1 g ) 1 +f g 1
(n1,n2+1)(n1,n2) 2
(cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18) (cid:19)
p = f (1 g ) 1 +f g 1 , (22)
(n1,n2−1)(n1,n2) 2
(cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18) (cid:19)
(n1,n2)(n1,n2)
p p . (23)
We can obtain the deterministic equation, valid in the limit N , describing the
effect of migration on the number of A alleles on one island, by using the same method
as was used to find Eq. (18), describing the effects of mutation. In this case we calculate
n1,n2 n 1 p (n1,n2)(n′ 1 ,n′ 2) from Eqs. (22) and (23) to find that
h i h i N h i−h i
which is of the same form as Eq. (18) for mutations. The corresponding expression for
the expected number of A alleles on island 2, n (t+1) is obtained by exchanging all
1 and 2 indices. Using these expressions one can show that the weighted mean
1 21 1 2 12 2
is conserved, i.e., n¯(t+1) = n¯(t), whilst the difference
decays geometrically since
In other words, migration results in a convergence of the mean allele frequencies on the
two islands to a common value which in turn eventually reaches a stationary value n∗
that can be worked out from equation (25) once the initial values n (0) and n (0) are
known:
f g n (0)+f g n (0)
n∗ = 1 21 1 2 12 2 . (28)
Stochastic Models of Evolution in Genetics, Ecology and Linguistics 13
Population genetics Population ecology Language evolution
gene individual token
allele species variant
island patch speaker
deme local community grammar
population metacommunity speech community
mutation speciation innovation
migration immigration conversation
Table 1. The correspondences between constituents, concepts and processes in
population genetics, population ecology and language evolution.
2.5. Mapping between population genetic, ecological and linguistic models
In section 1 we have already discussed the analogies that can be drawn between models
of population genetics, individual based models (IBMs) in ecology and models of the
evolution of language. The mathematical formalism we have introduced in the current
sectionallowsustomake theseanalogiesmoreconcrete, andtodefine mappingsbetween
models in these three distinct areas.
The genetic models which we have described have been of a gene at a single position
(locus) on a chromosome, involved only one chromosome, and has not included sex: new
genes were “born” from a single parent. In this very simplified genetics, we can directly
identify a gene with an individual and vice-versa. In this case different alleles can be
thought of as different species. Therefore in the context in which we have been working,
the mappings [genes individuals] and [alleles species] is very natural. The idea
of an island is common to both population genetics and population ecology, where it is
called a patch, and we have the further correspondence [deme local community].
To extend these mappings to the evolutionary model of language change [12, 13,
15, 16] described briefly in section 1, we begin by noting that the central idea of this
approach is to make an analogy between “different ways of saying the same thing”—
called variants of a word or set of words, and alleles. The specific “word or set of words”
under consideration is called the lingueme. Thus the first analogy is [variants alleles].
In the model [17], each speaker’s utterances may contain different variants of a lingume.
In the case of two variants, the speaker’s grammar can be modelled as being made up of
N tokens, of which n are of one variant and N n of the other. An utterance by speaker
i will then produce tokens which modifies his own grammar (death and birth of tokens
belonging to speaker i) and which may modify the grammar of speaker j (migration of
tokens from speaker i to speaker j). This gives the further analogies [tokens genes]
and [speakers islands]. Table 1 summarises the mappings between these different
areas.
While wehave so farassumed thatthereareonlytwo alleles, AandB, inthecase of
population genetics, the analogies with population ecology and evolutionary linguistics
Stochastic Models of Evolution in Genetics, Ecology and Linguistics 14
make it clear that we will frequently be interested in having more than two species or
variants in our models. Therefore in the next section will generalise the models so that
there are M possible types of gene/individual/token.
The interpretation of “genetic drift”, mutation and migration in populationecology
and evolving linguistics is interesting. The species being considered in the analogy
are not to be thought of as predators and prey, but rather as species of a similar
type (“trophically similar species”) competing for a common resource, such as space
or light. The fact that when a death of an individual occurs, it is immediately replaced
by another (either through a birth or by immigration) means that there is intense
competition; as soon as a “vacancy” occurs, it is immediately filled. This coupling of
the death rate to the birth/immigration rate so that the overall population remains
fixed, is called the “zero-sum rule” in biology. Models where trophically similar species
(for example, forests of trees) change their population sizes through purely random
dynamics analogous to pure genetic drift, are called neutral models [7]. They are, at
present, quite controversial [36], mainly because measurable “physical” quantities such
as the species abundance distribution arise as a result of random effects. In the context
of neutral theories a mutation corresponds to speciation, where a single individual of a
species changes into an individual of a different species. This is, of course, a very coarse-
grained description of a very complex process. Immigration has the same interpretation
as migration in the genetic case.
In the linguistics application, we think of different linguistic variants competing for
use by members of the speech community. Here, the analogue of “trophically similar
species” would be functionally equivalent variants, or “two ways of saying the same
thing”. For true neutrality, one would further require that no speakers ascribe any
social value (“prestige”) to a variant, which might cause them to reproduce it more (or,
indeed, less) often they have heard it used thus far. There are many ways in which
new variants might be created, a process referred to as innovation [14]. Basically, most
of these arise from speakers needing to communicate something that they have not
communicated before; other forces behind innovation include articulatory constraints
which may involve speakers producing one variant, even if they aim to produce another.
This latter case, in particular, could be modelled by mutation rates between variants,
as we have described for the genetics application. Migration corresponds to the process
whereby tokens from the grammar of one speaker are incorporated into the grammar of
another speaker with whom the first is conversing. Two factors contribute to the overall
rate at which tokens migrate from one grammar to another: first, the is the frequency
withwhich two speakers converse; secondly, speakers maygive higher orlower weights to
the utterances of other speakers based, for example, on the listener’s perception of how
similar the interlocutor is to themselves, or whether they wish to acquire social status
by imitating variants associated with a prestigious group. Such sociolinguistic effects
are discussed in more detail in [14]. Meanwhile, it has been proposed [20] that when
dialects are brought into contact, as happened for example when people from Britain
and Ireland migrated to New Zealand, a truly neutral theory (i.e., one in which these
Stochastic Models of Evolution in Genetics, Ecology and Linguistics 15
social factors are claimed to be unimportant) should describe observed effects, such as
convergence to a relatively homogeneous dialect among a large community of speakers
ona timescale of order of a human lifetime. Whether a genetic drift-like process actually
allows for such behaviour is another matter of debate and is under current investigation.
In this section we have introduced the simplest stochastic models of population
genetics and brought out analogies with similar models in population ecology and
evolutionary linguistics. In the next section we will write these models in a form more
familiar to statistical physicists, generalise them, and also show that when the number
of genes/individuals/tokens for an island/patch/speaker is large, they may be replaced
by models based on Fokker-Planck equations, rather than on master equations.
3. Master and Fokker-Planck equations
As we have seen in Section 2, the Wright-Fisher model is quite difficult to analyse,
especially when mutation and migration are allowed for, and so very early on workers
resorted to the diffusion approximation [37, 38, 39]. This is a description of the process,
valid when N is large, where (a) the (rational) allele frequencies n/N are replaced by
real numbers x, 0 x 1, and (b) the generational label, t, is rescaled by a factor
of 1/N. Specifically, t now measures units of N generations, so that one generation
becomes only 1/N units of t. The governing equation is now a Fokker-Planck equation
for P(x,τ′ x ,0) which for pure genetic drift has the form
∂τ′ 2∂x2 −
where τ′ = t/N. In essence, this is a mesoscopic description, whereas the Wright-Fisher
equation was a microscopic, or gene-based description. It is possible to add terms to
Eq. (29) which account for mutations and migrations.
In the last section we also described how the Moran model, while similar to the
Wright-Fisher model, was in many ways easier to write down and generalise. Therefore
in this section we will formulate the basic stochastic processes that interest us in terms
of Moran-type models, rather than Wright-Fisher models. An advantage is that Moran-
type models may be formulated as master equations, a step that is not typically followed
in the mathematical biology literature. The advantage of formulating a stochastic
process in this way, is that there there then exist systematic methods to approximate
the master equation for large N as a Fokker-Planck equation [27]. It will turn out that
the Fokker-Planck equation corresponding to the large N limit of the Moran model has
the same form as Eq. (29), that is, has the same limit as the Wright-Fisher model.
Wewillbeginbydiscussing thereformulationoftheMarkovchainbaseddescription
of population genetics given in Section 2 to the master equation description which we
will use in the rest of the section.
Stochastic Models of Evolution in Genetics, Ecology and Linguistics 16
3.1. Master equations and population genetics
We begin by rewriting the standard dynamical relationfor a Markov chain, P(n,t+1) =
p nn′P(n′,t) as
P P(n,t+1) P(n,t) = p nn′P(n′,t) p n′n P(n,t), (30)
using n′ p n′n = 1. Now the terms in the sums with n′ = n may be omitted—since they
cancel between the two terms on the right-hand side—and so only the terms involving
an actual transition, that is, terms with n′ = n, appear in the equation.
Up until this point, we have been careful not to refer to t as a “time”—it has simply
been an integer labelling generations. However now we interpret t as time divided into
intervals ∆t taken to be sufficiently small that at most one sampling event occurs during
it. Dividing Eq. (30) by ∆t, and omitting the terms with n′ = n, yields
∆t ∆t − ∆t
n′6=n(cid:18) (cid:19) n′6=n(cid:18) (cid:19)
We now adopt a different view of the stochastic process. Instead of assuming that
one exactly one sampling event happens per generation (including n n, where no
transition actually occurs), we now have sampling events occur at unit rate so that on
average one event takes place per generation. Once t is sufficiently large, by far the
most likely number of sampling events that will have taken place will be equal to t.
Therefore one expects the properties of the continuous and discrete time processes to
concur at large times. Additionally, we replace the transition probability from state n′
to n per generation p nn′ with the transition rate per unit time T(n n′).
These two quantities are related via the expression
where the terms of order (∆t)2 and higher represent the probability of two or more
events happening in time ∆t. Substituting (32) into Eq. (31), and letting ∆t 0, gives
which is the usual master equation used by statistical physicists [27, 40, 41]. Typically,
the transition rates T(n n′) are assumed given (this specifies the model) and we wish to
determine the P(n,t). The initial condition is that the system is in state n at t = 0.
Boundary conditions may also have to be given.
To illustrate these ideas we will lookat three examples, all ofwhich were introduced
in Section 2. We begin with the Moran model for pure genetic drift, which has non-zero
elements of the transition matrix given by Eq. (10). In the continuous time formulation,
the population evolves by two individuals being sampled uniformly with replacement
from the population as a Poisson process with the mean time between events taken
to be unity. One of the sampled individuals is designated the parent which is copied
to create an offspring; the other sampled individual is sacrificed to make way for the
Stochastic Models of Evolution in Genetics, Ecology and Linguistics 17
new offspring. To obtain the transition rates in the master equation (33), we need not
consider the matrix element p , since this does not involve an actual transition. We
find therefore
T(n+1 n) = 1 , T(n 1 n) = 1 . (34)
| − N N − | N − N
(cid:18) (cid:19)(cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18) (cid:19)(cid:18) (cid:19)
WenowturntotheMoranmodelwithmutation, which hasnon-zeroelements given
by Eq.(15). Wewill contrast two ways onemight construct acontinuous-time processto
mirror the discrete time process as defined in Section 2.3. The most obvious is to follow
the prescription given earlier: that is, to have Poisson sampling events as described in
thepreviousparagraph,andtomutatethecopyoftheparenttoalleleB withprobability
u if the chosen parent was an A or with probability v in the opposite direction. The
transition rates T(n+1 n) and T(n 1 n) are then given by the expressions for p
and p appearing in Eq. (15), i.e.,
T(n+1 n) = (1 u) 1 +v 1 ,
(cid:18) (cid:19)(cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18) (cid:19)
T(n 1 n) = (1 v) 1 +u . (35)
(cid:18) (cid:19)(cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18) (cid:19)
The second approach we shall take differs in that the mutation process will
is divorced from the death/birth process—the two are considered to take place
independently with mutations occurring spontaneously, rather than between a death
and a birth. Specifically, we shall sample on average once per unit time a parent–
offspring pair, as previously described. With probability γ, we replace the offspring
with a copy of the parent without mutation. The rest of the time, i.e., with probability
1 γ, we switch the offspring individual to allele state B with probability U if it is
in state A; otherwise we switch to state A from B with probability V. This leads to
transition rates of the form
(cid:18) (cid:19)(cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18) (cid:19)
(cid:18) (cid:19)(cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18) (cid:19)
To make contact with the discrete-time Moran process, we shall insist that, at any given
time, the probability that the next event to occur in thecontinuous-time process isequal
to that for the discrete-time process, given the same starting configuration. To do this,
we rewrite p and p in (15) as
p = (1 u v) 1 +v 1
(cid:18) (cid:19)(cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18) (cid:19)
p = (1 u v) 1 +u . (38)
− − − N N N
(cid:18) (cid:19)(cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18) (cid:19)
Correspondence is obtained if we put
γ = 1 u v , V = and U = , (39)
that is, if a fraction u of the time, A alleles spontaneously change state to B alleles,
and a fraction v of the time, B alleles change to A. Note this leads only to positive
Stochastic Models of Evolution in Genetics, Ecology and Linguistics 18
transition rates if the mutation probabilities satisfy u+v < 1. Therefore, not all Moran
processes in which birth, death and mutation are intertwined can be represented by
a continuous-time model in which mutation occurs independently of birth and death.
Nevertheless, a model with transitions rates of this form was introduced by Maruyama
(Model I in the appendix of [25]) and it has been remarked [42] that the results obtained
by this model and the Moran model seem to be essentially identical. Our derivation of
the former starting from the latter shows why this is the case.
Wenow turnto thetheMoranmodelwithmigrationbetween two islands, discussed
in Section 2.4. In this case the state of the system is specified by two integers:
n = (n ,n ). The considerations leading to the master equation (33), where the state is
specified by a single variable, generalise in a straightforward way to the case where the
state is specified by a set of integers:
where in the case under consideration here n = (n ,n ). The transition probabilities are
given by Eq. (22). To construct the corresponding continuous-time process, we take the
rate at which a parent is chosen in deme j, the offspring of which displaces an individual
in deme i, to be
G = f g , (41)
where we recall that f is the probability the parent is in deme j, and g the probability
that the offspring lands in deme i, conditioned on the parent being in deme j. Since
f = 1 and g = 1 for any j, the total rate at which pairs of individuals are
sampled is
G = f g = 1 (42)
as required, even though the sampling is now non-uniform.
The transition probabilities for this model then follow as
T(n +1,n n ,n ) = G 1 +G 1 ,
1 2 1 2 11 12
| − N N − N N
(cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18) (cid:19)
T(n 1,n n ,n ) = G 1 +G 1
1 2 1 2 11 12
− | − N N N − N
(cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18) (cid:19)
T(n ,n +1 n ,n ) = G 1 +G 1
1 2 1 2 22 21
| − N N − N N
(cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18) (cid:19)
T(n ,n 1 n ,n ) = G 1 +G 1 . (43)
1 2 1 2 22 21
− | − N N N − N
(cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18) (cid:19)
Note that the diagonal matrix elements G give the rates at which an individuals are
chosen to reproduce without their offspring subsequently migrating. From the master
equation (40) and the transition rates (43), we can obtain the deterministic equation,
valid in the limit N , describing the effect of migration on the number of A alleles
on one island, by calculating d n /dt. Focusing on island 1, we multiply Eq. (40) by
Stochastic Models of Evolution in Genetics, Ecology and Linguistics 19
n and sum over all n and n . By shifting the quantities being summed over by 1 in
some of the sums over n , one finds that
h i = T(n +1,n n ,n ) T(n 1,n n ,n ) . (44)
1 2 1 2 1 2 1 2
dt h | i−h − | i
Substituting for the transitions rates using Eq. (43) yields
h i = G h i h i , (45)
dt N − N !
which is in agreement with Eq. (24) as one would expect.
3.2. Fokker-Planck equations and the large N limit
Having obtained the transition rates (34), (37) and (43) for pure genetic drift involving
two alleles, together with mutation and migration between two islands, we can now
investigate the form that the governing equations take in the limit where N is large. It
will turn out that these processes can be described by Fokker-Planck equations in this
limit. This will allow more complex situations, for example involving L islands or M
alleles, to be formulated in a rather straightforward way.
We again begin with the Moran model for pure genetic drift. When formulated as
a master equation, it has the form (33) with transition rates (34). Such an equation
is of “the diffusion type”, since there is no macroscopic equation and the large N
approximation results in a non-linear Fokker-Planck equation [27]. In this case, the
large N limit can be obtained in a straightforward fashion by substituting n = xN, and
expanding out any remaining terms in N in a 1/N expansion. We find
∂P 1 1 1 ∂P(x,t) 1 ∂2P(x,t)
= x 1 x+ P(x,t) +
∂t (cid:18) − N (cid:19)(cid:18) − N (cid:19)( − N ∂x 2N2 ∂x2 )
1 1 1 ∂P(x,t) 1 ∂2P(x,t)
(cid:18) N (cid:19)(cid:18) − − N (cid:19)( N ∂x 2N2 ∂x2 )
After a little algebra, this reduces to
∂t N2∂x2 − O
So if we define a scaled time τ = 2t/N2, then taking N we obtain
which is the diffusion equation (29). This shows that two different gene-based
models—the Wright-Fisher and Moran models—give the same mesoscopic Fokker-
Planck equation. This is a familiar situation in statistical physics: microscopic models
describing the same “physics”, but formulated in slightly different ways, typically will
give rise to the same mesoscopic equation. The only difference between the Wright-
Fisher and the Moran model is that, as usual, the time-scales differ. The redefinition of
a generation in the Wright-Fisher model leads to τ′ = t/N, whereas the scaling of time
Stochastic Models of Evolution in Genetics, Ecology and Linguistics 20
in the Moran model gives τ = 2t/N2. In other words, a generation in the Wright-Fisher
model is N/2 times as long as in the Moran model in this mesoscopic description.
When the diffusion approximation is applied to the Moran model which includes
mutational and migrational effects, the rates of migration and mutation have to be
rescaled by a factor of N. If this were not so, the large N limit of the master equation
would not be a Fokker-Planck equation of the diffusion type, but a linear Fokker-Planck
equation which would describe fluctuations about the deterministic equation (17) [27].
In the backward-time formulation discussed later (see Section 4), we will also see that
this scaling corresponds to a regime in which all relevant processes affecting the ancestry
of the population occur on the same timescale.
Let us first consider the models with mutation. The scaled mutation rates, with
the factor of N mentioned above and a factor of 2 to be explained below, are defined by
In Section 3.1 we discussed two ways of introducing mutation into the Moran model.
The first resulting in transition rates given by Eq. (35) and the second in transition
rates given by Eq. (37), with γ,U and V given by Eq. (39). There is no need to carry
out the 1/N expansion for each model in turn, since the transitions rates for both are
identical (although one has the restriction u+v < 1), and which using the scaled forms
2 2 n n 2 n
T(n+1 n) = 1 U V 1 + V 1
| − N − N − N N N − N
(cid:18) (cid:19)(cid:18) (cid:19)(cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18) (cid:19)
2 2 n n 2 n
T(n 1 n) = 1 U V 1 + U . (50)
− | − N − N N − N N N
(cid:18) (cid:19)(cid:18) (cid:19)(cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18) (cid:19)
Since the term (47) is already of order 1/N2, the terms involving /N and /N which
multiply it give terms of order 1/N3, which do not contribute to the Fokker-Planck
equation. Therefore the only additional terms due to mutation are the second terms on
the right-hand side of the transitions probabilities (50), which are
2 1 1 ∂P(x,t) 2 1
V 1 x+ P(x,t) + U x+
(cid:26) N (cid:18) − N (cid:19)(cid:27)( − N ∂x ) (cid:26) N (cid:18) N (cid:19)(cid:27)
1 ∂P(x,t) 2 2
× ( N ∂x )− (cid:20) N − N (cid:21) O
which on simplification yields
Adding this additional term to Eq. (47), and using rescaled time units τ = 2t/N2, we
find on letting N that the additional mutation processes present in either model
give rise to the Fokker-Planck equation
The restriction u + v < 1, which applied to one of the models, takes the form
+ < N/2, when expressed in terms of the scaled mutation rates. Since in most
Stochastic Models of Evolution in Genetics, Ecology and Linguistics 21
applications and are numerically small, and in any case we are taking the limit
N , this condition will always hold. Furthermore, Fokker-Planck equation (53)
agrees with that found by applying the diffusion approximation to the Wright-Fisher
model with mutation [23]. The additional factors of 2 introduced in Eq. (49) were
included to conform with the conventions used in the Wright-Fisher case.
The introduction of two islands or speakers has been discussed in section 2.4 and
the transition rates given in Eq. (43). To derive the Fokker-Planck equation from the
master equation in this case, we note that the first terms on the right-hand sides of
these transition rates are exactly as for pure drift, up to the inclusion of prefactors G
or G . Therefore, the contribution from events which do not involve actual migration
N2∂x2 i − i O
The second terms onthe right-handside ofthe transition rates inEq. (43), for migration
from island j to island i are:
1 1 ∂P(x,t)
+ G 1 x + x P(x,t)
(cid:18) − N (cid:19) ( − N ∂x i )
1 1 ∂P(x,t)
(cid:18) N (cid:19) − ( N ∂x i )
ij i j i j
− − − O N2
(cid:18) (cid:19)
N ∂x − O N2
i (cid:18) (cid:19)
Inorder fortheFokker-Planck equationtobeofthediffusiontype, theratesofmigration
between demes, i.e., G fori = j, havetobescaledbyafactorofN, just asthemutation
rates were. Let us now parametrise these off-diagonal matrix elements as G = 2 /N
where is of order unity. Then, G = f + (1/N), and so the Fokker-Planck equation
∂P(x,t) 1 2 ∂2
∂t N2 i ∂x2 i − i
N2 G 12 ∂x 1 −G 21 ∂x 2! 1 − 2 O (cid:18) N3 (cid:19)
Introducing τ = 2t/N2, as before, we can let N and obtain the Fokker-Planck
equation for migration between two islands:
∂τ 2 i ∂x2 i − i
G ∂x 1 −G ∂x 2! −
In this mesoscopic formulation all trace of the individual genes has disappeared, and we
are left only with a description in terms of the fractions of genes on island i which are
of type A.
Stochastic Models of Evolution in Genetics, Ecology and Linguistics 22
3.3. Migration of genes having M alleles between L islands
We have so far, for simplicity, mainly restricted ourselves to considering two islands and
twoalleles. However theformalismwehavediscussedcarriesoverwithlittlemodification
to the cases of an arbitrary number of island and alleles. In order to avoid introducing
too many complicating looking expressions in this section, we have relegated some of
the details to an appendix.
3.3.1. L Islands We assume that on each island we have a deme labelled by i, with n
being the number of A alleles and (N n ) the number of B alleles. A parent is chosen
from island j with probability f and subsequently leaves an offspring on island i with
probability g , where the sum rule g = 1 g must be satisfied. Then proceeding
ij ii j6=i ji
as in Section 2.4, the transition probabilities analogous to those in Eq. (22) are:
p = f 1 g 1
(n1,...,ni+1,...,nL)(ni,...,nL) i
j6=i (cid:18) (cid:19)
+ f g 1 , (58)
j6=i (cid:18) (cid:19)
p = f 1 g 1
(n1,...,ni−1,...,nL)(ni,...,nL) i
j6=i (cid:18) (cid:19)
+ f g 1 . (59)
j6=i (cid:18) (cid:19)
To go over to a master equation description, we introduce the set of migration rates via
Eq. (41). The transition rates for the master equation (40) now follow:
T(n ,...,n +1,...,n n ,...,n ) = G 1 ,
1 i L 1 L ij
j (cid:18) (cid:19)
T(n ,...,n 1,...,n n ,...,n ) = G 1 . (60)
1 i L 1 L ij
j (cid:18) (cid:19)
To obtain the Fokker-Planck equation, valid when N is large, is now very simple, since
the required calculations are as in the L = 2 case. For example, Eq. (54) is unchanged,
except that the sum is now from i = 1 to i = L, and the contribution (55) holds for all
pairs i and j with i = j. Introducing as before G = 2 /N for i = j, rescaling time
as τ = 2t/N2, letting N and noting that G f in this limit, we obtain the
Fokker-Planck equation for migration between L islands:
∂τ 2 i ∂x2 i − i
Xhiji G ∂x i −G ∂x j! −
Here the notation ij means “sum over all distinct pairs i and j”.
Stochastic Models of Evolution in Genetics, Ecology and Linguistics 23
Fokker-Planck equations may be written as continuity equations [41]; in the case
of interest here it takes the form ∂P/∂τ + ∂J /∂x = 0, where
i i i i ij i j
is the probability current. Multiplying the equation of continuity by x and integrating
over all x (i = 1,...,L) gives
h i = dxx = dxx = dxJ , (63)
dτ ∂τ − ∂x
since the probability current vanishes on the boundaries [41]. From Eqs. (62) and (63)
h i = ( x x ) . (64)
dτ − G h i−h i
To make contact with previous results for finite N, we reintroduce n = Nx , G =
2 /N and t = N2τ/2, so that Eq. (64) becomes
h i = G ( n n ) . (65)
dt − N h i−h i
This is in agreement with Eq. (45) found directly from the master equation in the case
L = 2.
Let us briefly consider under what conditions the mean of the frequency of A alleles
across all islands is conserved. For this we require
n = ( n n ) = h i (G G ) = 0 .(66)
k k j kj jk
dt h i − N h i−h i N −
k k j6=k j k6=j
For this to hold for any set of allele frequencies n , we require
G = G j . (67)
Since the total mean A allele frequency is conserved by migration (and rigorously
conserved in the absence of drift, not just on average) models for which the migration
rates satisfy this equality are called conservative. We will see in Section 5 that a number
of exact results are known for models with conservative migration.
3.3.2. M Alleles So far in this article we have restricted ourselves to situations where
each gene has only two alleles: A and B. There is no reason, other than grounds of
simplicity, to do so, and it is possible to generalise the treatment to the situation where
there are M possible types of alleles, A , where α = 1,...,M. If one is considering a
single island, the possible states are labelled by the number of A alleles denoted by
n , where α = 1,...,(M 1). Clearly, since M n = 1, n = 1 (M−1) n is not
an independent variable. If there are L islands, then there are L(M 1) independent
variables: n with i = 1,...,L and α = 1,...,(M 1).
Stochastic Models of Evolution in Genetics, Ecology and Linguistics 24
We begin by assuming that there is no mutation or migration (that is, L = 1). The
basic transition probability associated with an A allele being replaced by an A allele
p = , (68)
(n1,...,nα+1,...,nβ−1,...,nM−1)(n)
(cid:18) (cid:19)(cid:18) (cid:19)
where α = β, α,β = 1,...,(M 1). Clearly if the transition involves the Mth allele
the expression has to be modified, since the number of alleles of type M is not an
independent variable. The transition rates which appear in the master equation are
obtained as before through consideration of a continuous-time process in which pairs
of individuals, one of which reproduces and whose offspring displaces the others, are
sampled on average once per unit time. This leads to
T(n ,...,n +1,...,n 1,...,n n) = , (69)
(cid:18) (cid:19)(cid:18) (cid:19)
where α = β and neither is equal to M, and
T(n ,...,n +1,...,n n) = T(n ,...,n 1,...,n n)
1 α M−1 1 α M−1
(cid:18) N (cid:19) P N !
if either allele α(= M) increases at the expense of allele M or allele M increases at the
expense of allele α(= M), respectively.
We can now carry out a large N expansion on the master equation with the
transition rates (69) and (70), just as we did in Eq. (46). The algebraic details are a
little more messy for general M, and so we have given them in the Appendix. Rescaling
the time as before, one finds the Fokker-Planck equation
∂P 1 M−1 ∂2 M−1M−1 ∂2
in the limit N . This the usual multi-allelic diffusion equation [43]
If we now add the possibility of mutations occurring, M(M 1) mutation
probabilities have to be defined to describe mutations from allele A to allele A . We
will denotethis probability byu (α = β). To see how thismatrix enters theformalism,
let us return to the the case of two alleles and rewrite Eqs. (13) and (14) as
where we have written A and B as A and A respectively, n = N n , and where the
mutation matrix is given by
Notice that the condition that the columns of the matrix u add up to 1 ensures that
p = 1, since n = N. For the case of M different alleles u has entries u if
α α β β αβ
α = β, and 1 u for the diagonal entry (β,β). Therefore to deduce the form of
the transition probabilities in the Moran model with M alleles and mutation, we may
Stochastic Models of Evolution in Genetics, Ecology and Linguistics 25
follow the same arguments which led to Eq. (15) in the case of two alleles. For instance,
if an A allele is replaced by an A allele, then
(n1,...,nα+1,...,nβ−1,...,nM−1)(n) α
(cid:18) (cid:19)
This will hold for all α and β, with α = β, as long as we interpret n as 1 n .
The change in the mean value of n with time can be calculated in an analogous way
to Eq. (18) and one finds that
n (t+1) = n (t) + u h i u h i . (75)
h i h i ( N − N )
As in Section 3.1, we shall follow two approaches to mutation in the continuous
time formulation. First, we shall have pairs of individuals sampled on average once per
unit time, and the offspring of the parent changed to allele α with probability u given
that the sampled parent carried allele β. Transition rates for this model are then given
T(n ...n +1...n 1...n n) = u (76)
for α = β and it is understood that n is always implicitly given by 1 M−1n . In the
Appendix we derive the Fokker-Plank equation for this system, valid when N is large.
Again, it is necessary to rescale the rates of mutation between different alleles, i.e.,
The Fokker-Planck equation reads
∂P M−1 ∂ 1 M−1M−1 ∂2
where (x) and (x) are given by
x (1 x ), if α = β
D ( x α x β , if α = β.
Note that the term in the sum with α = β in (79) is zero, so it is not necessary to define
the diagonal rescaled mutation matrix elements
It is worth, briefly, considering the variant of the continuous-time mutation model
in which mutation events are separated from the birth-death events. As in Section 3.1,
we shall sample pairs of individuals on average once per generation, and a fraction γ of
the time replace one of the pair with a copy of the other; the remaining fraction 1 γ
of the time, one of the pair shall be mutated to allele α with probability U , given that
it carries allele β. The transition rates for this model are
T(n ...n +1...n 1...n (n) = γ +(1 γ) U . (81)
− | N N − N
(cid:20) (cid:21) (cid:20) (cid:21)
Stochastic Models of Evolution in Genetics, Ecology and Linguistics 26
Compare now with (76) which can be written as
T(n ...n +1...n 1...n n) = 1 u + u . (82)
− |  −  N N N N
Since no allele frequencies n /N with δ = α,β appear in (81), the only way the two can
be made equal is if we take u = u . Then, the sum over n /N gives 1 n /N, since
all allele frequencies add up to unity. This results in
T(n ...n +1...n 1...n n) = 1 u +u . (83)
− | − ! N N N
Correspondence with (81) is then obtained as long as
γ = 1 u and U = , (84)
where we have taken U = U for all β =Pα. We see that, in common with the case
M = 2 discussed in Section 3.1, the sum of mutation rates u must be less than one
in order for the simplified model (in which mutation is a spontaneous process) to have
the same dynamics as the full model in which mutation, birth and death are combined.
We remark that this condition is satisfied in the limit N when mutation rates
are scaled with N as above. The Fokker-Planck equation (78) results, albeit with a
simplified deterministic (potential) term
on account of the mutation rates depending only on the end product of the mutation.
Note that this time, the term β = α is included in the summation. Even with this
simplification, the Fokker-Planck equation is a nonlinear partial differential in (M 1)
variables, and one therefore does not expect it to be readily solved. The stationary
solution has long been known [38] to be
M M x2Uα−1
P∗(x ,x ,...,x ) = Γ 2 α (86)
α X =1 U ! α Y =1 Γ(2 U α )
in which Γ(u) is the usual Gamma function. In this steady state, the probability current
vanishes everywhere, i.e., detailed balance is satisfied. For a general set of mutation
rates, i.e., one for which the mutation rates depend on both initial and final allele
states, the stationary solution of the Fokker-Planck equation has not been found. One
therefore speculates that detailed balance is not satisfied for these more general models,
which may be related to the fact that one cannot represent these mutation rates in
models where birth/death and mutation are independent.
Meanwhile, a remarkable feature of the Fokker-Planck equation under the
restriction = is that the full time dependence can be found, not just the steady
state. There are at least two ways to achieve this; either one can explicitly construct
the set of polynomials orthogonal to the weight function given by (86) to obtain the
Stochastic Models of Evolution in Genetics, Ecology and Linguistics 27
eigenfunctions of the operator appearing in (78) [44]. Alternatively, one can make the
change of variables
ξ = , α = 1,...,M 1, (87)
under which the equatiPon becomes separable [45]. Essentially this is possible because
of the simple way that the M-allele problem is “nested” in the (M +1)-allele problem.
This is also responsible for most of the simplifications in the calculations of many other
quantities of interest, such as mean times to fixation, the probability of a particular
sequence of extinctions, and so on [45]. In this approach, it is also learnt that the
eigenfunctions of the Fokker-Planck equation are Jacobi polynomials.
3.3.3. L Islands and M Alleles The final case to consider is when there are M alleles
and L islands. The analysis is a combination of the M = 2, general L case considered
in section 3.3.2 and the L = 1, general M case just considered. So, for example, not
including mutation for the moment, the terms in the transition probability which do
not involve migration are exactly as in Eq. (69) with indices i added to the n or n , as
well as an extra factor of f (1 g ). Alternatively, the transition probabilities are
exactly as in Eqs. (58) and (59) with indices α and β added:
(...,niα+1,...,niβ−1,...)(n) i
j6=i (cid:18) (cid:19)(cid:18) (cid:19)
+ f g . (88)
j6=i (cid:18) (cid:19)(cid:18) (cid:19)
Here we have removed an A allele from island i and replaced it with an A allele, also
from island i (first term) or with a migrant from island j (second term).
We assume that mutation occurs at the point that a parent is copied to make
the new offspring, no matter whether that offspring remains on its parent’s island or
emigrates. Furthermore, the probability that a parent with allele β gives birth to an
offspring with allele α does not depend on either the source or target islands, i.e., the
mutation occurs with probability u as before. Including this mutation process, the
transition probability becomes
p = f 1 g p (n )
(...,niα+1,...,niβ−1,...)(n) i  − ji  α i N
j6=i (cid:18) (cid:19)
+ f g p (n ) . (89)
j ij α j N
j6=i (cid:18) (cid:19)
As before, α = β and it is understood that n should be replaced by 1 n .
The transition rates follow as before.
Starting from the master equation (40) it is straightforward to obtain the Fokker-
Planck equation using these transition rates, the algebraic steps simply being a
combination of those which need to be carried out for the cases considered in Sections
Stochastic Models of Evolution in Genetics, Ecology and Linguistics 28
3.3.1 and 3.3.2. The details are given in the Appendix, where it is shown that the
resulting Fokker-Planck equation is given by
∂P L M−1 ∂
i=1 α=1 iα
ij ji iα jα
1 L M−1M−1 ∂2
X i=1 α X =1 β X =1 iα iβ h i
where (x) and (x) are given by Eqs. (79) and (80) respectively.
An equation of a very similar formto Eq. (90) has been obtained in connection with
the model of language evolution previously discussed [17]. In that case the equation was
derived through purely mesoscopic reasoning—there were no “islands” of N tokens, only
fractions, x, of different variants in a speaker’s grammar. In this case in order to derive
the Fokker-Planck equation, the mutation and migration rates also had to be scaled,
now not by N, but by λ, the weight given to new tokens. The generational time had also
to be scaled, this time by λ−2. Thus the scalings required to derive the Fokker-Planck
equation are identical in both cases.
4. Backward-time formulation: coalescent theory
In Section 2 we described the Wright-Fisher model as a forward-time process, i.e., one
specifies the probability of having a certain number of alleles in a subsequent generation
given the number present in the current generation. It is perfectly legitimate instead to
ask for the probability that a certain number of individuals in the current generation are
all descended from a set of individuals from the previous generation. As we describe in
this section, one can reconstruct the ancestry of the present-day population given that
it has evolved under the dynamics defined in Section 2. We shall also show below that
this can be used to recover any desired property of the population going forward in time
from a known initial condition. Thus these forward- and backward-time approaches are
entirely equivalent.
4.1. Reconstructing the ancestry
To describe the backward-time approach in detail, we return to the ideal Wright-Fisher
population of N haploid individuals described in Section 2. Each of these individuals
must have a parent from the previous generation; some of them may share a parent,
in which case there are individuals in the previous generation that did not have any
offspring. Hence, as one looks back in time the number of ancestors of the present-day
population must decrease until a single ancestor of the entire population is found.
Let us assume that at t generations in the past (note that in this section, increasing
t means going back further in time) there are n ancestors of the present-day population.
Stochastic Models of Evolution in Genetics, Ecology and Linguistics 29
Figure 2. Graphical representation of the coalescent process. Each vertical line
corresponds to a lineage leading to the final (present-day) population. Two lineages
merge whenever the ancestors they correspond to find a common parent. Since this
coalescentrateisproportionalton(n 1),wherenisthenumberoflineagesremaining
and is much smaller than the total population size N, the expected time between
coalescence events considerably lengthens as one goes back in time.
The probability that any pair of these ancestors have the same parent is 1/N. This can
be understood from the fact that when going forward in time, a new generation can be
constructed by assigning to each of the N offspring a parent chosen at random from one
of the N individuals in the previous generation. The probability that out of any pair of
offspring, the second receives the same parent as the first is then clearly 1/N as claimed.
If the number of ancestors is much smaller than the total population size, n N, the
probability that three or more individuals are siblings, or that that there is more than
one pair of siblings among the subpopulation of n ancestors, is of order 1/N2 and can
thus be neglected in the limit N . As one steps back a single generation, therefore,
the number of ancestors decreases by one with probability
since there are n pairs that could find a common parent; otherwise the number of
ancestors stays t(cid:16)he(cid:17)same.
It is customary to represent this decrease in the number of ancestors in the form of
a tree with the vertical direction representing time (going upwards corresponds to going
backward in time). Each branch represents an ancestor of the present day population
and two branches coalesce when the corresponding ancestors find a common parent—
see Fig. 2. For this reason this backward-time process was called “the coalescent”
when formalised mathematically by Kingmaninthe 1980’s[46], althoughthe underlying
ideas had previously been employed by population geneticists prior to this point (some
discussion of this earlier work can be found in [47]).
Another way to picture this process, which may be more appealing for physicists,
is as a particle reaction system. Let there be a lattice (or, to be more technically
correct, a graph) with N sites (nodes), n of which are occupied by a particle. In each
Stochastic Models of Evolution in Genetics, Ecology and Linguistics 30
Figure 3. Interpretation of the ancestral dynamics as a reaction-diffusion process on
the complete graph. Each particle represents a lineage, and each particle hops to a
neighbour, or stays where it is, with equal probability in each time step. Should two
particles ever coincide on the same site, they react immediately, leaving only a single
particle.
timestep, each particle either remains where it is, or hops with some probability to one
of its neighbours. Should two particles ever occupy the same site simultaneously, they
immediately coalesce—see Fig. 3. One can verify that the backward-time formulation
of the ideal Wright-Fisher model corresponds to this reaction-diffusion process on the
complete graph (i.e., a network in which each site is connected to every other—also
sometimes called a mean-field geometry).
From p one can calculate statistics of the length of time that elapses between a
state with n ancestors to a state with m < n ancestors (as long as both n and m are
much smaller than N). This is because p is constant until a coalescence occurs, and
hence the time spent in a state with n ancestors has a geometric distribution
The mean of this distribution is thus 1/p (n), and since successive coalescence events
are uncorrelated, the time from n to m ancestors is
n 1 n 1 1 1
T(n m) = = 2N = 2N . (93)
ℓ= X m+1 c ℓ= X m+1 − (cid:18) (cid:19)
Thisresultshowsthattheancestryofapresent-daypopulationisdominatedbyanerain
which the number of ancestors is small: the mean time in which there are two ancestors
T(2 1) is more than half the time T(m 1) to a single common ancestor from any
number m N ancestors. In fact, it can further be shown that if one starts with a
sample comprising the entire population m = N, in the limit of an infinite population
N , after any finite rescaled time τ = t/N, the number of ancestors remaining is
finite (i.e., a vanishing fraction of the initial population) [48]. This is significant because
it means that the condition for only pairwise coalescences with nonzero probability, i.e.,
that n N, is satisfied at any finite rescaled time τ in the past.
This backward-time description of Wright-Fisher population dynamics has a
number of practical benefits. Firstly, the data that geneticists have to hand comes
from some present-day sample of individuals, and thus it is sensible to condition the
outcome of the evolutionary dynamics on this known outcome. Indeed, geneticists are
Stochastic Models of Evolution in Genetics, Ecology and Linguistics 31
Figure 4. Linesofascent/descentconnectingtwosetsofindividuals,oneintheinitial
condition and one in the final condition. Note here that shading does not refer to the
allelic state of any individual, rather whether it is considered to be within or outside
the set of interest at the early or late time. The heavy lines show the lines of descent
from the early-time set that contribute to the late-time set.
often interested in the information obtained by reconstructing the ancestry of sampled
genes, and a number of sophisticated methods based on ensembles of ancestral trees
have been developed with this aim in mind [49]. Secondly, it is very much more efficient
to simulate the backward-time process: to construct a genealogical tree for n present-
day individuals with the desired rate involves generating n 1 waiting times from the
appropriate geometric distributions (92). Furthermore, having constructed this tree,
one can superimpose various of models of mutation (such as that described above)
since selectively neutral mutations (i.e., those that do not cause individuals carrying
a particular allele to have more offspring than others) by definition do not affect the
population dynamics. Finally, as we will discuss in Section 5 below, the backward-time
method generalises more readily to non-ideally mating populations (although one is
restricted to selectively neutral alleles).
4.2. Relationship between forward- and backward time dynamics
Clearly, it should be possible to use the backward-time formulation to calculate
properties of the forward-time evolution from a fixed initial condition. The way to
do this is to note that the process of assigning mutant alleles to individuals in the
initial condition is an example of a (one-off) mutation process that has no effect on
the statistics of the line of descent. Consider now Fig. 4. It shows the lines of descent
from some initial condition: we can take the individuals shown shaded at the earlier
time (top) to be mutants, and the remainder to carry the wild-type allele. At the later
time, we can select some other set of individuals (e.g., that formed by the dark-shaded
individuals) and ask for the probability that all are mutants.
Clearly for them all to be mutants, they must all be descended from the mutants
in the initial condition (if no mutation events take place in the interim). However, there
may also be other mutants present at the later time outside the set of interest (there are
two such mutants in Fig. 4). Therefore, to construct the probability R(a,d;t) that all d
Stochastic Models of Evolution in Genetics, Ecology and Linguistics 32
sampled individuals at late time are descended from one, more or all of the a mutants
at the initial time from P(b a;t), the probability that there are precisely b mutants t
generations after the initial condition, one needs to sum the latter, weighted by the
probability that the chosen set falls within the late-time mutant set. Given that there
are b mutants in the population, there are b ways to choose d individuals in such a way
that all are mutants. Since there are in to(cid:16)ta(cid:17)l N possible ways in which d individuals
could have been chosen, we have that (cid:16) (cid:17)
R(a,d;t) = P(b a;t) . (94)
(cid:16)N(cid:17) |
(cid:16) (cid:17)
We can ask the same question using the backward-time language. Let Q(c d;t)
be the probability that the late-time chosen set of d individuals has coalesced into c
ancestors t generations previously. For all d late-time individuals all to be mutants,
their c ancestors must all be drawn from the initial mutant set. Using the same kind of
counting argument as previously one finds that
R(a,d;t) = Q(c d;t) . (95)
(cid:16)N(cid:17) |
(cid:16) (cid:17)
Equating these two expressions gives an implicit duality relation between the forward-
and backward-time distributions P and Q; this can be found for example in [50]. Using
the identity
b′ N N−b b′
(cid:17)(cid:16)
(cid:17)(cid:16)
b!
b!
d X =b d d X =b −
(cid:16) (cid:17)
one can write this duality relation to give P explicitly in terms of Q [21]. One finds
a N N N−b a
P(b a;t) = ( 1)b+d b d−b c Q(c d;t) . (97)
| − (cid:16) (cid:17)(cid:16) N (cid:17)(cid:16) (cid:17) |
X c=1d X =b c
(cid:16) (cid:17)
Since it is usually the case that backward-time quantities are more easily obtained
than their forward-time counterparts (e.g., by Monte Carlo sampling of the ancestral
dynamics, or the equivalent reaction-diffusion process), this formula provides one means
for efficient computation of the evolution from a fixed initial condition. For example, if
one wants to know the probability that a mutant allele has become fixed by time t, one
puts b = N in the foregoing to find
P(N a;t) = Q(c N;t) . (98)
| (cid:16)N(cid:17) |
(cid:16) (cid:17)
Actually, in this case Q(c N;t) is known analytically [48, 47], as indeed is P(N a;t),
at least in the limit N and after rescaling allele frequency x = a/N and time
τ = t/N [23]. Nevertheless, this approach has recently found utility in applications
to fixation times subdivided populations in which neither of these distributions can be
calculated exactly (see [21] and Section 5 below).
Stochastic Models of Evolution in Genetics, Ecology and Linguistics 33
4.3. Scaling with population size in the coalescent formulation
In Section 3 we saw that the characteristic timescale of evolution grew linearly with
population size for the Wright-Fisher model, and quadratically in the Moran model.
One sees these same scaling relations in the coalescent formulation. Recall that above
we argued that the probability that two lineages coalesce in one generation undergoing
Wright-Fisher evolution is p (2) = 1. Under the Moran model, the probability that a
pair of lineages coalesces is equal to the probability that one of them was chosen to be
the parent individual, and the other the offspring. This is p (2) = 2 or p (2) = 2
c N2 c N(N−1)
if the sampling is done with or without replacement, respectively. The factor of 2
appears here because there are two ways in which a (parent, offspring) permutation can
be assigned to a pair of individuals.
In both cases, the total rate of coalescence if there are n lineages present is
p (n) = n p (2) as long as n N. Therefore in the limit N the ancestries
c 2 c ≪ → ∞
of both W(cid:16)ri(cid:17)ght-Fisher and Moran populations have the same dynamics as long as time
as rescaled as τ = t/N in the former and τ = 2t/N2 in the latter. This is precisely the
scaling that was previously used to obtain the same Fokker-Planck equation for the two
models.
In fact, very many neutral population dynamical processes have the same ancestral
dynamics as the Wright-Fisher and Moran models in the limit N under the
appropriate rescaling of time. For example, if one has a model in which the distribution
of offspring number for each individual is invariant under exchanges of the individuals,
and one can further define a timescale on which the probability of ternary coalescences
is vanishingly small compared to binary coalescences, then (subject to other rather
formal requirements), the ancestral dynamics converges in the limit N to that of
the Wright-Fisher process (see, e.g., [51] for the full mathematical details). Population
geneticists refer to this property as the robustness of the coalescent; physicists will
recognise this lack of sensitivity of the late-time behaviour to details of the dynamics in
large populations as a kind of universality.
Furthermore, one can also understand the need to rescale migration and mutation
rates with the population size N from the backward-time formulation. Consider the
Moranmodelwithtwo allelesasdefined inSection 2.3. The probability thata particular
ancestor was chosen as the offspring in the previous generation is 1/N, and further that
the allele mutated after the parent was sampled is either u or v (depending on the allele
in question). For coalescence and mutation probabilities to be of the same order in N,
we therefore require u and v both to be of order 1/N.
5. Non-ideal populations
Wehavethusfarmostlyrestrictedourdiscussiontoidealpopulations,i.e.,thoseinwhich
the individual(s) displaced through the production of new offspring are chosen from a
uniform distribution. We now turn to the contrasting case of non-ideal populations,
Stochastic Models of Evolution in Genetics, Ecology and Linguistics 34
where the individuals to displace are chosen non-uniformly and investigate the various
ways in which population subdivision has been handled by population geneticists.
Non-ideal populations are most easily handled within the backward-time
formulation, and therefore it is most convenient to describe the migration events in
terms of the set of probabilities µ that any given individual randomly sampled from
subpopulation (or deme) i is the offspring of a parent individual from the previous
generation in deme j. For the case i = j, this is given simply as the joint probability
for a parent to be in deme j and an offspring in deme i, which in our earlier notation is
µ = f g . (99)
On the other hand, the probability that an individual in deme i is not an immigrant is
obtained from the fact that µ = 1, viz,
µ = 1 fPg . (100)
It is worth at this stage to explore these migration parameters a little further.
First, if subpopulation i comprises N individuals, the expected number of immigrants
per generation is
N = N µ . (101)
Meanwhile, the expected number of emigrants from deme i (defined as the number of
offspring of individuals that end up in a deme j = i) is
N = N µ . (102)
Migration is called conservative if the expected number of individuals entering and
(in) (out)
leaving every deme per generation is the same, i.e., if N = N i, or equivalently,
N µ = N µ i . (103)
Notethat thiscorresponds with thedefinition ofconservative migrationpreviously given
(67) when all deme sizes are equal, N = N. Now, let us briefly consider the common
ancestor of a subdivided population. The single lineage that remains as t will
hop from between subpopulations at a rate µ from deme i to deme j. Therefore,
the stationary distribution of the common ancestor (assumed unique) is given by the
solution of the set of equations
We see that if migration is conservative, i.e., if (103) holds, the probability that the
common ancestor is in subpopulation i in the steady state is proportional to its size,
where L is the number of subpopulations and N¯ = 1 L N is their mean size.
Stochastic Models of Evolution in Genetics, Ecology and Linguistics 35
Clearly, one can construct models of varying complexity and intricacy by suitable
choices of the migration probabilities µ and subpopulation sizes N , although some
cases are still excluded from this description. Consider the following classical examples.
Symmetric island model The simplest model of subdivision has L equal-sized
subpopulations (islands) of equal size N = N from which a uniform fraction µ of the
individuals on each island are replaced by offspring chosen at random from the other
islands: µ = µ/(L 1) for all pairs i = j. The version of this model that has an
infinite number of islands was introduced by Wright [2, 52]; the finite island model is
often attributed to Maruyama [53] and Latter [54].
Randomly-mating diploid population with two sexes Recall that a diploid population is
one that carries two instances of each gene which may or may not be the same allele. A
diploid population of L individuals can be thought of as a set of L subpopulations, each
of size 2. One gene from in each subpopulation is sampled randomly from the L males
in the populations; the other from the L = L L females. To represent this model
via the migration parameters µ , however, it is necessary to have 2L subpopulations
each of size 1. We then take µ = 1 if subpopulation i is a gene that is inherited
from a male and j is one of the 2L genes carried by a male in the previous generation;
and µ = 1 is the corresponding quantity for females.
Randomly-mating asexual diploid population with hermaphrodism As an alternative to
sexual reproduction, the two genes carried by a diploid individual could be inherited
from the same parent (through a process called selfing) with probability S, or from
two different parents with probability 1 S (by outcrossing). This model cannot be
reproducedusingtheµ parametersbecausetheparentaldistributionisnotindependent
for the two genes carried by a single individual.
It is also possible for populations to be subdivided by age group, for example, if
only individuals within some age class are fertile. Given that considerable complexity
is possible within even the simple general model of population subdivision outlined
here, it is unsurprising that geneticists have sought a small number of parameters with
which to characterise anddifferentiate thevarious specific cases that can beconstructed.
Two quantities that appear prominently throughout the population genetics literature
are inbreeding coefficients and effective population size. Both of these concepts are
commonly said to have been introduced by Wright [55].
5.1. Inbreeding coefficients, fixation indices and F-statistics
Geneticists are often most interested in diploid organisms, and there an important
question is whether the two instances of a gene at a specified locus are the same or
not. In the absence of mutation, the two genes are the same only if they share a
common ancestor (a situation described as being identical by descent). Since this is the
Stochastic Models of Evolution in Genetics, Ecology and Linguistics 36
case if some inbreeding has occurred, the probability F that two genes are identical by
descent is sometimes called an inbreeding coefficient.
Given a sample of some individuals taken from a population, F can be estimated by
examining specificgenetic markers. Forexample, onecanlookfordifferent enzymes that
can catalyse a particular chemical reaction, or look directly at DNA sequences (see e.g.,
[56] for a description of various methods in the context of subdivided populations).
Of particular interest is the way in which population structure manifests itself in
observed identity probabilities: typically, one expects there to be a greater chance
for genes sampled from a subpopulation to be identical, than those from the wider
(meta)population.
A quantity that encodes this information and that has become ubiquitous in
analyses of population structure is denoted F , variously called an inbreeding
coefficient, fixationindexorF-statistic,andwasintroducedbyWright[55]. Anumber of
subtly different, sometimes ambiguous, definitions of this quantity can be found dotted
around the literature—one senses a slight air of frustration arising from this state of
affairs in the introduction of [57] for example. Following the approach of [58] (and
others), we avoid getting too heavily into the distinctions between different expressions
for F , and simply adopt a particular definition, namely that provided by Nei [59]
which reads
Here F is the probability that two genes drawn at random fromthe same subpopulation
are identical by descent, and F¯ is the corresponding quantity for a pair of genes sampled
randomly from the entire population. Nevertheless this definition leaves open the
question of whether these samples should be weighted according to the subpopulation
sizes or not; in practice, this depends on how F has been determined from an actual
sample at hand.
Despite its ubiquity and utility, there are various aspects of this quantity that are
confusing at a first encounter. First there is the (rarely elucidated) notation: S and
T simply stand for subpopulation and total population respectively. With reference to
diploidpopulations, onecanalso defineanalogousquantities F andF which measure
how much more (or less) closely related the pair of genes contained within an individual
are than a pair sampled from the population at large.
Next, one often finds a single expression of F quoted for a given model of
subpopulation, even though identity probabilities in general change with time. Wright’s
infinite island model (defined above) provides one example of a case where F is time
independent. Since the total population size is infinite, the number of individuals across
the whole population that carry a particular allele does not change with time. However,
ifonetakesasubsampleofthispopulationofsizeN,therewillbevariationinthenumber
of alleles of a particular type, and so one finds F = F¯ which leads to a nontrivial F .
Wright [52] obtained an expression for F by taking the case of two alleles with a
fraction x of the individuals in subpopulation i carrying one of them (say, the wild
Stochastic Models of Evolution in Genetics, Ecology and Linguistics 37
type). In such a case, one can show that
F = x2 +(1 x )2 = 2x2 2x¯+1 (107)
0 L i − i −
where f(x) = 1 f(x ). Hence,
We remark that in the limit of infinite subpopulations (where there is no distinction
between sampling with and without replacement), one has 0 F 1, the lower
and upper bounds relating to extremes of homogeneous and heterogeneous spatial
distributions of alleles respectively. These bounds one can see by noting first that the
numerator of (109) is positive, since it is a variance, and second that since all 0 x 1
it follows that 0 x¯ 1 and further that x2 x¯. When subpopulations are finite, it
is possible for F to be slightly negative as a consequence of the effects of sampling
without replacement: having removed one gene from a subpopulation, the probability
of finding an identical gene in another subpopulation could be of order 1/N more likely
than in the same subpopulation. Therefore, if one uses (109) as a general definition
of F rather than (106), as is done for example in [57], the results obtained will not
necessarily agree in situations where subpopulations are finite.
Using (109), Wright [52] showed by an explicit calculation of the variance in the
allele frequencies that for the island model
A quick way to obtain this result is to focus on a single subpopulation and assume
that any immigrants that arrive from the wider population do not have a common
ancestor (and are hence unrelated). This assumption can be justified by switching to
the coalescent picture outlined in Section 4, suitably extended to cater for population
subdivision. If two lineages are situated within a single subpopulation, they coalesce
at a rate 1/N, whereas two lineages in different subpopulations will coalesce at a
rate proportional to µ/L. If the subpopulation size N is held fixed whilst L ,
a separation of timescales occurs and the probability that two lineages in different
subpopulations coalesce effectively vanishes. Hence, F is effectively zero (since the
chance of two randomly-chosen individuals are from the same subpopulation is also of
order 1/L), and F = F . Using now the fact that F does not change with time, one
can establish that
(cid:20) (cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:21)
since the right-hand side of this equation gives the value of F after one generation
of the Wright-Fisher process (as defined in Section 2). This comes about because the
probability that the members of any pair are both descended from individuals from
Stochastic Models of Evolution in Genetics, Ecology and Linguistics 38
the subpopulation of interest is (1 µ)2; the probability that both are offspring of the
same parent is 1/N; and if they are offspring of different parents, those parents were
themselves related with probability F . Rearranging this equation yields (110). Note
that within this picture, F can be interpreted as the probability that two lineages in
the same subpopulation coalesce before one of them migrates away (looking backward
in time).
It is worth looking more closely at how F behaves in the various limits that have
previously been established. First, if the migration probability µ remains finite as the
subpopulation size N , F 0 which indicates an absence of spatial structure
in gene frequencies—precisely what one would expect in the strong migration limit. On
the other hand, if the combination Nµ is finite as N , one has
to leading order in 1/N. As a consequence of this relationship, a value of F
estimated by sampling from a population is often used as a means to obtain the mean
number of migrants µN arriving in a subpopulation in each generation, this being
considered an easier task practically than tracking the movement of individuals between
subpopulations. Wealso remarkthat (110) isnot restricted tothespecial case where the
migration rate between every pair of islands is the same, since it has only been assumed
that F is stationary, and that all immigrants into the subpopulation of interest are
unrelated. In practice this means one requires an infinite total population that is at
equilibrium, or has stationary mean allele frequencies as a consequence of conservative
migration. Nevertheless, these are still quite restrictive assumptions and it turns out
that estimating µN in this indirect way is fraught with difficulties [60].
There is therefore much interest in exploring how F behaves under more general
conditions, and in particular under models of population subdivision in which migration
is not conservative, or the number of subpopulations is finite. In these models, allele
frequencies vary with time, and typically therefore the focus is on the value of F
that is approached as equilibrium is reached. In a model with a finite total population,
the equilibrium state is one of fixation, as previously discussed in Section 2. Hence all
identity probabilities tend to unity. However, the ratio that appears in (106) approaches
a nontrivial finite value, and thus contains some information about population structure
that can be related to gene diversity.
ApopularwaytocalculatethislimitingvalueistoexploitatrickduetoSlatkin[61].
Let us trace the ancestry of a pair of genes sampled from the present day population.
From the discussion of Section 4 we know that eventually a common ancestor of these
genes are found; let us suppose that this happens at time t with probability c(t). Let us
also introduce a Poisson mutation process that occurs with probability θ per generation.
Then, the probability that the two genes are identical in state (i.e., share a common
ancestor and have not been subject to any mutations since the time of coalescence) is
Stochastic Models of Evolution in Genetics, Ecology and Linguistics 39
In the limit θ 0, the concepts of identity by descent and identity in state become
equivalent, and so asymptotically,
F = lim − = 1 (114)
where T and T¯ are the mean times for two genes randomly sampled from within or
between subpopulations respectively to find a common ancestor. In essence, therefore,
the task is to calculate the mean first passage time for a pair of random walkers which
hop between sites of a network at rates controlled by the migration parameters µ .
This is achieved by solving the set of linear equations
ij ik jℓ kℓ k,ℓ
kℓ (cid:18) k (cid:19)
where T is the mean time for two lineages, one in subpopulation i and one in
subpopulationj tocoalesce. Thisequationarisesbecauseifonehastwodistinctlineages,
one needs to wait at least one generation for a change of state to occur. The joint
probability that the lineages in i and j hop to k and ℓ is µ µ . If they arrive in
different subpopulations, we must then further wait a mean time T for coalescence to
occur. Ontheotherhand,iftheylandinthesameplacek, thereisaprobability1/N for
coalescence to occur immediately (i.e., a mean waiting time of zero), otherwise we need
to wait T on average. As with F , the question arises as to how to form the averages
T and T appearing in (114). For example, one could take T = T for a specific
subpopulation of interest. Alternatively, one could average over all subpopulations,
possibly weighted according to their size. It is not uncommon to see both size-weighted
and unweighted versions of T¯ in the literature, presumably because the correct form
depends on whether subpopulation sizes are known experimentally or not (some further
discussion is given in [58]).
For arbitrary migration rates (115) can be rather cumbersome to solve, even for
simple models of population subdivision. Simplifications occur in the limit of slow
migration, where µ = m /N¯ where N¯ is the mean subpopulation size and is taken to
infinity. Recall from Section 2 that this is the regime in which both drift and migration
operate on the same timescale in the limit of an infinite population size; meanwhile, in
the backward-time formulation, this scaling has migration events occurring on the same
timescale as coalescence (see, e.g., [62]). In this limit, terms which have both lineages
hopping simultaneously do not enter into (115). Furthermore, it has been shown [63]
that, ifmigrationisconservative, themeantimeforcoalescence oflineageslocatedinthe
same subpopulation i is independent of i and given by T = LN¯. This fact considerably
simplifies calculation of F for conservative models. For example, Slatkin [61] showed
that for the symmetric island model with a finite number L of islands undergoing a slow
migration process,
ST 1+2Nm L 2 ≈ 1+2Nm " 1+ 2N 1 m L (cid:18) L2 (cid:19)#
(cid:16) (cid:17)
Stochastic Models of Evolution in Genetics, Ecology and Linguistics 40
which agrees with the result previously obtained by other methods (such as that used
by [54]; see also [58]). We observe the the finite-size corrections to the infinite island
result, (110), are of order 1/L which perhaps sheds some light on the ubiquity of the
expression (110) in analyses of population structure.
This procedure for calculating the fixation index F has been followed for a range
of models of population subdivision, such as a hierarchical island model [64] (which
has one finite island model nested inside another), a model with two subpopulations
of different sizes [58] and a continental-island model, where migration does not take
place directly between the islands but only via a central continent [58]. These models
are tractable because of some symmetry or regularity in the migration structure that
can be exploited. It is also possible to make progress in cases where the number of
subpopulations tend to infinity [65, 66, 67]. However, we will not discuss these models
further here.
5.2. Effective population size
Aswedescribedintheprevioussection,themotivationbehindstudyingF isthatitisa
statistic of a populationthatcan beestimated by examining appropriatedata. Asecond
characteristic ofbiologicalpopulationsthathasalsoreceived considerableattentionisits
effective size, N . Like F , this notion can also be attributed to Wright [2], although
it is also understood that Crow and coworkers also made significant contributions to
its development (see, e.g., the classic text [23]). The basic idea here is that an ideal
population is entirely characterised by the number of individuals N that are randomly
mating. In a real population, one suspects that fluctuations (like those associated with
genetic drift) might be due to some special “breeding” individuals that form a subset
of the full population.
There areasmanyways todefineN astherearepropertiesofapopulationthatone
might be interested in; furthermore, these different definitions will not generally give the
same value for a given model of population subdivision. Nevertheless, for the concept
to be useful, one hopes that the effective size determined by examining one quantity is
indicative of how the population as a whole will behave. It is not appropriate here to
get too involved in all the various definitions and their pros and cons; instead we will
highlight two particularly prominent definitions and give a flavour of how they depend
on certain aspects of the population structure. For more extension discussions we refer
the reader to [68, 69].
One of the most natural definitions of effective size arises from the forward-time
prescriptions of the population dynamics given in Section 2. Recall that under the
Wright-Fisher dynamics, if the allele frequency in one generation is known to be x′,
in the next it is a random variable x that has variance x′(1 x′)/N. This connection
between thevarianceofanallelefrequency andpopulationsizecanbeexploitedtodefine
aneffectivepopulationsizeinamoregeneralcontext. Letx¯′ besomemeasureofanallele
frequency across a subdivided population, e.g., the arithmetic mean x¯′ = 1 L x′, and
Stochastic Models of Evolution in Genetics, Ecology and Linguistics 41
Var(x¯) the variance in this quantity after one generation of the underlying population
dynamics. An effective size N of this subdivided population can then be given as
x¯′(1 x¯′)
To distinguish it from other effective sizes than can be defined, this one is called the
variance effective size. Note that in this expression the variance is over the distribution
of allele frequencies x¯ generated by the population dynamics, and not the variance
over subpopulations appearing in (109). A drawback of this definition of N is that
it is likely to depend on the frequency x¯, and possibly other statistical quantities—
such as the variance of allele frequencies over subpopulations. Therefore, if one seeks
a description of the dynamics that is closed in a small set of random variables, it will
typically have to be an approximate description (see, e.g., [70, 71, 72]).
A definition of effective population size that avoids these difficulties makes use of
the fact that when tracing lineages of an ideally mating population backward in time,
pairs coalesce at a rate 1/N. The mean rate of coalescence between pairs of lineages
in a subdivided population can then be taken to define the reciprocal of an effective
populationsize. AswiththefixationindexF ,thisratewilltypicallyvarywithtime; in
those cases, one can adopt the coalescence rate that is approached as one looks infinitely
far back in time. The effective size that results is then often referred to as an asymptotic
effective size. In fact, the same limit has been shown to be approached by a range of
different definitions of effective size [73, 69]. This fact can traced to all definitions being
governed asymptotically by the decay rate of the longest-lived nonstationary eigenstate
of the underlying population dynamics. Furthermore, this feature makes the asymptotic
effective population size an appealing quantity to devote some effort to calculating.
As with F , there are a few cases where the mean coalescence rate does not
change with time and can be easily be calculated exactly. The first two such cases were
introduced at the start of this section.
Randomly-mating diploid population with two sexes If there are two distinct lineages in
adiploidpopulation,theymustbothbeinheritedfromthesameparent(andfurthermore
be the same gene from that parent) if they are to coalesce—see Fig. 5. Taking two genes
from the population at random (with replacement for simplicity), the probability that
both were inherited from a male, or both from a female, is 1. Within these classes,
the same gene is chosen with probability 1 and 1 for male and female parents
respectively. Hence one finds a total coalescence probability per generation of
1 1 1 L +L 1
4 2L m 2L f! 8L m L f N e
wherewehaveidentifiedthecoalescenceratewithaninverse populationsizeasdescribed
above. This result was first given by Wright [2]. Notice that N 2(L +L ), that is,
if there is any imbalance in the number of males and females, the effective number of
gene instances in the population is less than their actual number.
Stochastic Models of Evolution in Genetics, Ecology and Linguistics 42
Females Males
Figure 5. Sexually reproducing diploid population. Each individual carries one gene
inherited from a female (shown solid) and one from a female (shown shaded). Two
ways in which two distinct genes may coalesce are shown. In both cases, the two
offspring must have been inherited from an individual of the same sex.
Randomly-mating asexual diploid population with hermaphrodism In this model, the
effective size can be calculated as a consequence of a separation of timescales. A
classical calculation can be found in [74]; here we follow the coalescent-based approach
introduced in [75], also outlined in [62]. As we have already remarked, this model is
subtly different to that described in Section 2, in that the parents of two lineages are
not chosen independently. Instead, should two lineages find themselves within the same
individual there is a selfing probability S that both are descended from genes contained
within a single parent individual, and 1 S that they are each descended from different
individuals. At the time of arrival into a single individual, these two lineages have a
probability 1/2 of immediately coalescing; otherwise, going back a further generation
there is a probability S/2 that they are both still in the same individual, uncoalesced,
or S/2 of coalescing, or 1 S for the two lineages to return to a state at which they are
located in different individuals. Using the properties of the geometric distribution, it
can be shown that two lineages arriving at the same individual have a total coalescence
probability of 1/(2 S), and the mean time to do so is S/(2 S); on the other hand,
escape occurswithprobability (1 S)/(2 S)andtakes onaverage 2/(2 S)generations
[75, 62]. Meanwhile, when two lineages are in different individuals, the mean time for
them to arrive in the same individual is L, the number of individuals (since the arrival
probability per generation is 1/L). Thus, once L is taken sufficiently large at any fixed
S, the rate of coalescence upon arrival is very much faster than the rate of arrival—see
Fig. 6. Then, one can approximate the coalescence rate as the product of the arrival
rate and the subsequent probability of coalescence, i.e.,
Again, the effective (haploid) population size N = L(2 S) is less than twice the actual
population size, unless there is no selfing (S = 0), when the effective and actual sizes
are equal.
Stochastic Models of Evolution in Genetics, Ecology and Linguistics 43
Figure6. Separationoftimescalesinahermaphroditediploidpopulation. Thetypical
timescaleτ fortwolineagestomigrateintothesameindividualisverymuchlonger
than the typical time to coalescence τ due to selfing, or to escape to different
individuals τ due to outcrossing.
Population subdivision in the strong migration limit The coupling of a large ratio of
coalescence to migration rates and small subpopulation sizes is crucial in admitting
the computation of effective size of a hermaphrodite population. In the opposite
limit, where migration is very fast compared to coalescence and subpopulation sizes
are large, a simple, expressions valid for general models of population subdivision can
also be obtained. The key is to realise that between coalescence events, all lineages
are independently distributed according to the stationary distribution generated by the
backward-time migration dynamics. That is, we assume that the probability for two
lineages to be present in subpopulation i is (Q∗)2 where Q∗ is the stationary distribution
for the single common ancestor of the whole population given by the migration balance
equations (104). Given that the rate of coalescence for two lineages in subpopulation i
is 1/N it then follows that under this approximation that the mean coalescence rate is
= i . (120)
This formula has been shown to exact (to leading order in 1/N) if the migration
probabilities µ obey
where N¯ is the mean subpopulation size [76]. This equation defines a strong migration
limit, withinwhichitisseenthattheeffective populationsizeisalways lessthanorequal
to the total population size LN. Equality is reached only if the stationary probabilities
Q∗ are in proportion to the subpopulation size, i.e., if Q∗ = N /(LN¯). If the stationary
distribution is unique, this is the case only if migration is conservative. Since ancestral
lineages are well-mixed, one does not see any variation between subpopulations, and
so the approximation of the entire population as an ideal population with a possibly
reduced effective size would appear to be a good one.
For more general models of subdivision, where migration probabilities are typically
of order 1/N¯, fewer exact results are available. Nevertheless, a formula for the effective
Stochastic Models of Evolution in Genetics, Ecology and Linguistics 44
population size in terms of the asymptotic changes in identity probabilities has been
given [69] as
1 = lim L i=1 N 1 i (Q∗ i )2(1 − F ii (t)) (122)
N e t→∞ P L i=1 L j=1 Q∗ i Q∗ j (1 − F ij (t))
where F (t) is the probaPbilityPthat two individuals, one sampled from subpopulation i
and one from subpopulation j, are identical by descent after t generations, as defined
in the previous subsection.
This formula takes a particularly simple form in models when migration is
conservative. Then, as shown at the start of this section, the probability Q∗ that the
single remaining ancestor is in deme i in the steady state is proportional to N , the size
of deme i. Then, reduces to
where F and F¯ here are deme-size-weighted probabilities of identity for pairs of genes
sampled from within demes and from the whole population respectively, that is
F = F (124)
F¯ = i j F . (125)
L2 N¯ N¯ ij
Defining a size-weighted F through (106) and the formulæ for F and F¯ given here,
we find that for conservative models N and F can be related through
N = . (126)
When the assumption of conservative migration is relaxed, one does not
find a simple relation between effective population size and inbreeding coefficients.
Furthermore, it is not clear that a single parameter (such as N of F ) should
satisfactorily characterise all aspects of the evolutionary dynamics. For example, when
migration is weak, it has been argued that the ancestral dynamics can only be fully
expressed in terms of takes “structured coalescent” [77] that takes into account the
numbers of lineages present in a particular subpopulation at finite times rather than
the weighted late-time average implied by (122) [78, 79]. In such cases, it is therefore
necessary to examine specific models. For example, the variation of fixation times in
structured populations undergoing weak migration has been investigated in an exact
approached based on the duality relation given in Section 4 for an ideal population
[21]. This allows for a comparison with the fixation time that would be seen in an ideal
population with an effective size given by (122). In a range of models considered, it was
found that the effective size gives an extremely good prediction for the fixation time,
except in a particular case where special properties of the network structure admitted
fixation to occur in a finite time in an infinite population. This finite-time effect has
also been seen in voter models on heterogeneous (scale-free) graphs [80, 81], which in
Stochastic Models of Evolution in Genetics, Ecology and Linguistics 45
fact is a special case of the general model of population subdivision outlined here with
all subpopulation sizes N = 1.
6. Selection
So far we have considered only neutral models of evolution, that is, those for which there
is no preference for a particular allele. Despite being apparently a reasonable model
for some aspects of genetic, ecological or linguistic behaviour (as we have previously
discussed) geneticists in particular have been interested in the fate of alleles that are
selected for or against.
The relationship between the genetic make-up of an individual and its survival is
of course very complicated. However, one can explore the effects of selection by simply
introducing parameters that determine how many offspring an individual carrying a
particular allele (or combination of alleles when diploid organisms are being considered)
has on average. In this section we offer a small taste of some evolutionary models that
encompass selection.
Let us return to the model that has a randomly-mating haploid population of N
individuals with two alleles, denoted A and B. In the neutral model, the parent of
each individual in an offspring generation is chosen uniformly from all possible parents.
When selection is active, it is supposed that an individual with allele A (B) is chosen
to be a parent with a weight w (w ). That is, if there are n′ A alleles in the parent
generation, each offspring has a probability
of carrying allele A (at least, if no mutations occur). Since each individual is assigned
a parent independently, we have that the probability for there to be n A alleles in the
next generation is
N n′w n (N n′)w N−n
n! n′w A +(N n′)w B! n′w A +(N n′)w B!
1 N n′ n n′ N−n
= w 1 w (128)
(w¯′)N n! "N# ! " − N# !
where in the second line we have simplified the notation by introducing the mean fitness
of a population with n′ A alleles
Note that when the two alleles have equal fitness, i.e., w = w , (128) reduces to (2)
for a neutral population.
It is usual to take a pre-existing ‘wild-type’ allele (we’ll take this to be B) to have
fitness w = 1, and the ‘mutant’ (A) to have fitness w = 1 + s. Then, the mean
Stochastic Models of Evolution in Genetics, Ecology and Linguistics 46
change in the number of mutants in one generation, given that there are n(t) mutants
in generation t, is
h i− = s 1 +O(s2) . (130)
N N − N !
Denoting the frequency of mutant A alleles as x, the Fokker-Planck equation can be
shown (e.g., via a Kramers-Moyal expansion or a large-N expansion) to be
when the relative fitness of the mutant s is small. In this instance, small means s 1,
and not relative to 1/N. Hence, if at some fixed s one has the (effective) population size
N 1/s, the effects of drift can typically be neglected. Then the mean allele frequency
satisfies the deterministic equation
and one finds a logistic growth in the number of mutants
Typically it is assumed that the stochastic effects of drift are important only
when one of the allele frequencies is small, and so the logistic growth is taken to be
representative of the change in frequency of a beneficial mutation in a randomly mating
population once its frequency has reached some threshold (see e.g., [82]). This period
of rapid growth is often referred to as a selective sweep. Of course, a mutant allele is
present only in small numbers when it first appears, and here one can work out the
probability that a mutant allele will be lost due to genetic drift. To do this one needs
to solve the stationary backward Fokker-Planck equation corresponding to (131)
− " dx 2N dx2 #
subject to the boundary conditions Q(0) = 0 andQ(1) = 1, since Q(x) is the probability
that a mutant allele becomes fixed given that its initial frequency is x. Integrating once
gives Q′(x) e−2Nsx and again gives Q(x) = Ae−2Nsx + B where A and B are to be
fixed by the boundary conditions. This yields [83]
In particular, if there is initially only a single mutant, x = 1/N, inthe limit of aninfinite
population one has
2s 0 < s 1
N→∞ ( 0 s 0
where we recall that to obtain (131) it was assumed that s is small. From the backward
Fokker-Planck equation (134) one can also find the mean number of generations τ until
fixation of a selectively advantageous allele. It is given approximately as
Stochastic Models of Evolution in Genetics, Ecology and Linguistics 47
when the combination Ns is large (e.g., s some fixed value and N ) [24].
One may ask how selection affects the backward-time formulation of the population
dynamics that is couched in terms of genealogies. It turns out that the complexity of the
calculations increases considerably, because as one goes back in time one needs to keep
track of the number of alleles of each type present in the population. One can sometimes
find situations in which there is an equilibrium in these frequencies, for example, when a
selectively disadvantageous allele (s < 0) is maintained in a population due to recurrent
mutations generating it [84]. When there is a selective sweep, it can be shown that
the relevant genealogies are those that have multiple lineages coalescing simultaneously
[85]—compare with the case of neutral evolution when the probability of a triple merger
is suppressed by a factor of 1/N compared to that of a pairwise coalescence. This
is consistent with the fact that for fixation to be achieved on a timescale sublinear
in N (137): recall, that in a state of fixation all N individuals share a common
ancestor. One way to formulate the genealogical process with selection is through
the “Λ-coalescent” [86]; meanwhile, certain aspects have recently been elucidated by
considering the properties of noisy travelling waves [87].
Given the discussion of Section 5, one may also be interested in determining how
effects of selection and population subdivision combine. In a number of ways the
situation is rather similar to the neutral case, at least if the selective advantage s (or
disadvantage, if negative) is not spatially dependent. For example, when migration is
strong one expects fixation probabilities and times to be given (135) and (137) but with
N being an effective population size of the order of the total population size [88]. In
the slow migration limit, the mean time for a lineage to hop between subpopulations
N is much longer than the duration of a selective sweep lnN and so typically each
subpopulation is taken to be fixed in either the wild-type or mutant state. One thus
calculates fixation probabilities and times by having wild-type subpopulations invaded
by their mutant neighbours (and vice versa) on the migration timescale, and a flip
from the wild-type to mutant state occurring with the probability given by Q(1/N),
and in the other direction with the same expression but with s replaced by s. When
conservative migration is in force, it can be shown that the probability a mutant allele
fixes is independent of the location of the initial mutation [53, 88]: a similar situation
occurred in the neutral case (although the fixation probability is different). To see
deviations from this behaviour, one needs either to introduce additional processes (such
as extinction and recolonisation of subpopulations [89]) or relax the assumption of
conservative migration [90]. In the latter case one finds that the network structure
connecting the subpopulations strongly influences whether selection or drift is the
dominant process. For example, star-like structures amplify the effects of selection and
can be constructed such that an advantageous mutation appearing almost anywhere is
guaranteed to fix. On the other hand, it is also possible to contrive networks in which
fixation occurs whenever the mutation occurs within a particular subpopulation, and
never if it appears elsewhere. This latter type of behaviour does not, in fact, depend
on the mutation having a selective advantage: even neutral mutations appearing in
Stochastic Models of Evolution in Genetics, Ecology and Linguistics 48
“well-connected” parts of a system can fix with high probability when migration is a
non-conservative process [21].
Shifting focus from networks to continuous space, one can write down an equation
fortheadvanceof anadvantageousmutation. Recallthatintheabsence of drift, onehas
the deterministic equation (132) for the mutant gene frequency x in a subpopulation.
With isotropic migration in one dimension with a coordinate u one would augment this
equation with a diffusion term
This is known as the Fisher or KPP (Kolmogorov-Petrovksy-Piskunov) equation [91,92]
and admits travelling wave solutions of the form x(u,t) = f(u vt) where v is the wave
velocity. If one anticipates that the leading edge of the wave has an exponential decay
f(ξ) = e−λξ, one finds a range of velocities v = Dλ + s/λ 2 s/D are possible. It
turns out that in such an equation, if the interface between thqe stable and unstable
phases (here, regions of high and low mutant frequencies) is sufficiently sharp, the front
velocity selected is the smallest allowed [93]. If genetic drift is reintroduced, e.g., by
adding a white noise to (138) with zero mean and variance x(1 x)/N (cf. (131), but
note the usual problems that arise from introducing multiplicative noise in such an ad-
hoc way), one expects strong fluctuations in the leading edge of the travelling wave as
a consequence of the possibility that a newly introduced mutant may go extinct. This
causes a very small shift in the velocity of the front and a more diffuse profile than in
the deterministic case [94].
One can also consider models with spatially varying fitnesses. A simple example
would be if a mutant had fitness advantage +s at position u > 0 and disadvantage s
at u < 0 (s here is taken to be a positive number) [95]. At u one anticipates that
the mutant allele would be fixed (x = 1), whilst at u only the wild type would
be found (x = 0). Using (138) the steady state can be found by solving the nonlinear
where the positive signis taken foru < 0 andthenegative signforu > 0. The symmetry
of the problem implies that x(u) = 1 x( u), and in particular that x(0) = 1. However,
onefindsthestepinthefitnesslandscapeatu = 0induces adiscontinuity inthegradient
of x(u) at that point. To see this, one must solve this differential equation which is
achieved by multiplying both sides by dx and integrating twice. This procedure leads
3 1 tanh2 1 su κ u < 0
 3 htanh2 1 (cid:16)suq+κ 1(cid:17)i u > 0
 2 2 D − 2
(cid:16) q (cid:17)
κ = ln = 1.146216... . (141)
2 √3 √2!
Stochastic Models of Evolution in Genetics, Ecology and Linguistics 49
Rescaled position, x = (s/2D)1/2u
Figure 7. Variation of mutant allele frequency with position in a steady state where
selection is balanced by migration. The mutant allele has a selective advantage s at
positions u > 0, a disadvantage s at positions u < 0. Migration is characterised by
a diffusion constant D. Although hard to discern on the plot, there is a discontinuity
in the gradient of the allele frequencies at u=0.
This function is plotted in Fig. 7. The spatial variation of allele frequencies due to a
balance between migration and a changing fitness landscape has been called a cline [96].
Finally one can consider variation in fitness not in real space, but in the space
of genotypes (i.e., possible allele combinations). Let us return to a randomly-mating
diploid population, in which a fraction x of all genes are of allele A , i = 1,2,...,n. It
is fairly straightforward to show [23] that, in the absence of drift, the change in allele
frequency per generation is
x (1 x ) ∂
where the mean fitness of the population is
w¯ = x x w (143)
and w is the fitness of an individual carrying the pair of alleles (A ,A ). One can
therefore view the function f(x ,x ,...,x ) = lnw¯ as a kind of free energy defined
over the space of allele frequencies which the evolutionary dynamics seeks to minimise.
If we now extend the discussion to multiple gene loci (i.e., genes coding for different
traits) with interactions between them, it is possible for an extremely rugged fitness
landscape in the space of all possible allele frequencies to emerge [97]. One can then
find a transition between two distinct regimes induced by a change in mutation rate:
if the total number of mutants appearing per generation across the whole population
(which is governed by the population size N multiplied by the mutation rate u) is small,
fixation of a selectively advantageous allele is likely to occur before the onset of the next
mutation (see e.g, [98, 99]). Thus, all individuals in the population are then likely to
have the same genotype, and one which tends towards a local fitness maximum. On the
other hand, if the number of mutants appearing per generation is large, and one is likely
Stochastic Models of Evolution in Genetics, Ecology and Linguistics 50
to see many different genotypes in the population, each corresponding to a different
fitness maximum. In the latter case the individuals are said to form a quasi-species
7. Conclusion
This article has been a review of the ideas and formalism used to model stochastic
processesinfieldsthatstatisticalphysicistsarenottypicallyacquaintedwith,specifically
population genetics, ecology and linguistics. As a consequence, some parts of the
discussion will seem familiar, other parts will not. We have tried, and we hope that we
have succeeded, to explain the background ideas and motivation, since this will be the
greatest obstacle to understanding among a readership of statistical physicists. On the
other hand the degree of mathematical sophistication that has been assumed is greater
than would be typical outside physics or mathematical biology. This makes review quite
different to others in the same area, and while we expect the readership to be mainly
statistical physicists, we hope that some of those working particularly in ecology and
linguistics will find our approach to their subject interesting and stimulating.
In our discussions of the mathematical models, we have mostly used the language
of population genetics, but through of the mappings discussed in Section 2.5 the results
obtained are more widely relevant. As the evolutionary paradigm becomes even more
widely applied, there may be other areas in which analogies can be drawn. It is
interesting how neutral processes turn out to have greater importance in all three
areas we discussed; at the very least neutral theories can be thought of a null models,
against which data and other models can be compared. Most textbooks in population
genetics begin their discussion of genetic drift with the Wright-Fisher model, although
for physicists the use of non-overlapping generations and a “time” measured in number
of generations will not appear so natural. The Moran model, which has exactly the
same limit when the number of genes become large, is far more familiar, resembling a
birth/death processes where a death is immediately followed by a birth. In addition,
the continuous time limit may easily be taken, leading to a master equation of a kind
well-known in statistical physics.
Wespentsometimeexplaining therelationshipbetween thediscrete-time approach,
based on transition probabilities, and the continuous-time master equation approach,
based on processes occurring independently at a given rate. The use of master equations
is apparently rare in the population genetics literature, which is one of the reasons why
we have gone into this approach in such detail. Furthermore, this latter formalism
usually turns out to be more efficient. For example, in his book Hubbell [7] formulated
his model by analogy with the corresponding discrete-time genetic models, and had
to perform simulations to generate the stationary probability distribution. However, if
the model is formulated as a master equation, the stationary probability distribution
can be obtained analytically [101]. However, the relationship between the discrete-
and continuous-time formulations is not necessarily straightforward. For example, in
Stochastic Models of Evolution in Genetics, Ecology and Linguistics 51
Section3.1weoutlinedtwo waysinwhichmutationcanbeincluded inacontinuous-time
formulation. Oneis tohave combined birth, deathandmutation events, withonaverage
one occurring per unit time. The other is to have mutation as a spontaneous Poisson
process (like radioactive decay). We showed that whilst all discrete-time (Moran)
processes with mutation could be realised using the former approach, restrictions were
imposed on the latter.
Another aspect of the article, which to our knowledge has not been elucidated
elsewhere in the context of these problems, is the emphasis we have put on starting with
individual (or gene or token) based models and deriving the corresponding mesoscopic
model, where the limit of the number of individuals, N, tends to infinity. Simulations
are frequently carried out using individuals, and moreover, as is well-known, an infinity
of individual based models will give the same mesoscopic model in the large N limit.
For example, the language evolution model which we have alluded to, was first discussed
in a mesoscopic context [17], but this analysis was restricted to quite simple situations,
for instance where all speakers spoke equally with each other. When more complex
situations are analysed, such as allowing for a non-trivial network topology for links
between speakers [21], the individual-based picture becomes far more useful. In
particular, the backwards-time or coalescent approach is a far more efficient way of
performing simulations. In some cases, such as understanding trends in how fixation
time changes with network structure, which require simulations of quite large networks,
the coalescent formulation is indispensable.
In genetics, ecology or language, just as in physics, reality cannot be described by
ideal models; there will be a multitude of ways in which real systems deviate from the
ideal models created by scientists when they first enter a field. One of the methods
that has been devised by population geneticists to deal with this will be very familiar
to physicists. This is to characterise a non-ideal system by a few parameters, which
will hopefully, if chosen correctly, capture the essence of the system. It may be that
a simple model can then be utilised, but with these parameters built in. An example
is the effective population size, N , discussed in Section 5.2, which reflects how the
non-ideal nature of the system changes the effective value of N: the effective size of the
real population being the number of individuals in the ideal population which gives the
samemagnitudeforthequantityofinterest. Theeffectivepopulationsizeandinbreeding
coefficient, discussed in Section 5.1, are extremely widely used, but unfortunately not in
a very systematic way. We have attempted to illustrate their use, and to draw attention
to some of the confusion which exists in the literature, but it is still the case that those
using these useful concepts will need to be vigilant when reading the literature on them.
This last observation opens up some questions that may be worth of further
study. First one can ask whether inbreeding coefficients and the effective population
size really adequately characterise the evolution of a non-ideal population. Are there
other approximation schemes that might allow deviation from ideal behaviour to be
described in a systematic and controlled way? Secondly, the backward-time description
of neutral evolution will be recognised by nonequilibrium statistical physicists as the
Stochastic Models of Evolution in Genetics, Ecology and Linguistics 52
reaction-diffusion process A+A A. Although exact solutions for this process exist
for certain mathematically convenient geometries (such as continuous real space [102]
and, as we have seen, the complete graph) there is interest in extending the analysis to
heterogeneous graphs, whichthusfarhavebeentreatedonlyusing approximatemethods
[80, 81, 21]. Such solutions would be useful as they would obtain more detail about the
evolution of the system, for example, the manner in which an innovation propagates
through the system en route to fixation. There are many other questions which would
benefit from a systematic study of the type that statistical physicists are well-placed
to carry out. We hope that this article has stimulated some readers to find out more
about these fascinating applications of stochastic methods and to contribute to the
development of the field.
Acknowledgements
We wish to thank David Alonso and Alan Bray for useful discussions. RAB holds a
Personal Research Fellowship awarded by the Royal Society of Edinburgh.
Appendix A. The large N expansion of the master equation for M alleles
In this Appendix we give details of carrying out the large N expansion beginning from
the master equations involving M > 2 alleles, considered in Sections 3.3.2 and 3.3.3.
We begin by expanding out the terms containing the transitions rates (70)—which
arethoseinvolving thetypeM allele—letting x = n /N,andexpanding allotherterms
in powers of 1/N. This is the procedure used to obtain Eq. (46), and the analogous
expression in this case
M−1 1 M−1 1 1 ∂P 1 ∂2P
= x 1 x + P +
M−1 1 M−1 1 1 ∂P 1 ∂2P
+ x + 1 x P + +
M−1 1 M−1 M−1 ∂2P
x 1 x P = x 1 x
2x +2 1 x 2P , (A.1)
neglecting terms of order 1/N3 and higher. Carrying out the same procedure for the
terms containing the transition rates (69) gives an expression
M−1M−1 1 1 1 ∂P 1 ∂P
= x x + P +
α=1 β6=α "(cid:18) − N (cid:19)(cid:18) N (cid:19)( − N ∂x α N ∂x β
Stochastic Models of Evolution in Genetics, Ecology and Linguistics 53
1 ∂2P 1 ∂2P 1 ∂2P
1 M−1 ∂2P ∂2P ∂P ∂P
= x x x x +2x 2x P (A.2)
again neglecting terms of order 1/N3 and higher. Adding Eqs. (A.1) and (A.2) gives for
the master equation
∂P 1 M−1 ∂P
= M(M 1)P +2 (1 Mx )
∂t N2 "− −
M−1 ∂2P M−1M−1 ∂2P 1
+ x (1 x ) x x +
− ∂x2 − ∂x ∂x  O N3
1 M−1 ∂2 M−1M−1 ∂2
up to terms of order 1/N3 and higher. As in previous cases, if we define a new time
τ = 2t/N2, and take N , then we find the result Eq. (71).
In the main text we discussed two different ways of including mutations. In the first
type of model, mutation rates were given by Eq. (76). This equation may be written as
T(n ...n +1...n 1...n n) = (1 ρ ) +σ (n/N) ,(A.4)
− | − N N N
ρ = u and σ (x) = u x . (A.5)
Suppose that we first look at the case where α,β = 1,...,M 1 in the transition rate
(A.4). This gives the following contribution to the right-hand side of the Fokker-Planck
equation:
M−1M−1 1 1 1 ∂P 1 ∂P
α=1 β6=α (cid:20) − (cid:18) − N (cid:19) (cid:21)(cid:20) N (cid:21) N ∂x β − N ∂x α!
The terms involving only the mutation rates are
1 M−1M−1 ∂P ∂P 1
The analogous expression when α = 1,...,M 1 and β = M is:
M−1 1 M−1 1 1 ∂P
(cid:19) (cid:21)
Stochastic Models of Evolution in Genetics, Ecology and Linguistics 54
and when β = 1,...,M 1 and α = M is:
M−1 M−1 1 1 1 ∂P
β X =1  γ X =1  (cid:18) (cid:19)
which lead to the analogous expressions to Eq. (A.6): 
1 M−1 M−1 M−1 ∂P 1
ρ x 1 x +σ (x) 1 x + .(A.7)
    
1 M−1 M−1 ∂P 1
From the expressions (A.6)-(A.8), the term involving mutations in the Fokker-Planck
equation can be found. For example, let us focus on the mutation rates involving A
and A with α,β = 1,...,M 1 and α = β. After some straightforward algebra, the
terms from Eqs. (A.6) and (A.7) which involve P, but not derivatives of P are
1 M−1 1 M−1
using Eq. (A.5). The terms from Eqs. (A.6) and (A.7) which involve derivatives of P
are more complicated, but eventually yield
= u x u x . (A.10)
N  −  ∂x
We may combine Eqs. (A.9) and (A.10) to give
u x u x P + . (A.11)
− N ∂x  −  O N2
Stochastic Models of Evolution in Genetics, Ecology and Linguistics 55
Introducing the scaled mutation rates defined in Eq. (77), this expression equals
x x P + . (A.12)
− N2 ∂x  U − U  O N3
Using the rescaled time τ = 2t/N2 and letting N , we see that we obtain the
mutation terms displayed in Eqs. (78) and Eqs. (79), at least in the sector where
α,β = 1,...,M 1. In a similar way, the mutation terms where the allele A is
involved may be derived from Eqs. (A.7) and (A.8). One again finds the result given by
Eqs. (78) and Eqs. (79).
Theformofthemutationterms intheFokker-Planck equationinthesecond scheme
we investigated, defined by the transition rates (83), follows from the results obtained
above for the first scheme. This is because if one takes u = u for all β = α, then the
transition rates of the two approaches are identical, although in the second case there
is the restriction that M u < 1. We therefore find the same Fokker-Planck equation
(78), but now with Eq. (79) taking the form
A U −U U − U
which is Eq. (85). When written out in terms of the scaled mutation rates, the condition
on the u in the second case reads
< , (A.14)
which, since the rescaled rates are numerically small and we have taken the limit
N , is always satisfied.
Finally, we consider the most general case where there are L islands and M alleles.
As we remarked in the main text, this involves only minor modifications of calculations
which have been carried out previously. This is because, since both the mutation and
migration rates are scaled by a factor of N, any product of these rates will give a term
of order 1/N3, and so will not contribute to the Fokker-Planck equation. Therefore we
may consider mutation and migration separately, and simply need to insert appropriate
indices on the contributions already calculated.
First let, us consider Eq. (88), which does not include mutation. If we begin by
ignoring the migration terms g with i = j, then we see that the transition rates will
be of the form given in Eqs. (69) and (70), but multiplied by f and with an index i
included. Thus the result of a 1/N expansion is as in Eq. (A.3), but with an index i
and f included:
f M−1 ∂2 M−1M−1 ∂2
[x (1 x )P] [x x P] , (A.15)
up to terms of order 1/N3 and higher. This has to be summed over all i.
Returning to Eq. (88), the transition rates which involve migration can be found
by analogy with the discussion in Section 3.3.1, and in particular Eq. (60), with α and
Stochastic Models of Evolution in Genetics, Ecology and Linguistics 56
β indices for the allele labels. These appear as in Eqs. (A.1) and (A.2). The result is:
M−1M−1 1 1 ∂P 1 ∂P
G x + x P +
M−1 M−1 1 1 ∂P
x x P]+G 1 x + x P
iβ jα ij iγ jα
M−1 M−1 1 M−1
1 x x P +G x + 1 x
iγ jα ij iβ jγ
1 ∂P M−1 1
P + x 1 x P +
N " − α=1 − ∂x iα# O (cid:18) N2 (cid:19)
N ∂x − O N2
α=1 iα (cid:18) (cid:19)
Scaling the migration rate by introducing = NG /2, adding an analogous term
which represents migration from island i to island j, and summing over all pairs of
islands ij gives
2 M−1 ∂ ∂ 1
ij ji iα jα
N2 Xhiji α
=1 G ∂x iα −G ∂x jα! − O (cid:18) N3 (cid:19)
The third and final term is found from Eq. (89) ignoring the migration terms g with
i = j. This is as in Eq. (76), but multiplied by f and with an index i added to the n
and n . From the discussion leading to Eq. (A.12) we find that the contribution for the
first type of mutation is
− N2 i ∂x A α i O N3
α=1 iα (cid:18) (cid:19)
This has to be summed over all i. The second type of mutation gives the same result,
but with (x ) defined as in Eq. (85).
Putting Eqs. (A.15), (A.17) and (A.18) together gives equation (90), a general
Fokker-Planck equation describing a population of genes, of M possible types,
subdivided between L different islands.