Strain-Engineering Anisotropic Electrical Conductance of Phosphorene and Few-Layer
Black Phosphorus
Ruixiang Fei and Li Yang*
Department of Physics, Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, MO 63130, USA
Abstract: Newly fabricated monolayer phosphorene and its few-layer structures are expected to
be promising for electronic and optical applications because of their finite direct band gaps and
sizable but anisotropic electronic mobility. By first-principles simulations, we show that this
unique anisotropic conductance can be controlled by using simple strain conditions. With the
appropriate biaxial or uniaxial strain, we can rotate the preferred conducting direction by 90
degrees. This will be of useful for exploring quantum Hall effects, and exotic electronic and
mechanical applications based on phosphorene.
Strain has been known as an effective mechanism for controlling electronic, transport, and
optical properties of semiconductors for decades [1-6]. This tool is particularly useful when
engineering one-dimensional (1D) and two-dimensional (2D) crystals because these
reduced-dimensional structures can sustain much larger strains than bulk crystals. For example,
monolayer graphene and MoS have been reported to be strained up to their intrinsic limit (~
25%) without substantially damaging their crystal structures [7,8], providing a dramatically-wide
range for tuning their mechanical and electronic performances. Furthermore, beyond device
applications, spatially modulated strain can even mimic gauge fields that are crucial for studying
more fundamental phenomena in 2D structures, e.g., realizing ultra-strong magnetic fields and
associated zero-field quantum Hall effects as observed in graphene [9].
Recently, a promising 2D semiconductor, phosphorene, was successfully fabricated [10-12].
Unlike the widely studied semimetallic graphene, phosphorene exhibits a finite and direct band
gap within an appealing energy range [10, 11, 13]. Particularly notable features of phosphorene
include its anisotropic electric conductance and optical responses [11, 13], distinguishing this
material from many other isotropic 2D crystals, i.e., graphene and molybdenum and tungsten
chalcogenides. In this regard, it will be useful to manipulate these anisotropies. Considering that
all electronic and optical anisotropies are essentially decided by geometries of atomistic
structures and that strain is the most direct way to change the atomistic and electronic structures
[14], it is obvious to attempt to use strain to control the appealing anisotropies of phosphorene.
In this work, through first-principles simulations, we show that strain can serve as an efficient
tool for controlling the anisotropic electrical conductance of phosphorene. As shown in Fig. 1 (a),
the spatial preference of conductance can be rotated by 90 degrees in plane through either
uniaxial (less than 6%) or biaxial strain (less than 4 %), which are well achievable given current
experimental capabilities. Moreover, our calculated mobilities of electrons and holes exhibit
different responses to the external strain; only the anisotropy of the electron conductance is tuned
by the strain. Quantum-mechanics calculations further show that this change of electron
conducting anisotropy is a result of a switch in the energy order of the first and second
lowest-energy conduction bands that is induced by strain. Our observed strain-engineered
anisotropic conductance provides many opportunities for studying novel mechanical-electronic
devices and unusual quantum Hall effects related to strongly anisotropic effective masses [15].
The studied structures of monolayer and bilayer phosphorene are presented in Figs. 1 (b), (c) and
(d). Each phosphorus atom is covalently bonded with three neighboring phosphorus atoms to
form a puckered 2D honeycomb structure. We fully relax these structures according to the force
and stress calculated by density functional theory (DFT) with the Perdew, Burke and Ernzerhof
(PBE) functional [16]. The band energy is obtained by solving the Kohn-Sam equation under
plane-wave basis with normal-conserving pseudopotentials [17]. The plane-wave energy cutoff is
set to be 25 Ry and the k-point sampling grid is 14 x 10 x 1, producing converged results. The
vacuum spacing between neighboring supercells is set to be 2.5 nm to avoid artificial interactions.
Our calculated lattice constants and geometries are similar to previous works on monolayer and
few-layer phosphorene [13, 18, 19].
Figure 1 (a) schematic of strain-induced rotation of electrical conductance in monolayer
phosphorene. The color contours are those of 2D electron and hole bands. (b) Top view of
monolayer phosphorene. (c) and (d) Side views of monolayer and bilayer phosphorene,
respectively.
We start from the electronic band structure of intrinsic monolayer phosphorene presented in Fig.
2 (a). In addition to the direct band gap located at the point, an impressive feature of
phosphorene is its highly anisotropic band dispersion around the band gap. Both the top of
valence bands and the bottom of conduction bands have much more significant dispersions along
the -Y direction, which is the armchair direction in real space as indicated in Fig. 1 (a);
however, these bands are nearly flat along the -X (the zigzag) direction. Therefore, the
corresponding effective mass of electrons and holes are also highly anisotropic. The anisotropic
effective mass of electrons of intrinsic monolayer phosphorene is illustrated in real space in Fig.
3 (a). For different directions, these values can differ by an order of magnitude. This anisotropic
effective mass or band dispersion is responsible for the recently-observed anisotropic electric
conductance in phosphorene [11].
Figure 2 Band structures of: (a) intrinsic monolayer phosphorene, (b) phosphorene with a 5%
biaxial strain, and (c) phosphorene with a 6% zigzag uniaxial strain. (d) The side view of the
electronic wave function of the lowest-energy conduction band at the  point. (e) That of the
second-lowest-energy conduction band at the  point.
Interestingly, beyond the first conduction band (red-color marked one in Fig. 2 (a)), there is
another unique conduction band close to the bottom of the first conduction band, which is
marked by blue color in Fig. 2 (a). Excitingly, the dispersion of this blue-colored band is also
highly anisotropic, but its spatial isotropy is orthogonal to that of the first conduction band; it is
highly dispersive along the -X (zigzag) direction while almost flat along the -Y (armchair)
direction. To understand the anisotropic band dispersion and conductance, we have plotted the
real-space wave functions of the first and second conduction bands at the point in Figs. 2 (d)
and (e). It is easy to see the spatial continuity of the wave function along the armchair direction
in Fig. 2 (d), which hints a high mobility along this direction. In Fig. 2 (e), the wave function is
isolated within each unit cell with a small overlap between each other, indicating low mobility
along the armchair direction.
Since the electrical transport behavior is usually decided by the lowest-energy band edge, if we
can switch the energy order of the red-colored and blue-colored conduction bands of
phosphorene, the anisotropic electrical conductance will change accordingly. Applying external
strain proves to be an appealing way to achieve this switch in band order. Let us first focus on the
uniform biaxial strain. We do find that this strain lowers the second (blue-colored) conduction
band while increases the first (red-colored) conduction band. In Fig. 2 (b), when the applied
biaxial strain is 5%, the energy order of these two conduction bands is switched at the point.
Correspondingly, the effective mass of free electrons, which is shaped by the bottom of the
conduction band, also rotates its spatial isotropy. As concluded in Fig. 3 (b), the spatial
anisotropy of free electrons is rotated by exactly 90 degrees; now the electrons have a very small
effective mass along the -Y (armchair) direction and a large effective mass along the -X
(zigzag) direction.
Figure 3. The electron effective mass according to spatial direction. (a) That of intrinsic
phosphorene and (b) that of 5% biaxially strained phosphorene. The length of the blue arrow
represents the absolute value of effective mass.
In order to directly connect the anisotropic band dispersion to the electrical conductance, we
have further estimated the electrical mobility of electrons along specific directions (zigzag and
armchair directions) according to the formula [20-23]:
  x_anisotropy (1)
x_anisotropy (2)3k Tm*m E2
Herem*is the effective mass along the transport direction, and the density-of-state mass m is
determined bym  m* m* . The deformation potential constant E E/(l /l )is obtained
d ex ey 1x x x
by varying the lattice constant along transport direction l (l is the lattice constant along the
transport direction, here is x direction) and checking the change of band energy under the lattice
compression and strain. The elastic module C is obtained by
x_anisotropy
C (l /l )2/2(EE )/S , where EE is obtained by varying the lattice constant
x_anisotropy x x 0 0 0
by small amount (l /l ~ 0.5%) to obtain the change of the total energy, andS is the lattice area
in xy plane. T is the temperature. The estimation only considers the simplest electron-phonon
coupling and gives the upper limit of mobility of realistic cases, in which many other extrinsic
factors will further decrease these overestimated mobility values. However, this formula is
sophisticated enough to capture the anisotropic conductance of this system.
The calculated electron mobility at temperature T 300K according to the biaxial strain is
shown in Fig. 4 (a). First, for intrinsic phosphorene, the mobility of electron along the zigzag
direction is impressive, around 2000 cm2/v∙s, which is much larger than those observed in other
2D semiconductors, such as MoS [24]. This is also consistent with previous predictions and
measurements, which claim that phosphorene may be a promising material for various
high-performance devices [23]. Second, for different percentages of biaxial strain, the critical
transition between anisotropic mobilities occurs at a strain between 3% and 4%, which is well
within current experimental capabilities. After the switch, the mobility along the zigzag direction
is around 10 times of magnitude larger than that along the armchair direction, directly showing
the rotation of the anisotropic electrical conductance.
Figure 4. (a) and (b) Electron mobilities of monolayer phosphorene along the zigzag (x) and
armchair (y) directions for biaxial strain and uniaxial strain along the zigzag direction,
respectively. (c) and (d) The electron mobilities of bilayer phosphorene along the zigzag (x) and
armchair (y) directions for biaxial strain and uniaxial strain along the zigzag direction,
respectively. The black diamond and red hollow circle indicate the x-direction electron mobility
and y-direction electron mobility, respectively.
In addition to biaxial strain, we also observe the similar rotation of the electric conductance for
uniaxial strain on phosphorene. As shown in Fig. 2 (b), the energy order of the first two
conduction bands can be switched by applying uniaxial strain along the zigzag direction. The
critical strain magnitude (between 5% and 6%, reading from Fig. 4 (b)) for rotating the electrical
conductance is slightly larger than that of biaxial strain (between 3% and 4%). On the other hand,
applying uniaxial strain along the armchair direction does not produce a band switch and thus
there is no rotation of the electrical conductance.
Finally, we observe a similar rotation of the anisotropy of electrical conductance for bilayer
phosphorene as well. In Figs. 4 (c) and (d), the electron mobility values along the zigzag and
armchair directions switch for external uniaxial strains above 5%, or for biaxial strains larger
than 3%, which are similar to those in monolayer structures. Therefore, this strain-tunable
anisotropy of the electrical conductance can also be realized in multi-layer phosphorene
structures.
In conclusion, we have demonstrated a novel mechanism for engineering the unique, anisotropic
electrical conductance in monolayer and few-layer phosphorene. By applying appropriate
uniaxial or biaxial strains, the anisotropy of the electron effective mass and corresponding
mobility direction can be rotated by 90 degrees. First-principles simulations reveal that this is a
result of a switch in the energy order of the lowest two conduction bands. This discovery of a
method for controlling the exotic anisotropies of phosphorene makes this material even more
promising for mechanical and electronic applications.
This work is supported by the National Science Foundation Grant No. DMR-1207141. The
computational resources have been provided by the Lonestar of Teragrid at the Texas Advanced
Computing Center (TACC). The DFT calculation is performed with the Quantum Espresso [25].
* lyang@physics.wustl.edu