BMC Bioinformatics
BioMed Central
Open Access
Structuring and extracting knowledge for the support of hypothesis
generation in molecular biology
Marco Roos*1, M Scott Marshall1, Andrew P Gibson2, Martijn Schuemie3,
Edgar Meij1, Sophia Katrenko1, Willem Robert van Hage4,
Konstantinos Krommydas1 and Pieter W Adriaans1
Address:1InformaticsInstitute,UniversityofAmsterdam,Amsterdam,1098SJ,TheNetherlands,2SwammerdamInstituteforLifeScience,
UniversityofAmsterdam,Amsterdam,1018WB,TheNetherlands,3BioSemanticsgroup,ErasmusUniversityofRotterdam,Rotterdam,
3000DR,TheNetherlandsand4BusinessInformatics,FacultyofSciences,VrijeUniversiteit,Amsterdam,1081HV,TheNetherlands
E-mail:MarcoRoos*-roos@science.uva.nl;MScottMarshall-marshall@science.uva.nl;AndrewPGibson-a.p.gibson@uva.nl;
MartijnSchuemie-m.schuemie@erasmusmc.nl;EdgarMeij-not@valid.com;SophiaKatrenko-not@valid.com;
WillemRobertvanHage-not@valid.com;KonstantinosKrommydas-not@valid.com;PieterWAdriaans-P.W.Adriaans@uva.nl
*Correspondingauthor
fromSemanticWebApplicationsandToolsforLifeSciences,2008
Edinburgh,UK28November2008
Published:01October2009
©2009Roosetal;licenseeBioMedCentralLtd.
whichpermitsunrestricteduse,distribution,andreproductioninanymedium,providedtheoriginalworkisproperlycited.
Background: Hypothesis generation in molecular and cellular biology is an empirical process in
which knowledge derived from prior experiments is distilled into a comprehensible model. The
requirement of automated support is exemplified by the difficulty of considering all relevant facts
that are contained in the millions of documents available from PubMed. Semantic Web provides
tools for sharing prior knowledge, while information retrieval and information extraction
techniques enable its extraction from literature. Their combination makes prior knowledge
available for computational analysis and inference. While some tools provide complete solutions
that limit the control over the modeling and extraction processes, we seek a methodology that
supports control by the experimenter over these critical processes.
Results: We describe progress towards automated support for the generation of biomolecular
hypotheses. Semantic Web technologies are used to structure and store knowledge, while a
workflow extracts knowledge from text. We designed minimal proto-ontologies in OWL for
capturing different aspects of a text mining experiment: the biological hypothesis, text and
documents,textmining,andworkflowprovenance.Themodelsfitamethodologythatallowsfocus
on the requirements of a single experiment while supporting reuse and posterior analysis of
extractedknowledgefrommultipleexperiments.Ourworkflowiscomposedofservicesfromthe
‘AdaptiveInformationDisclosureApplication’(AIDA)toolkitaswellasafewothers.Theoutputis
asemanticmodelwithputativebiologicalrelations,witheachrelationlinkedtothecorresponding
evidence.
(pagenumbernotforcitationpurposes)
Conclusion: We demonstrated a ‘do-it-yourself’ approach for structuring and extracting
knowledge in the context of experimental research on biomolecular mechanisms. The
methodology can be used to bootstrap the construction of semantically rich biological models
usingtheresultsofknowledgeextractionprocesses.Modelsspecifictoparticularexperimentscan
be constructed that, in turn, link with other semantic models, creating a web of knowledge that
spans experiments. Mapping mechanisms can link to other knowledge resources such as OBO
ontologies or SKOS vocabularies. AIDA Web Services can be used to design personalized
knowledgeextractionprocedures.Inourexampleexperiment,wefoundthreeproteins(NF-Kappa
B, p21, and Bax) potentially playing a role in the interplay between nutrients and epigenetic gene
regulation.
Background of databases and file systems, many scientists find it
In order to study a biomolecular mechanism such as increasingly challenging to ensure that all potentially
epigenetic gene control (Figure 1) and formulate a new relevantfactsareconsideredwhilstformingahypothesis.
hypothesis, we usually integrate various types of Support for extracting and managing knowledge is
information to distil a comprehensible model. We can therefore a general requirement. Developments in the
use this model to discuss with our peers before we test area of the Semantic Web and related areas such as
the model in the laboratory or by comparison to information retrieval are making it possible to create
available data. A typical hypothesis is based on one’s applications that will support the task of hypothesis
own knowledge, interpretations of experimental data, generation.First,RDFandOWLprovideuswithawayto
the opinions of peers, and the prior knowledge that is represent knowledge in a machine readable format that
containedinliterature.ManyWebresourcesareavailable isamenabletomachineinference[1,2].Ontologieshave
for molecular biologists to access available knowledge, become an important sourceof knowledge in molecular
of which Entrez PubMed, hosted by the US National biology. Many ontologies have been created and many
Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI), is prob- types of application have become possible [3], with the
ably the most used by molecular biologists. The lifesciencesprovidingakeymotivationofaddressingthe
difficulty of information retrieval from literature reveals informationmanagementproblemthatarisesfromhigh
the scale of today’s information overload: over 17 throughput data collection [4,5]. A downside to the
million biomedical documents are now available from popularity of bio-ontologies is that their number and
PubMed. Also considering the knowledge that did not size have become overwhelming when attempting to
make it to publication or that is stored in various types discover the best representation for one’s personal
hypothesis. Moreover, building a biological ontology is
usually associated with a community effort where
consensus is sought for clear descriptions of biological
phenomena [6]. The question arises how an experimen-
tal biologist/bioinformatician can apply Semantic Web
languages when the primary aim is not to build a
comprehensive ontology for a community, but to
represent a personal hypothesis for a particular biomo-
lecular mechanism. Therefore, we explored an approach
to semantic modeling that emphasizes the creation of a
personal model within the scope of one hypothesis, but
without precluding integration with other ontologies.
Secondly, information retrieval and information extrac-
Cartoon model for the mechanism of chromatin
tion techniques can be used to elucidate putative
condensation and decondensation. Models for
knowledge to consider for a hypothesis by selecting
condensation and decondensation of chromatin, a
relevant data and recognizing biological entities (e.g.
determinant of transcriptional activity, involves enzymes for
protein names) and relations in text [5,8]. For instance,
histone acetylation (HAT) and histone deacetylase (HDAC),
tools and algorithms have been developed that match
DNA methylation, and methylation of histone H3K9 [47].
predefined sets of biological terms [7,8], or that use
Cartoon representations are a typical means for scientific
discourse for molecular biologists. machine learning algorithms to recognize entities and
extract relations based on their context in a document
(pagenumbernotforcitationpurposes)
[9]. These techniques can also be used to extend an alsomodeledtheevidencethatledtotheseinstances.For
ontology[10,11].Severaltoolsexistfortextmining(See, instance, the process by which a protein name was found
for instance [8]), but for a methodology to be attractive and in which document it was found. We find a clash
to practitioners of experimental molecular biology we betweenourintentionofenrichingabiologicalmodel,and
would like a method that is more directly analogous to thefactualobservationsofatextminingproceduresuchas
wet laboratory experimentation. Workflow management ‘term’, ‘interaction assertion’, or ‘term collocation’. For
systems offer a platform for in silico experimentation example, it is obvious that collocation of the terms
[12-14] where, for example, data integration [5,15], and ‘HDAC1’ and ‘p53’ in one abstract does not necessarily
systematic large-scale analysis [16] have been imple- implycollocationofthereferredproteinsinacell.Inorder
mented. Workflows can also be shared on the web such toavoidconflationofknowledgefromthedifferentstages
as accomplished in myExperiment [17]. In a workflow, ofourknowledgeextractionprocess,wepurposefullykept
the steps of a computational experiment are carried out distinct OWL models. This lead to the creation of the
by individual components for which Web Services followingmodelsthatwillbetreatedindetailbelow:
provide a common communication protocol [18]. We
adopted the workflow paradigm for the design and ❑ Biological knowledge for our hypothesis (Protein,
execution of a reusable knowledge extraction experi- Association)
ment. The main services in the workflow are from the ❑ Text (Terms, Document references)
‘Adaptive Information Disclosure Application’ toolkit ❑ Knowledge extraction process (Steps of the
(AIDA) that we are developing for knowledge manage- procedure)
ment applications [19] and this document). The output ❑Extractionprocedureimplementation(WebService
enriches a knowledge base with putative biological and Workflow runs)
relations and corresponding evidence. The approach is ❑ Mapping model to integrate the above through
not limited to text mining but can be applied to references.
knowledge extracted during any computational experi- ❑Results(Instancesofextractedtermsandrelations)
ment. The advantage of routinely storing extracted
knowledge is that it enables us to perform posterior Biological model
analysis across many experiments. Forthebiologicalmodel,westartedwithaminimalsetof
classes designed for hypotheses about proteins and
protein-protein associations (Figure 2). This model con-
tainsclasses suchas ‘Protein’, ‘Interaction’and ‘Biological
Wepresentthemethodologyinthefollowingorder:1)a
Model’. We regard instances in the biological model as
description of representing prior knowledge through
interpretationsofcertainobservations,inourcase,oftext
proto-ontologies; 2) extension of the proto-ontologies
miningresults.Wealsodonotconsiderinstancesofthese
by a workflow that adds instances to a semantic
classes as biological facts; they are restricted to a
repository preloaded with the proto-ontologies; 3) a
hypothetical model in line with common practice in
description of how to query the knowledge base; 4) a
experimental biology. The evidence for the interpretation
description of the toolkit that we use for knowledge
isimportant,butitisnotwithinthescopeofthismodel.
extraction and knowledge management. Data and
Inthecaseoftextmining,evidenceismodeledbythetext,
references are accessible from pack 58 on myExperi-
text mining, and implementation models.
ment.org [20].
Text model
Model representation in OWL A model of the structure of documents and statements
Different types of knowledge therein is less ambiguous than the biological model,
Step one of our methodology is to define machine becausewecandirectlyinspectconcreteinstancessuchas
readable ‘proto-ontologies’ to represent our biological (referencesto)documentsorpiecesoftext(Figure3).We
hypothesis within the scope of an experiment. The canbesureofthescopeofthemodelandwecanbeclear
experiment in this case is a procedure to extract protein about the distinction between classes and instances
relations from literature. Our approach is based on the because we computationally process the documents.
assumption that knowledge models can grow with each This model contains classes for documents, protein or
experiment that we or others perform. Therefore, we gene names, and mentions of associations between
created a minimal OWL ontology of the relevant proteinsorgenes.
biological domain entities and their biological relations
forourknowledgeextractionexperiment.Thepurposeof Text mining model
the experiment is to populate (enrich) the proto- Next, we created a model for the knowledge extraction
ontologies with instances derived from literature. We process.Thismodelservestoretrievetheevidenceforthe
(pagenumbernotforcitationpurposes)
population of our biological model (Figure 4). It
contains classes for information retrieval and informa-
tion extraction such as ‘collocation process’ and proper-
ties such as ‘discovered by’. We also created classes to
contain text mining specific information such as the
likelihood of terms being found in the literature. This
allows us to inspect the uncertainty of certain findings.
Becauseanyprocedurecouldbeimplementedinvarious
ways, we created a separate model for the implementa-
tion artifacts.
Workflow model
For more complete knowledge provenance, we also
created a model representing the implementation of the
Graphical representation of the biological domain
model in OWL and example instances. This proto- text mining process as a workflow of (AIDA) Web
ontology contains classes for instances that may be relevant Services. Example instances are (references to) the AIDA
in hypotheses about chromatin (de)condensation. HDAC1 Web Services, and runs of these services. Following the
and PCAF are example instances representing proteins properties of these instances we can retrace a particular
implied in models about this process and known to interact. run of the workflow.
In this and following figures, red diamonds represent
instances, dashed arrows connected to diamonds represent
Mapping model
instance-of relations and blue dashed arrows represent
At this point, we have created a clear framework for the
properties between classes or instances. Inverse relations
descriptionofourbiologicaldomainandthedocuments
arenotshownforclarity.ProteinAssociationrepresentsthe
and the text mining results as instances in our text and
reified relation in which two (or more) proteins participate.
Instances of ‘BiologicalModel’ represent an abstraction of a text mining ontologies. The next step is to relate the
instancesinthevariousmodelstothebiologicaldomain
biological hypothesis that can be partially represented by
model. Our strategy is to initially keep the domain
user queries, proteins provided by the user, and proteins
discovered by text mining. model simple at the class and object property level,
and to map sets of instances from our results to the
domain model. For this, we created an additional
mapping model that defines reference properties
between the models (Figure 5). This allows us to see
Graphical representation of proto-ontology for
entities in text and example instances. This proto-
ontologycontainsclassesofinstancesfordocuments,terms,
and statements found in the text of the documents. The Figure 4
latter relation is represented by ‘component of’ properties. Graphical representation of the proto-ontology for
The instances represent concrete observations in text. the text mining process. This proto-ontology contains
Properties such as ‘relates’ and ‘relatesBy’ represent their the classes for instances of the processes by which a
interrelations. Example instances are shown for protein knowledge extraction experiment is performed. The darker
names ‘HDAC1’ and ‘p68’ and an assertion suggesting a coloured classes represent restriction classes for instances
relation between these two proteins. that have at least one ‘discoveredBy’ property defined.
(pagenumbernotforcitationpurposes)
experiments’analogoustoawetlaboratoryexperiments.
We therefore used the workflow paradigm to design the
protocol of our text mining experiment, here with the
workflow design and enactment tool Taverna [13,21]. A
basic text mining workflow consists of the following
steps: (i) Retrieve relevant documents from MedLine, in
particulartheirabstracts,(ii)Extractproteinnamesfrom
the retrieved abstracts, and (iii) Present the results for
inspection.Weimplementedthetextminingprocessasa
workflow (Figure 6). We added an additional sub-
workflow to process the input query in order to extract
known protein names from the input query and expand
the query with synonyms for known protein names. For
this, we employed a Web Service that provides UniProt
identifiersandsynonymsforhuman,ratandmousegene
Figure 5 names. These were derived from a combination of
Graphical representation of the proto-ontology several public databases [22]. The query is first split
containing the mapping properties between the into its individual terms with a service from the AIDA
biological, text, and text mining models. The
ToolkitthatwrapstheLucenetokenizer,andthenallthe
‘reference’ properties connect the concrete observations
terms (tokens) from the original query are checked for
capturedinthetextmodelwiththemodelrepresentationsin
having a UniProt identifier by which they are identified
the biological model. For instance, the discovered protein
asreferringtoaknownprotein.Thesub-workflowmakes
name ‘HDAC1’ in the text mining model refers to the
proteinlabelled‘HDAC1’thatisacomponentofaninstance the synonyms, UniProt identifiers, and the expanded
query available for the rest of the workflow. The
representing a chromatin condensation hypothesis.
expanded query is the input for the next sub-workflow:
document retrieval. We applied the document search
that an interaction between the proteins labeled ‘p68’ service from the AIDA Toolkit, parameterized to use the
and‘HDAC1’inourhypotheticalmodelisreferredtoby regularly updated MedLine index that is stored on our
amentionofanassociationbetweentheterms‘p68’and AIDA server and updated daily. The output of this
‘HDAC1’, with a likelihood score that indicates how retrieval service is an xml document that contains
elements of the retrieved documents, such as the
remarkable it is to find this combination in literature.
PubMed identifier, title, abstract, and the authors. We
then extract titles and abstracts for the next sub-
In summary, we have created proto-ontologies that
workflow: i.e. protein name recognition. Sub-workflow
separate the different views on biomolecular knowledge
3employstheAIDAWebService‘applyCRF’torecognize
derived from literature by a text mining experiment. We
protein (or gene) names in text. This service wraps a
cancreateinstancesineach viewandtheirinterrelations
machine learning method based on the ‘conditional
(Figure 6). This allows us to trace the experimental
random fields’ approach [23]. In this case it uses a
evidence for knowledge contained in the biological
recognition model trained on protein/gene names. We
model. In a case of text mining such as ours, evidence
addedtheaforementionedUniProtserviceagaintomark
ismodeledbythedocument,textmining,andworkflow
the extracted results as genuine human, rat, or mouse
models. A different type of computational experiment
protein/gene names. In a number of cases the workflow
would require other models and new mappings to
produced more than one identifier for a single protein
represent evidence.
name. This is due to the ambiguity in gene and protein
names. For instance, Tuason et al. reported 6.6%
Knowledge extraction experiment ambiguous occurrences of mouse gene names in text,
The proto-ontologies form the basis of our knowledge
andpercentagesrangingfrom2.4%to32.9%depending
base. They provide the initial templates for the knowl-
on the organism [24]. The final step of our text mining
edge that we wish to be able to interrogate in search of
procedure was to calculate a likelihood score for the
new hypotheses. The next step is to populate the
extracted proteins to be found in documents retrieved
knowledge base with instances. At the modeling stage
through the expanded input query. We used a statistical
wealreadyanticipatedthatourfirstsourceofknowledge
method where the likelihood of finding a document
would be literature, and that we would obtain instances
withinputquery(q)anddiscoveredproteinname(d)is
by text mining. An element of our approach is to regard
knowledge extraction procedures as ‘computational calculated by: −log ⎛ ⎜ QDexp ⎞ ⎟,QD =( Q∗D ) /N, in
⎝ QD ⎠ exp
(pagenumbernotforcitationpurposes)
Knowledgeextractionworkflow.Theknowledgeextractionworkflowhasthreeparts.Theleftpartexecutesthestepsof
a basic text mining procedure: (i) extract protein names from the user query and add synonyms using the BioSemantics
synonymservice,(ii)retrievedocumentsfromMedLinewiththeAIDAdocumentsearchservice,(iii)extractproteinswiththe
AIDA named entity recognition service, (iv) calculate a ranking score for each discovery. The middle workflow converts the
resultsfromthetextminingworkflowtoRDFusingthebiologicalmodelandthetextmodelastemplate.Theworkflowonthe
right-side creates execution-level instances for the workflow components and couples these to the instances created in the
middle workflow. The blue rectangles represent inputs and outputs. The pink rectangles represent sub-workflows.
which Q, D, and QD are the frequencies of documents procedureistoinitializethisknowledgebaseafterwhich
containing q, d, and q and d, respectively; QD exp is the the proto-ontologies are loaded into the knowledge
expected frequency of documents containing q and d base, and references to the knowledge base are available
assumingthattheirco-occurrenceisarandomevent;Nis for the rest of the workflow. The next step is to add
the total number of documents in MedLine. instances for the following entities to the knowledge
base: 1) the initial biological model/hypothesis, 2) the
In parallel to the part of the workflow that performs the original input query, 3) the protein names it contains,
basic text mining procedure, we designed a set of and 4) the expanded query. We assumed that the input
‘semantic’ sub-workflows to convert the text mining query and the proteins mentioned therein partially
resultstoinstancesoftheproto-ontologiesandaddthese representthebiologicalmodel;eachrunoftheworkflow
instances to the AIDA knowledge base, including their creates a new instance of a biological model unless the
interrelations(stepssNinFigure6).Thefirststepofthis input query is exactly the same as in a previous
(pagenumbernotforcitationpurposes)
experiment. Figure 7 illustrates the creation of an Querying the knowledge base
instance of a biological model and its addition to the The result of running the workflow is that our knowl-
knowledge base, including the details for creating the edge base is enriched with instances of biological
RDF triples in Java. All the semantic sub-workflows concepts and relations between those instances that
follow a similar pattern (data not shown). The follow- can also tell us why the instances were created. We can
ing sub-worfklow adds instances for retrieved docu- examine the results in search of unexpected findings or
ments to the knowledge base; it only uses the PubMed we can examine the evidence for certain findings, for
identifier. The sub-workflow that adds discovered instance by examining the documents in which some
proteins is critical to our methodology. It creates protein name was found. An interesting possibility is to
protein term instances from protein names in the Text explore relations between the results of computational
ontology to which it also adds the collocation relations experiments that added knowledge to the knowledge
with the original query a and a ‘discovered_in’ relation base. To prove this concept we ran the workflow twice,
with the document it was discovered in. In addition, it first with “HDAC1 AND chromatin” as input, and then
creates protein instances in the BioModel ontology and with “(Nutrition OR food) AND (chromatin OR
a biological association relation to the proteins found epigenetics) AND (protein OR proteins)” as input. We
in the input query. Between term and protein instances were then able to retrieve three proteins that are
in the different ontologies it creates reference relations. apparently shared between the two biological models
As a result, our knowledge base is populated with the (see Figure 8 for the RDF query): NF-kappaB (UniProt
discoveries of the text mining procedure and their ID P19838), p21 (UniProt ID P38936), and Bax
biological interpretations still linked with the knowl- (UniProt ID P97436). If we would like to investigate
edge they are interpretations of. The final sub-workflow theevidencebywhichtheseproteinswerediscoveredwe
adds the calculated likelihood scores as a property of designed a query that traces the chain of evidence
the protein terms in the knowledge base. Finally, to be (Figure 9). It retrieves the process by which the name of
able to retrieve more complete evidence from the the protein was found, the service by which the process
knowledgebase,weextendedourmodelsandworkflow was implemented and its creator, the document from
to accommodate typical provenance data (not shown). MedLineinwhichtheproteinnamewasdiscovered,and
We created an ontology with classes for Workflow runs the time when this discovery service was run. For
and Web Service runs. Using the same semantic example, NF-KappaB was found on the 18th of Novem-
approach as above we were able to store instances of ber 2008 in a paper with PubMed identifier 17540846,
these runs, including the date and time of execution. by a run of the ‘AIDA CRF Named Entity Recognition
Example RDF conversion workflow. This workflow creates an OWL instance for a biological hypothesis in RDF ‘N3’
format, and adds the RDF triples to the AIDA knowledge base with the ‘addRDF’ operation of the AIDA repository Web
Service. The actual conversion is performed in the Java Beanshell ‘Instantiate_Semantic_Type’ of which the code is shown at
the bottom. The sub-workflow has the hypothesis instance as output for use by other sub-workflows in the main workflow.
(pagenumbernotforcitationpurposes)
(AIDA). AIDA is a generic set of components that can
perform a variety of tasks related to knowledge extrac-
tion and knowledge management, such as perform
specialized search on resource collections, learn new
pattern recognition models, and store knowledge in a
repository. W3C standards are used to make data
accessible and manageable with Semantic Web technol-
ogies such as OWL, RDF(S), and SKOS. AIDA is also
Figure 8 based on Lucene and Sesame. Most components are
Pseudo RDF query for extracting proteins related to available as web services and are open source under an
two hypotheses. RDF queries are pattern matching Apache license. AIDA is composed of three main
queries. This query returns proteins that were found by modules: Search, Learning, and Storage.
mining for relations with two different hypotheses
represented by two different user queries. The result is a
table of protein descriptions and the two user queries. Search – the information retrieval module
AIDA provides components which enable retrieval from
a set of documents given a query, similar to popular
search engines such as Google, Yahoo!, or PubMed. To
make a set of documents (a corpus) searchable, an
‘index’ needs to be created first [25]. For this the AIDA’s
configurable Indexer can be used. The Indexer and
Search components are built upon Apache Lucene,
version 2.1.0 [26], and, hence, indexes or other systems
basedonLucenecaneasilybeintegratedwithAIDA.The
Indexer component takes care of the preprocessing (the
conversion, tokenization, and possibly normalization)
of the text of each document as well as the subsequent
index generation. Different fields can be made retrieva-
ble such as title, document name, authors, or the entire
contents. The currently supported document encodings
are Microsoft Word, Portable Document Format (PDF),
MedLine, XML, and plain text. The so-called “Docu-
mentHandlers” which handle the actual conversion of
each source file are loaded at runtime, so a handler for
anyotherproprietarydocumentencodingcanbecreated
Figure 9 and used instantly. Because Lucene is used as a basis, a
Graphical representation of a ‘chain of evidence
plethora of options and/or languages are available for
query’. This RDF query matches patterns in the RDF graph
stemming, tokenization, normalization, or stop word
createdbytheknowledgeextractionworkflow.Theresultis
removal which may all be set on a per-field, per-
a table of protein identifiers, protein names, the process by
document type, or per-index basis using the configura-
whichtheproteinswerefound,theservicethatimplemented
tion. An index can currently be constructed using either
thisprocess,thedateandtimeitwasrun,itscreator,andthe
the command-line, a SOAP webservice (with the limita-
document that the service used as input and of which the
protein name was a component. tion of 1 document per call), or using a Taverna plugin.
Learning – the machine learning module
service’ based on ‘conditional random fields trained on
AIDA includes several components which enable infor-
protein names’, created by Sophia Katrenko.
mationextractionfromtextdataintheLearningmodule.
These components are referred to as learning tools. The
The AIDA Toolkit for knowledge extraction and large community working on the information extraction
knowledge management task has already produced numerous data sets and tools
The methodology that we propose enables a ‘do-it- to work with. To be able to use existing solutions, we
yourself’ approach to extracting knowledge that can incorporated some of the models trained on the large
support hypothesis generation. To support this corpora into the named entity recognition web service
approach, we are developing an open source toolkit NERecognizerService. These models are provided by
called Adaptive Information Disclosure Application LingPipe [27] and range from the very general named
(pagenumbernotforcitationpurposes)
entity recognition (detecting locations, person and based[30,31].ThesaurusRepositoryWSisanextensionof
organization names) to the specific models in the RepositoryWS that provides convenient access methods
biomedical field created to recognize protein names for SKOS thesauri. The Sesame RDF repository offers an
input/output, which gives us an opportunity to work integrate Sesame into workflows we created a SOAP
with either text data or the output of the search engine service that gives access to the Sesame Java API. We
Lucene.WealsooffertheLearnModelwebservicewhose accommodate for extensions to other RDF repositories,
aim is to produce a model from annotated text data. A such as the HP Jena, Virtuoso, Allegrograph repositories
model is based on the contextual information and uses or future versions of Sesame, by implementing the
learningmethods providedbyWeka[28]libraries.Once Factory design pattern.
suchamodeliscreated,itcan beusedby theTestModel
webservicetoannotatetextsinthesamedomain.Inthis
Complementary services from BioSemantics applications
paperweuseanAIDAservicethatappliesaserviceforan
One of the advantages of a workflow approach is the
algorithm that uses sequential models, such as condi-
ability to include services created elsewhere in the
tional random fields (CRFs)/CRFs have an advantage scientific community (’collaboration by Web Services’).
over Hiddem Markov Models because of their ability to
For instance, in our BioAID workflows operations are
relax the independence assumption by defining a
used for query expansion and validation of protein
conditionalprobabilitydistributionoverlabelsequences
names by UniProt identifiers. AIDA is therefore com-
given an observation sequence. We used CRFs to detect
plemented by services derived from text mining applica-
named entities in several domains like acids of various
tionssuchasAnni2.0fromtheBioSemanticsgroup[32].
lengthsinthefoodinformaticsfieldorproteinnamesin The ‘BioSemantics’ group is particularly strong in
the biomedical field [9].
disambiguation of the names of biological entities such
as genes/proteins, intelligent biological query expansion
Named entity recognition constitutes only one subtask
(manuscript in preparation), and provision of several
in information extraction. Relation extraction can be
well known identifiers for biological entities through
viewed as the logical next step after the named entity
carefullycompiledsetsofnamesandidentifiersarounda
recognition is carried out [29]. This task can be
biological concept.
decomposed into the detection of named entities,
followed by the verification of a given relation among
User interfaces for AIDA
them. For example, given extracted protein names, it
In addition to RDF manipulation within workflows as
should possible to infer whether there is any interaction
described in this document, several examples of user
between two proteins. This task is accomplished by the
interactions have been made available in AIDA clients
RelationLearnerwebservice.Itusesanannotatedcorpus
such as HTML web forms, AJAX web applications, and a
of relations to induce a model, which consequently can
Firefox toolbar. The clients access RepositoryWS for
be applied to the test data with already detected named
querying RDF through the provided Java Servlets. The
entities. The RelationLearner focuses on extraction of
webservicesinStoragehaverecentlybeenupdatedfrom
binaryrelationsgiventhesententialcontext.Itsoutputis
the Sesame 1.2 Java API to the Sesame 2.0 Java API.
alistofthenamedentitiespairs,wherethegivenrelation
SomeofthenewfeaturesthatSesame2.0provides,such
holds.
as SPARQL support and named graphs, are now being
addedtoourwebserviceAPI’sandincorporatedintoour
The other relevant area for information extraction is
applications.
detection of the collocations (or n-grams in the broader
sense). This functionality is provided by the Colloca-
tionService which, given a folder with text documents, Discussion
outputsthen-gramsofthedesiredfrequencyandlength. Our methodology for supporting the generation of a
hypothesisaboutabiomolecularmechanismisbasedon
a combination of tools and expertise from the fields of
Storage – the metadata storage module Semantic Web, e-Science, information retrieval, and
AIDA includes components for the storage and proces- information extraction. This novel combination has a
sing of ontologies, vocabularies, and other structured number of benefits. First, the use of RDF and OWL
metadata in the Storage module. The main component, removes the technical obstacle for making models
also for the work described in this paper, is Repositor- interoperable with other knowledge resources on the
yWS, a service wrapper for Sesame – an open source Semantic Web although semantic interoperability will
framework for storage, inferencing and querying of RDF oftenrequireanalignmentprocesstotakeplaceformore
data on which most of this module’s implementation is far reaching compatibility. The modeling approach that
(pagenumbernotforcitationpurposes)
we propose is complementary to the efforts of commu- thousands of Web Services and hundreds of workflows
nities such as the Open Biomedical Ontology (OBO) available for bioinformaticians [17], numerous exten-
community.Thiscommunity’sstatedpurposeistocreate sions to our workflow can be explored. In addition, the
an ‘accurate representation of biological reality’ by combination with a semantic model allows us to collect
developing comprehensive domain ontologies and evidenceinformationasatypeofknowledgeprovenance
reconciling existing ontologies according to a number during workflow execution. In this way, we were able to
of governing principles [4]. Our ambitions are more address the issue of keeping a proper log of what has
modest. We start with a minimal model to represent a happened to our data during computational experimen-
hypothesis, i.e. a particular model of reality. We define tation,analogoustothelabjournaltypicallyrequiredin
our own classes and properties within the scope of a wet labs [40]. Ideally, the knowledge provenance
knowledge extraction experiment, but because of the captured in our approach would be more directly
modularity supported by OWL this does not exclude supported by existing workflow systems. However, this
integration with other ontologies. In fact, integration is not yet possible. There seems to be a knowledge gap
with existing knowledge resources enables a comple- between workflow investigators and the users from a
mentary approach for finding facts potentially relevant particular application domain with regard to prove-
to a hypothesis. Clearly, in order to scale up our nance. We propose that workflow systems take care of
methodologytorepresentknowledgebeyondtheexperi- executionlevelprovenanceandprovideanRDFinterface
ments of a small group of researchers, alignment with on which users can build their own provenance model.
standards would have to be considered. Upper ontolo- In this context, it will be interesting to see if we will be
gies can facilitate integration (for an example see [33]), able to replace our workflow model and link directly to
and we can benefit from the OBO guidelines and the the light weight provenance model that is being
tools that have been developed to convert OBO implemented for Taverna 2 [41]. A third benefit is that
ontologies to OWL [33-35]. Another interesting possibi- the application of Semantic Web, Web Services, and
lity is the integration with thesauri based on the SKOS workflows stored on myExperiment.org, allow all
framework [36]. Relations between SKOS concepts resources relevant to an experiment to be shared on the
(terms) are defined by simple ‘narrower’ and ‘broader’ web, making our results more reproducible. We would
relations that turn out to be effective for human like to increase the ‘liquidity’ of knowledge so that
computer interfaces, and may be the best option for knowledge extracted from computational experiments
labelingtheelementsinoursemanticmodels.Insteadof caneventuallyfitintoframeworksforscientificdiscourse
providing a text string as a human readable label, we (hypotheses, research statements and questions, etc.)
could associate an element with an entry in a SKOS such as Semantic Web Applications in Neuromedicine
thesaurus, which is a valuable knowledge resource in (SWAN)[42].Ifitisto beglobal,interoperabilityacross
itself. The SKOS format is useful as an approach for modes of discourse would require large scale consensus
‘light-weight’ knowledge integration that avoids the on how to express knowledge provenance, not only
problems of ontological over-commitment associated about knowledge produced from computational experi-
with more powerful logics like OWL DL [37]. mentsbutalsofrommanualorhumanassertions.Some
groups are attempting to address various aspects of this
A second benefit of our methodology comes from the problem, such as the Scientific Discourse task force [43]
implementation of the knowledge extraction procedure intheW3CSemanticWebHealthCareandLifeSciences
asaworkflow.Theprocedureforpopulatinganontology Interest Group [44], the Concept Web Alliance [45] and
is similar to the one previously described by Witte et al. the Shared Names initiative [46].
[38], but our implementation allows the accumulation
of knowledge by repeatedly running the same workflow
oradaptationsofit.Thisenablesustoperformposterior Conclusion
analyses over the results from several experiments by In this paper wedemonstrate amethodology fora‘do it
querying the knowledge base, for instance in a new yourself’approachfortheextractionandmanagementof
workflowthatusestheAIDAsemanticrepositoryservice. knowledge in support of generating hypotheses about
Moreover, the approach is not limited to text mining. If biomolecularmechanisms.Ourapproachdescribes how
one considers text documents as a particular form of onecancreateapersonalmodelforaspecifichypothesis
data, we can generalize the principle to any computa- and how a personal ‘computational experiment’ can be
tionalexperimentinwhichtheoutputcanberelatedtoa designed and executed to extract knowledge from
qualitative biological model. As such, this work extends literature and populate a knowledge base. A significant
previous work on integration of genome data via advantageofthemethodologyisthepossibilityitcreates
semantic annotation [39]. In this case the annotation is to perform analyses across the results of several of these
carried out by a workflow. Considering that there are knowledge extraction experiments. Moreover, the
Page10of12
(pagenumbernotforcitationpurposes)
principle of semantic disclosure of results from a Sciences,2008.Thefullcontentsofthesupplementareavailableonlineat
Inprinciple,itcanbeappliedtoanykindof experiment