Send Orders for Reprints to reprints@benthamscience.net
Current Topics in Medicinal Chemistry, 2014, 14, 1923-1938 1923
Structure-Based Virtual Screening for Drug Discovery: Principles,
Applications and Recent Advances
Evanthia Lionta, George Spyrou, Demetrios K. Vassilatis and Zoe Cournia*
Biomedical Research Foundation, Academy of Athens, 4 Soranou Ephessiou, 11527 Athens, Greece
Abstract: Structure-based drug discovery (SBDD) is becoming an essential tool in assisting fast and cost-efficient lead
discovery and optimization. The application of rational, structure-based drug design is proven to be more efficient than the
traditional way of drug discovery since it aims to understand the molecular basis of a disease and utilizes the knowledge
of the three-dimensional structure of the biological target in the process. In this review, we focus on the principles and ap-
plications of Virtual Screening (VS) within the context of SBDD and examine different procedures ranging from the ini-
tial stages of the process that include receptor and library pre-processing, to docking, scoring and post-processing of top-
scoring hits. Recent improvements in structure-based virtual screening (SBVS) efficiency through ensemble docking, in-
duced fit and consensus docking are also discussed. The review highlights advances in the field within the framework of
several success studies that have led to nM inhibition directly from VS and provides recent trends in library design as well
as discusses limitations of the method. Applications of SBVS in the design of substrates for engineered proteins that en-
able the discovery of new metabolic and signal transduction pathways and the design of inhibitors of multifunctional pro-
teins are also reviewed. Finally, we contribute two promising VS protocols recently developed by us that aim to increase
inhibitor selectivity. In the first protocol, we describe the discovery of micromolar inhibitors through SBVS designed to
inhibit the mutant H1047R PI3K(cid:1) kinase. Second, we discuss a strategy for the identification of selective binders for the
RXR(cid:1) nuclear receptor. In this protocol, a set of target structures is constructed for ensemble docking based on binding
site shape characterization and clustering, aiming to enhance the hit rate of selective inhibitors for the desired protein tar-
get through the SBVS process.
Keywords: Computer-aided drug design, docking and scoring, ensemble docking, lead optimization, library design, PI3K(cid:1),
RXR(cid:1), virtual screening.
1. INTRODUCTION SBDD is nowadays central to the efficient development
of therapeutic agents and to the understanding of metabolic
The identification of lead compounds showing pharma-
processes. SBDD is proven to be more efficient than the tra-
cological activity against a biological target and the progres-
ditional way of drug discovery since it aims to understand
sive optimization of the pharmacological properties and po-
the molecular basis of a disease and utilizes the knowledge
tency of these compounds are the focal points of early-stage
of the three-dimensional (3D) structure of the biological tar-
drug discovery. To this end, the pharmaceutical industry has
get in the process. By using computational methods and the
adopted the experimental screening of large libraries of
3D structural information of the protein target, we are now
chemicals against a therapeutically-relevant target (high-
able to investigate the underlying molecular interactions in-
throughput screening or HTS) as a means to identify new
volved in ligand-protein binding and thus interpret experi-
lead compounds. Through HTS, active compounds, antibod-
mental results in atomic-level detail. The use of computers in
ies or genes, which modulate a particular biomolecular
drug discovery bears the additional advantage of delivering
pathway, may be identified; these provide starting points for new drug candidates more quickly and cost-efficiently.
drug discovery and for understanding the role of a particular
State of the art structure-based drug design methods in-
biochemical process in biology. Although HTS remains the
clude virtual screening (VS) and de novo drug design; these
method of choice for drug discovery in the pharma industry,
serve as an efficient, alternative approach to HTS. In virtual
the various drawbacks of this method, namely the high cost,
screening, large libraries of drug-like compounds that are
the time-demanding character of the process as well as the
commercially available are computationally screened against
uncertainty of the mechanism of action of the active ingredi-
targets of known structure, and those that are predicted to
ent have led to the increasing employment of rational, struc-
bind well are experimentally tested [1, 2]. However, database
ture-based drug design (SBDD) with the use of computa-
screening does not provide molecules that are structurally
tional methods.
“novel” as these molecules have been previously synthesized
by commercial vendors. Existing molecules can only be pat-
ented with a “method of use” patent covering their use for a
*Address correspondence to this author at the Biomedical Research Founda-
unique application and not their chemical structure. In the de
tion of the Academy of Athens, 4 Soranou Ephessiou, 11527 Athens,
Greece; Tel: +302106597195; Fax: +302106597545; novo drug design approach, the 3D structure of the receptor
E-mail: zcournia@bioacademy.gr is used to design structurally novel molecules that have
1873-5294/14 $58.00+.00 © 2014 Bentham Science Publishers
1924 Current Topics in Medicinal Chemistry, 2014, Vol. 14, No. 16 Lionta et al.
never been synthesized before using ligand-growing pro- sirable chemical moieties, metabolic liabilities, desired phys-
grams and the intuition of the medicinal chemist [3]. icochemical properties, lead-likeness, and chemical diver-
sity. Post-processing results in a small number of selected
Computer-aided drug discovery has recently had impor-
compounds, which proceed to experimental assaying [1, 2, 5,
tant successes: new biologically-active compounds have
10].
been predicted along with their receptor-bound structures
and in several cases the achieved hit rates (ligands discov-
ered per molecules tested) have been significantly greater
than with HTS [1, 4-6]. Moreover, while it is rare to deliver
lead candidates in the nM regime through VS, several reports
in the recent literature describe the identification of nM leads
directly from VS; these strategies will be discussed herein
[7-9]. Therefore, computational methods play a prominent
role in the drug design and discovery process within the con-
text of pharmaceutical research.
In this review, we focus on the principles and applica-
tions of VS in the SBDD framework, starting from the initial
stages of the process that include receptor and library pre-
processing, to docking, scoring, and post-processing of top-
scoring hits. We also highlight several successful studies and
protocols that led to nM leads, discuss novel applications of
Structure-Based VS (SBVS) such as substrate identification
for the discovery of novel metabolic pathways, and provide
recent trends in library design. Limitations of SBVS are also
examined. Finally, we present two developed VS protocols
that aim to enhance inhibitor selectivity for the target protein
structure.
2. VIRTUAL SCREENING IN STRUCTURE-BASED
DRUG DISCOVERY
The general scheme of a SBVS strategy is shown in Fig.
(1) [1, 2, 5]. SBVS starts with processing the 3D target struc-
tural information of interest. The target structure may be
derived from experimental data (X-ray, NMR or neutron
scattering spectroscopy), homology modeling, or from Mo-
lecular Dynamics (MD) simulations. There are numerous
fundamental issues that should be examined when consider-
ing a biological target for SBVS; for example, the druggabil-
ity of the receptor, the choice of binding site, the selection of
the most relevant protein structure, incorporating receptor
flexibility, suitable assignment of protonation states, and
consideration of water molecules in a binding site, to name a
few. In fact, the identification of ligand binding sites on bio-
logical targets is becoming increasingly important. The need
for novel modulators of protein/gene function has recently
directed the scientific community to pursue druggable allos-
teric binding pockets. Another consideration for SBVS in-
cludes the careful choice of the compound library to be
screened in the VS exercise according to the target in ques-
tion, and the preprocessing of libraries in order to assign the
proper stereochemistry, tautomeric, and protonation states.
Following library and receptor preparation, each com-
pound in the library is virtually docked into the target bind-
ing site with a docking program. Docking aims to predict the
Fig. (1). Structure-Based Virtual Screening work-flow.
ligand-protein complex structure by exploring the conforma-
tional space of the ligands within the binding site of the pro-
2.1. Protein Preparation Schemes for SBVS
tein. A scoring function is then utilized to approximate the
free energy of binding between the protein and the ligand in The success of a SBVS campaign largely depends on rea-
each docking pose. Docking and scoring produce ranked sonable starting structures for both the protein and the
compounds, which are then post-processed by examining ligand. A typical PDB structure file consists only of heavy
calculated binding scores, validity of generated pose, unde- atoms (if the input is an X-ray structure) and may contain
Structure-Based Virtual Screening for Drug Discovery Current Topics in Medicinal Chemistry, 2014, Vol. 14, No. 16 1925
water molecules, cofactors, activators, ligands, and metal tion are sought. Ideally, the target binding site is a pocket,
ions as well as several protein subunits. Moreover, the struc- typically a concave, having a variety of probable hydrogen
ture has generally no information on bond orders, topologies, bond donors and acceptors and hydrophobic characteristics.
or formal atomic charges. Terminal amide groups and aspar- Currently four approaches in the identification of putative
agine residues may be misarranged as X-ray structures can- binding sites exist in the literature: 1) Static approaches,
not unambiguously distinguish between O and NH groups. where computational solvent mapping with chemical probes
Ionization and tautomeric states are also unassigned in most (small organic molecules) is utilized to identify binding hot
cases, residue side chains or larger loops may be missing spots on a 3D structure (from Xray, MD, etc). These ap-
because of low resolution of a particular protein area, and proaches determine the hot spot druggability and provide
steric clashes may exist. information for drug design. Examples of such an approach
include SiteMap [29], FTMap [30], Fpocket [31], MDpocket
To efficiently address the above-mentioned structural is-
[32], QsiteFinder [33], MED-SUMO [34] and SiteHound-
sues, several protein preparation schemes have been pro-
web [35]. Selecting a different chemical probe each time
posed [5, 11, 12]. The general proposed strategy is to first
may result in the identification of a different type of binding
determine the protonation states of the aminoacids in the
site. 2) Dynamic approaches, where the probes and the pro-
protein using available software. Popular freely available
tein evolve dynamically in time and more than one probe
software include PROPKA [13], H++ [14], SPORES [15].
may be used in one simulation. Analysis of these simulations
The next step is to assign hydrogen atoms and optimize pro-
provides direct access to interaction free energies between
tein hydrogen bonds according to an optimal hydrogen bond
the protein and small organic molecules, which can then be
network. A widely-used software for these tasks is the
used to detect binding sites and predict the maximal affinity
PDB2PQR software [16]. The next steps are assignment of
that a drug-like fragment could attain. Programs following
partial charges, capping of residues, treating metals, filling in
this approach are MDMix [36], SILCS [37], MixMD [38]. In
missing loops and missing side chains, and minimizing the
this context, studies that aim to understand ligand binding
protein structure to relieve steric clashes. In addition, a deci-
mechanisms using microsecond MD simulations or enhanced
sion needs to be made regarding whether water molecules
sampling techniques [39-41] may also be used for revealing
will be left in or removed from the binding site. Several new binding pockets using small organic molecules as
methods have been developed to tackle this challenging probes, although this approach is not computationally-
problem, such as 3D RISM [17-19], SZMAP [20], JAWS efficient. 3) In the mixed approach, the detection of ligand
[21], WaterMap [18, 22], which are utilized in commercial binding sites is performed with a chemical probe as in the
software [23-25]. In case the protein is co-crystallized with static approach and in addition, the putative binding site is
substrates, cofactors, etc., these ligands must be prepared to evaluated in terms of flexibility. Flexibility can be deter-
create 3D geometries, assign proper bond orders, and gener- mined by performing normal mode analysis or by identifying
ate accessible tautomer and ionization states prior to VS. flexible residues within the binding site and probing residue
These tasks may be performed within available free software alternative conformations using a rotamer library. FTFlex,
packages such as the “Protein Preparation Wizard” of Maes- which is an extension of the FTMap server, uses the latter
tro [26] or scripts that use a variety of different programs to approach [42]. 4) The last approach uses water as a probe to
prepare a protein structure for SBVS, e.g. WebPDB (see identify putative binding sites on proteins. Approaches fol-
Table 1 for a full list of freely-available programs). lowing the inhomogeneous solvation theory [43] include
JAWS [21], WaterMap [22], and WATMD (Novartis), but
The importance of protein preparation in docking per-
also other methods have been developed such as 3D-RISM
formance has been recently reported [11]. Docking per-
[17] and SZMAP [20].
formance is significantly improved when employing a best-
practice preparation scheme over using minimally-prepared
structures from the PDB structure. In the only systematic 2.3. Compound Database Preparation
study available in the literature regarding the influence of
The construction of compound databases is the next im-
the protein preparation procedure in the success of a SBVS
portant step in the SBVS process. Databases for SBVS con-
workflow, Sastry et al. have explored each of the steps in-
tain drug-like small molecules, often freely available or
volved in preparing a system for VS [11]. In their study, a
available via purchase or synthesis, which possess desirable
large number of parameters in protein preparation is exam-
characteristics such as stability and solubility in aqueous
ined using the Glide validation set of 36 crystal structures
media, existence of appropriate functional groups to interact
and 1,000 decoys. Several protocols are considered and
with biological targets and absence of toxic and undesirable
applied on the Directory of Useful Decoys (DUD) database
moieties. Several rules have been applied to ensure ‘drug-
[27, 28], showing that database enrichment is improved
likeness’, with the most popular being the “Lipinski Rule of
after proper receptor preparation and that neglecting certain
Five" [44], which states that drug-like compounds should
steps of the preparation process produces a systematic deg-
have molecular weight lower than 500, lipophilicity (logP)
radation in enrichments, which may be large for some tar-
lower than 5, less than five hydrogen bond donors, and less
gets.
than 10 hydrogen bond acceptors. As increasingly more
compounds break some of these rules and enter the market
2.2. Binding Site Identification
(e.g. natural product drugs as well as 50% of marketed drugs
Binding site identification is often an additional prerequi- do not comply with the “Rule of Five”) [45], attempts to
site for performing SBVS, when the binding site is not improve the predictions of druglikeness have spawned many
known or when new, allosteric modulators of protein func- extensions to the Lipinski Rule of Five. Molecules may be
1926 Current Topics in Medicinal Chemistry, 2014, Vol. 14, No. 16 Lionta et al.
Table 1. Free available software and tools for performing a SBVS workflow.
Program Functionality Link to Download
Compound Filtering, Post-processing of
docking results
Grinter et al. [70] Ligand and Protein Preparation Contact authors
Computer-Aided
PyMOL [129]
For a list of available programs for SBVS:
considered as drug-like within a range of log P in (cid:1)0.4 to rotatable bonds < 3) [47]. However, in a recent study by
+5.6, molar refractivity from 40 to 130, molecular weight Klebe and coworkers, it was shown that only four of their 11
from 180 to 500, number of atoms from 20 to 70 (includes discovered fragments were compliant with the Rule of Three
H-bond donors (e.g.; OH's and NH's) and H-bond acceptors [48]. Strict compliance to this rule would have strongly lim-
(e.g.; N's and O's), polar surface area no greater than 140 Å2, ited the variety of chemotypes among the fragment hits, in-
and/or fewer than ten rotatable bonds [46]. Moreover, the dicating that it is advisable to follow these rules with a cer-
“Rule of Three” is an extension to the Rule of Five specifi- tain degree of flexibility, i.e. allow one violation to the rule
cally for fragments (molecular weight < 300, logP < 3, num- each time [49]. The overly rigid application of strict cut-off
ber of hydrogen bond donors and acceptors < 3, number of points may introduce artificial distinctions between similar
Structure-Based Virtual Screening for Drug Discovery Current Topics in Medicinal Chemistry, 2014, Vol. 14, No. 16 1927
compounds and runs the risk of missing valuable opportuni- [58]. The objective of this application is to facilitate com-
ties [50]. A more recent rule accounting for the physico- pound preparation prior to (or after) VS computations by
chemical properties relating to preclinical toxicology out- utilizing its many sections, such as (i) basic search, (ii) filter-
comes is the “Pfizer's Rule of 3/75", which is based on the ing (steric clashes and toxicity), (iii) advanced filtering based
values of calculated partition coefficient (ClogP) and topo- on custom chosen physicochemical properties, (iv) clustering
logical polar surface area (TPSA). According to this rule, (according to structure and compound physicochemical
compounds with ClogP lower than 3 and TPSA higher than properties providing representative compounds for each clus-
75 are approximately 2.5 times more likely to be safe in in ter), (v) customized pipeline and (vi) visualization of com-
vivo assays [51]. The “Jorgensen Rule-of-Three” is another pound' properties through property graphs and thus, increase
widely-followed rule for lead like properties and states that the efficiency and the quality of compounds that proceed to
the aqueous solubility measured as logS should be greater in vitro assaying. The FAF-Drugs2 server is a public tool for
than -5.7, the apparent Caco-2 cell permeability should be computationally filtering compounds by considering AD-
faster than 22 nm/s, and the number of primary metabolites MET and physicochemical properties, and identifying key
should be less than 7; these limits are based on the properties functional or undesirable moieties [59]. Moreover, users
of 90% of 1700 oral drugs [52]. Bickerton et al. have pro- have the opportunity to select filtering thresholds and rules
posed a measure of drug-likeness based on the concept of among 23 physicochemical and 204 substructure searching
desirability called “the quantitative estimate of drug- rules. Last but not least, this tool provides numerous distri-
likeness” (QED) [53]. The QED functions rank chemical bution diagrams of the properties of the filtered compounds
structures by their merit relative to the properties of oral in a web-server version [60].
drugs. Moreover, QED functions have the additional advan-
Finally, compound datasets should be preprocessed in
tage that they are based on the underlying distribution data of
realistic 3D representations. Therefore, the compound set to
drug properties and may identify cases in which a generally
be used for SBVS should have realistic bond lengths and
unfavorable property may be tolerated when the other pa-
angles as these may not change during docking. Also, it
rameters are close to ideal. Other metrics of promise include
must be devoid of accompanying fragments such as
ligand efficiency (LE = potency/heavy atom count) and lipo-
counter-ions, metals, and solvent molecules, all compounds
philic LE (LLE = potency - cLogP), which is a measure of
need to have assigned bond order and filled valences, par-
lipophilicity that leads to the observed potency. These met-
tial charges, an appropriate protonation state at physiologi-
rics show how well a molecule engages in receptor interac-
cal pH or at the pH of the interest and proper tautomeric
tions; taking these rules into account provides excellent in-
states [61, 62]. However, it was shown that consideration
sights for lead optimization [49].
of all possible tautomers (stable and unstable) yields
It should be noted that the majority of commercial com- slightly poorer results than including only the most stable
pounds found in chemical libraries have a larger molecular form in water [63]. Docking programs usually include
weight and higher hydrophobicity compared to orally avail- ligand preparation software such as Autodock Tools [64],
able drugs. This shift to higher hydrophobicity and lower LigPrep within the Schrödinger suite [65], MOE [23] and
solubility is also reflected in compounds with significant the MAPS platform [66]. Moreover, stand-alone programs
biological activity found in the ChEMBL database, indicat- exist for ligand preparation such as DISI [67], Pipeline pi-
ing a trend towards larger, more hydrophobic compounds. In lot [68], or Hyperchem [69]. Grinter et al. have created a
particular, drugs that have been recently approved were workflow through custom-made script files for preparing
found to possess much lower median logP values than those large libraries for docking, including scripts for ligand
previously suggested as optimal [54]. preparation, which are offered freely to the academic com-
munity [70].
It has been demonstrated that docking huge compound
collections such as PubChem (30M compounds) and Chem-
2.4. Library Design
Spider (26M compounds), in other words ‘blind docking’,
not only is time-consuming and computationally demanding, Although numerous drug-like compound libraries are
but also results in redundant possibilities and poses a great freely available online [1, 5], users may often need to create
burden for compound selection. Apart from filtering for a custom-made library. Libraries may be divided in a) ge-
lead-like properties, one should exclude known toxicophores neric virtual high throughput (vHTS) libraries, which contain
or metabolically liable moieties [55]. Moreover, several large sets of compounds, b) diversity-oriented, containing
novel filters have been recently developed, aiming at the highly chemically diverse compounds, c) target-oriented,
quality enhancement of database content. The Pan Assay which are designed with a specific target in mind, d) molecu-
Interference Compounds (PAINS) [56] and the ALARM- lar property diversity libraries, which are designed with spe-
NMR [57] filters, contain compounds found to be chemically cific molecular property profiles (i.e. solubility, lipophilicity
reactive and assay-interfering, appear as frequent hitters, and etc.), e) natural product libraries.
are not identified by toxicophoric filters. Therefore, a com-
Online tools for library design include CLEVER [71] that
bination of filtering for desired pharmacological and adsorp-
supports chemical library manipulation, combinatorial
tion, distribution, metabolism, excretion, and toxicological
chemical library enumeration using user-specified chemical
(ADMET) properties is advisable early in the drug design
components, chemical format conversion, as well as chemi-
process. To efficiently filter a library of compounds against
cal compound analysis and filtration with respect to drug-
such criteria, several online tools have been developed.
likeness, lead-likeness, and fragment-likeness based on the
Chembioserver is a publicly available online application physicochemical properties computed from the derived
specializing in filtering and selection of small molecules molecules. Also provided is an integrated property-based
1928 Current Topics in Medicinal Chemistry, 2014, Vol. 14, No. 16 Lionta et al.
graphing component that visually depicts the diversity, cov- have proposed that the involved atoms in the ligand-protein
erage and distribution of selected compound collections. complexes play a critical role in the exchange of the sub-
Another tool for library design is e-LEA3D, which performs stituent and therefore in the binding affinity change, provid-
combinatorial library design that is based on a user-drawn ing the possibility to extrapolate activities from one biologi-
scaffold and reactants coming, for example, from a chemical cal system to another. In seek of designing diverse libraries
supplier [72]. More freely-available as well as commercial to enrich the screening collection, Vainio et al., have con-
software packages are listed in Table 2. A review on how to structed “Virtual Library”, a virtual automatic system that
design target-focused compound libraries, e.g. for kinases, uses validated synthetic protocols and available starting ma-
ion channels, GPCRs, protein-protein interfaces can be terials to generates a large number of virtual compound li-
found in Ref. [73]. In another approach, by using a genetic braries [77].
algorithm, Lisurek et al. have identified substructures typi-
An informative analysis and novel insights on preparing
cally occurring in bioactive compounds using the World
a high-quality database of lead-like compounds for SBVS
Drug Index; subsequently available compounds containing
are presented in Ref. [78]. The application of functional
the selected substructures were collected from vendor librar-
group, lead-like, PAINS, and Tanimoto similarity exclusion
ies [74].
filters is discussed resulting in a library of ~350,000 com-
In order to build a compound library with a range of pos- pounds that represent 80% of available leadlike space based
sible replacements for a single substructure, Wirth et al. have on vendor information in what is proposed to be the globe’s
developed a useful platform for the applicability of Matched highest quality collection of available screening compounds.
Molecular Pairs (MMPs) to optimize the binding affinity of a The article is a nice review of filtering process steps also
small-molecule ligand to a target protein, namely the Swiss- providing detailed information on the filters and pointing out
Bioisostere database [75]. In this scheme, MMPs are defined several issues as resupply, minimum concentration to be
as two molecules, which differ in one particular substituent tested, etc., which is of practical use to medicinal chemists.
and exhibit different properties. The underlying assumption
Constructing libraries with inherent chemical diversity
of MMPs is that the difference in properties can be extrapo-
such as in Ref. [78] may be desired when investigating
lated to another pair of molecules exhibiting the same substi-
underexplored targets with few known ligands. However, the
tution pattern. Weber et al. have improved the bridging be-
construction of targeted libraries based on properties of
tween MMPs and structural data by developing the Virtually
known ligands may also be required in order to identify hits
Aligned Matched Molecular Pairs Including Receptor Envi-
with improved potency. Xing et al., designed combinatorial
ronment (VAMMPIRE) database [76]. In their work, they
libraries to search for novel soluble epoxide hydrolase (sEH)
Table 2. Free and commercial software packages for library design.
Software Free Academic License Website
Virtual Library [77] Yes Contact authors
Reactor [134](ChemAxon) No www.chemaxon.com
Structure-Based Virtual Screening for Drug Discovery Current Topics in Medicinal Chemistry, 2014, Vol. 14, No. 16 1929
inhibitors based on a benzoxazole template forming con- ance in comparison to previously developed SFCscore func-
served hydrogen bonds with the catalytic machinery of sEH tions, by using SFCscore descriptors and a PDBbind set of
[79]. Consequently, screening of these libraries resulted to 1005 complexes as a training set in combination with ran-
90% hit rate and more than 300 submicromolar sEH inhibi- dom forest for regression [97]. HYDE is another novel scor-
tors were finally discovered. ing function for protein-ligand complexes which is based on
HYdration and DEsolvation terms. It consistently describes
2.5. Docking & Scoring hydrogen bonds, the hydrophobic effect and desolvation.
Recently, Schneider et al. have validated the HYDE scoring
A large number of docking programs have been devel-
function through large-scale docking experiments, which
oped recently, including AutoDock [64], Dock [80], FlexX
resulted to successful prediction of the correct binding mode
[81], Glide [82], Gold [83], Surflex [84], ICM [85], Ligand-
in 93% of complexes when checked with the Astex diverse
Fit [86], Drugster [87], and eHiTS [88] (also reviewed in
set [98]. Alternatively, Ravindranathan et al. have defined a
[5]). Docking entails predicting the protein-ligand complex
physics based scoring function and more precisely, a vari-
structure and is followed by scoring in SBVS in order to
able dielectric model based on residue types for better de-
rank the compounds. Docking programs utilize various
scription of protein–ligand electrostatics in MM-GBSA scor-
methods of conformational search in order to explore the
ing, which results in a higher correlation with affinity data
ligand conformational space; these are categorized as follow-
[99]. Certainly, while much progress has been made in de-
ing: a) Systematic methods, which place ligands in the pre-
livering more accurate scoring functions, further improve-
dicted binding site after considering all degrees of freedom,
ments in this direction are desirable.
b) Random or stochastic torsional searches about rotatable
bonds, such as Monte Carlo and genetic algorithms to The assessment of the efficiency and accuracy of scoring
“evolve” new low energy conformers, (c) Molecular Dynam- functions has been addressed in a number of studies. Cross et
ics simulation methods and energy minimization for exploring al., have assessed six molecular docking programs (DOCK,
the energy landscape of a molecule [reviewed in Ref. 89]. FlexX, GLIDE, ICM, PhDOCK, and Surflex) in order to
evaluate docking pose, scoring and thus VS accuracy [90].
In order to rank compounds, docking programs utilize
The results revealed that ICM, GLIDE, and Surflex repro-
scoring functions that aim to estimate the free energy of
duced accurately the X-ray poses, while GLIDE and Surflex
binding of a ligand to a specific target based on a generated
showed superior receiver operating characteristic (ROC)
docked pose after docking different ligands of a database. A
areas under the curve (AUC) and ROC enrichments after
variety of scoring functions have hitherto been developed
performing a VS exercise on the 40 protein targets in the
(reviewed in [1, 5]). Commonly-used scoring functions can
Directory of Useful Decoys (DUD). McGann et al. have
be categorized as follows: (a) Force field-based functions
compared the performance of FRED and HYBRID docking
that estimate the binding free energy by summing the
programs on known datasets, where the second utilizes a
strength of intermolecular van der Waals, electrostatic inter-
modified version of FRED that uses both ligand- and struc-
actions and hydrogen bonding between all atoms of the two
ture-based information for docking [91]. The results have
binding partners in the complex. Solvation and entropy con-
shown that HYBRID scoring function increases identified
tributions are also taken into account. (b) Empirical scoring
actives. Especially, when using multiple crystal structures
functions that are based on counting the number of various
considering protein flexibility, HYBRID efficiency increases
types of interactions between the two binding partners, i.e.
even more without increasing significantly the docking time
hydrophobic contacts, number of hydrogen bonds and num- (~ 15 %). Liebeschuetz et al. have tested the four GOLD
ber of rotatable bonds immobilized in complex formation. scoring functions in docking and scoring computations and
These functions have proven to be successful for many pro- demonstrated that the ChemPLP scoring function comes first
tein-ligand complexes. LUDI, FlexX, F-Score, ChemScore for both pose and affinity prediction [92].
and Fresno are a few examples of functions that are con-
In an attempt to improve docking and scoring perform-
tained in this group. (c) Knowledge-based functions that use
ance, Spitzer et al. used Surflex-Dock to incorporate protein
statistical observations of intermolecular contacts in recep-
flexibility in the docking process. Ligand-protein optimiza-
tor-ligand complexes with known structural conformations.
tion before VS, resulted in large differences in the VS per-
For instance, some functions of this category are Potential of
formance, indicating that ligand re-docking for pose predic-
Mean Force (PMF), DrugScore and SMoG (Small Molecule
tion assessment may have limitations [93]. Docking proto-
Growth). Furthermore, there exist scoring functions that
cols, which incorporate protein flexibility, performed better
combine two or more of the above mentioned scoring func-
in terms of pose prediction. Applying various VS protocols
tion categories.
(docking, 2D molecular similarity, and 3D molecular simi-
It is commonly accepted that while docking results to larity) resulted in achieving better hit rates. Neves et al. have
successful binding pose prediction, scoring usually fails to investigated the ICM flexible docking and scoring bench-
correctly rank different compounds with the difficulty in- marks for 85 co-crystal structures of the modified Astex data
creasing in congeneric series [95, 96]. Hence, identifying set and derived significant improvements, compared to sin-
correctly the right binding pose as the top-ranked one still gle rigid docking [94]. Reparsky et al. also have obtained
remains a challenge [1]. Addressing the correspondence be- enrichment results for WScore, a new scoring function and
tween predicted and experimental binding affinities in em- sampling methodology incorporating WaterMap results into
pirical scoring functions still remains unresolved. Based on Glide screening [27]. In this study, WScore results show
that critical issue, Zilian et al. have developed a new scoring early enrichment and outerperform the DUD best-practices
function, SFCscoreRF, with significantly improved perform- Glide SP results.
1930 Current Topics in Medicinal Chemistry, 2014, Vol. 14, No. 16 Lionta et al.
2.6. Improving Pose/Compound Selection After Docking upon binding of a ligand, in which the protein conformation
(Post-processing) changes significantly. Hence, although crystal structures are
a preferable starting point for SBDD, in some cases they
A rate-limiting step in SBVS is often the need for a com-
provide misleading information. Therefore, many efforts
putational chemist expert to post-process compounds that
have been made to include receptor flexibility in docking
result from a VS/docking exercise before selecting the ones
programs, as it confers a more realistic depiction of the mod-
that will pass to the experimental test phase. The implemen-
eled system [100]. In order to avoid biasing towards one
tation of the simplified scoring functions and sometimes the
protein conformation and implicitly including protein flexi-
inadequate sampling of the conformational space for the
bility, one may use an ensemble of representative structures
ligand may lead to unrealistic poses, intra-ligand steric
to dock candidate ligands. ED comprises docking a single
clashes, twisted amides, E/Z esters, imperfect hydrogen-
ligand library against multiple rigid receptor conformations,
bonding network, and poses based on shape complementar-
contrary to the standard single rigid receptor docking meth-
ity. These poses may result to an unreasonably high score
ods. In this way, ED mimics the realistic structural variation
and need to be discarded. Therefore, visual inspection of
of the protein-target [101].
thousands of docking poses is normally needed by the me-
dicinal chemist in order to select the appropriate compound Currently, a huge amount of protein structures that can be
set for assaying. To this end, significant efforts have been used as biological targets for specific diseases is available.
dedicated to increase the efficiency and the quality of com- Therefore, the challenge in SBVS has changed from “Is there
pound selection [58, 106]. a promising structure available?” to “How do I appropriately
select a single or multiple protein structures for my screening
In the process of post-processing the results, one may re-
exercise?”. Consequently, standardized protocols that spe-
sort to rescoring. To examine the reliability of VS results
cialize in the selection of suitable conformations for ensem-
without post-processing, Malmstrom et al. have investigated
ble-based virtual screening and finally result to potent leads
a set of known binders and non-binders of L99A T4
of the target are needed. For instance, Rueda et al. conclude
lysozyme using both free energy of binding (FEB) rescoring
that the largest binding sites in X-ray structures lead to the
and other empirical docking scores and concluded that FEB
highest enrichments [102]. Osguthorpe et al. apply a shape-
rescoring may assist lead identification resulting from a
based characterization of the binding site using molecular
SBVS exercise [107]. Ding et al. have introduced a direc-
dynamics (MD) to construct ensembles with structural diver-
tional approach, MIECs (molecular interaction energy com-
sity [103]. The ensembles for the performance of ED may be
ponents), which successfully predicted the binding affinities
selected through X-ray crystallography, NMR spectroscopy
of protein-ligand complexes or distinguished binding from
or a combination of both and through computational tech-
non-binding ligands [108]. This methodology was extended
niques (molecular dynamics simulations, homology model-
to SBVS. HIV-1 protease was used as a model system to
ing) [100].
assess the performance of the method on ranking docking
poses and docked ligands and a support vector machine There are certain advantages that distinguish ED among
(SVM) was trained in evaluating the energetic and geometric other flexible-receptor docking methods, i.e. the capability of
characteristics that discriminate binding ligands from the accounting for any type of protein motion. The major disad-
non-binding ones. As previously-mentioned, several tools vantage of ED is the computational effort, which scales line-
arly with the number of receptor conformations in the en-
exist for the pre-processing of ligand libraries prior to the VS
semble. As a result, the ED calculations have a significantly
procedure. These tools may be also used for post-processing
longer duration comparing to standard docking protocols.
of SBVS results are readily available. The ChemBioServer
Moreover, possible inaccurate results being output from ED
for example, uses vdW filtering to remove compounds with
computations may be due to the possible imperfections in
steric clashes. Poses that are far from the energy minimum
scoring functions, which may lead to inaccurate predictions
are unlikely to be adopted in nature and hence, should be
of certain protein-ligand interactions [101, 103].
discarded. Compounds that pass vdW filtering may be then
subjected to more stringent physicochemical property filter- 2.7.2. Consensus Induced-Fit Docking
ing compared to the initial compound selection for SBVS.
Consensus Induced Fit Docking (cIFD) is an alternative
Subsequently, hierarchical clustering may be performed
docking approach, which allows the protein binding site to
in order to group compounds with similar struc-
adapt to multiple ligands during SBVS. This methodology
tures/physicochemical properties and derive subsets with
has been practiced by Kalid et al., firstly by validating the
maximal chemical diversity [58].
cIFD protocol on COX-2, the estrogen receptor, and HIV
reverse transcriptase, which were previously shown to be
2.7. Improvements in SBVS Efficiency
challenging for docking programs and then by proving the
2.7.1. Ensemble Docking (ED) utility of cIFD in discovering novel irreversible Crm1 inhibi-
Selecting the ideal crystal structure of a receptor target is tors [104]. Houston et al. have introduced Consensus Dock-
the first step in the SBVS process. Unfortunately, crystal ing for improving the probability of identifying accurately
structures provide a single conformation of the protein, docked poses [105]. In cIFD, a similar approach to consen-
which is influenced by the crystallization conditions, and do sus scoring schemes is applied; this methodology combines
not include any information on protein dynamics. Further- information about predicted binding modes rather than pre-
more, crystal structures are highly affected by ligand bind- dicted binding affinities. It results in 82% success rate of
ing, which leads to conformational changes in both the pro- pose prediction by using more than one docking program,
tein and the ligand. Proteins can exhibit induced fit effects while the success rate was found to be lower for each dock-
Structure-Based Virtual Screening for Drug Discovery Current Topics in Medicinal Chemistry, 2014, Vol. 14, No. 16 1931
ing program alone, e.g. 55% for Autodock, 58% for DOCK, pyranose-based VAST library (pyranose scaffolds mimic
and 64% for Vina. active GPCR peptides) was initially utilized to construct a
high quality MCH-1R model. Subsequently, the model was
3. PROPOSED WORKFLOWS-PROTOCOLS validated by a virtual enrichment experiment and the model-
driven structure-based expansion of the original hit was used
Nasr et al. have introduced a set of “binding site proper-
to identify key interactions in the binding site of the protein.
ties-based” guidelines that aim to optimize future prospec-
Following the model validation, a structure-based virtual
tive drug discovery protocols in presence of several available
screen of a library with (cid:1) 0.7 Tanimoto similarity to known
receptor structures [109]. Several trends in the properties of
MCH-1R ligands, provided a 14% hit rate and 10 novel
binding sites, including hydrophobicity, volume, and open-
chemotypes of potent MCH-1R antagonists, including two
ing, were identified and tested in SBVS with several pro-
nanomolar leads. Ligand selection also took into considera-
grams (Surflex-dock or ICM). Planesas et al. have proposed
tion AMBER interaction energies in the range of the top
a three-step VS protocol to improve actives from decoys
10% of known MCH-1R antagonists.
selection using VEGFR-2 (Kdr-kinase) inhibitors. This pro-
tocol includes the conventional docking step, a pharma- In all the above-mentioned approaches, a high hit rate
cophore post-filter step, and a similarity search post-process and high affinity binders were achieved by using a focused
[110]. When this protocol is retrospectively applied to library to identify lead candidates.
VEGFR2 inhibitors, both the overall and early VS perform- Apart from identifying novel lead candidates, other ap-
ance are improved. Osguthorpe et al. have generated a SBVS plications of SBVS may be envisaged such as the screening
protocol through which a set of target structures is con-
for novel substrates for genetically-engineered proteins. Re-
structed for ED based on binding site shape characterization
cently, it has been shown that new specific substrates of ge-
and clustering, in order to account for protein flexibility into
netically-engineered proteins can be used for identifying the
the VS process [103]. The protocol’s steps are: a) receptor direct protein targets of enzymes [111-113]. In this context,
structures selection from X-ray crystallography and MD, b) SBVS could be applied for the identification of substrates
binding site shape characterization, c) pairwise volume over- specifically-designed to target the mutated enzymes that are
lap computation, d) hierarchical clustering, e) docking calcu-
then used to elucidate signal transduction pathways. In this
lations of known actives and decoys to the shape-diverse
direction, the group of Matt Jacobson has recently unveiled a
binding sites, and f) comparison of ED results with the per-
strategy for assigning valid biological functions to proteins
formance of a single rigid receptor. identified in genome projects using SBVS [114]. Computer-
One approach to achieve nM hits directly from VS is to aided strategies for functional discovery with ‘metabolite
bias the compound selection toward known chemotypes of docking’ were used to predict substrate specificities of sev-
high potency. This high potency may be achieved through eral enzymes encoded by a bacterial gene cluster. This work
the design of target-focused libraries for virtual screening. led to the correct prediction of the in vitro activity of a struc-
Schröder et al. discovered covalent reversible inhibitors of turally characterized enzyme of unknown function (PDB
cathepsin K through virtual screening of a focused library 2PMQ), and also to the correct identification of the catabolic
built for this purpose, which included compounds bearing pathway in which Hyp-B 2-epimerase participates. These
electrophilic groups that act as warheads in mediating cova- studies establish the utility of structure-guided functional
lent reversible inhibition [8]. Substantial effort was invested predictions to enable the discovery of new metabolic and
in developing appropriate electrophilic warheads in their signal transduction pathways.
corresponding transition state. Covalent docking of this fo- Another emerging application of SBVS is the search for
cused library resulted in identifying 21 inhibitors of cathep- inhibitors of multifunctional proteins. Stumpfe et al. [115]
sin K, including 3 nanomolar leads, out of the 44 initially- report a virtual screening approach for finding inhibitors of
selected putative binders.
the cytohesins, a family of cytoplasmic proteins with multi-
In another SBVS for (cid:2)2-adrenergic receptor ligands, vir- ple known functions. Two virtual screening approaches, fin-
tual screening was performed on the lead-like subset of the gerprint similarity searching, and support vector machine
ZINC database using the available crystal structure [9]. modeling were combined to identify structurally diverse
0.05% of the top-ranked compounds (500 molecules) were compounds capable of inhibiting the different functions of
visualized, and 25 molecules were finally selected based on the cytohesins. Specific inhibitors of guanine nucleotide ex-
their chemical diversity, commercial availability, and overall change, insulin signaling, and leukocyte adhesion were iden-
balance between polar and non-polar complementarity to the tified from the screen.
binding site. These efforts resulted in the identification of a
9 nM inverse agonist of the (cid:2)2-adrenergic receptor. Al- 3.1. Protocol for the Discovery of Mutant-Specific PI3K(cid:1)
though the virtual screening procedure was unbiased, it was Inhibitors
later found that the lead-like subset of the ZINC database is
The PIK3CA gene is one of the most frequently mutated
biased towards GPCR ligands.
oncogenes in human cancers. It encodes p110(cid:1), the catalytic
A novel approach targeting GPCR inhibition, has unrav- subunit of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase, (cid:1) (PI3K(cid:1)) isoform.
eled nanomolar leads for the melanin-concentrating hor- The PI3K(cid:1) protein is implicated in signaling cascades, which
mone-1 receptor (MCH-1R) [7]. This approach integrates lead to cell proliferation, survival, and cell growth. One of
GPCR modeling, prediction of antagonist binding site, de- the most frequent mutations in PI3K(cid:1) is a histidine changed
sign, synthesis, in combination with utilizing a focused li- to arginine in exon 20 (H1047R) [116]. Here, we describe a
brary for screening. A primary hit compound from a VS workflow to identify novel inhibitors of the H1047R
1932 Current Topics in Medicinal Chemistry, 2014, Vol. 14, No. 16 Lionta et al.
mutant form of PI3K(cid:1) [95]. The workflow incorporates the visually inspected and the ten most promising compounds
use of ChemBioServer [58], a free web-based application, were purchased and submitted to in vitro assay testing. Four
which enables the efficient final selection of compounds to out of the ten purchased molecules inhibited the PI3K(cid:1) pro-
be tested experimentally. tein activity in vitro in μm concentrations, indicating that the
workflow described herein can be successfully applied in
Initially, the crystal structure of the mutant H1047R
drug discovery [120]. The process is described in Fig. (2).
PI3K(cid:1) (PDB ID: 3HIZ) was constructed using a combination
of homology and loop modeling and the atomistic model of
the full-length H1047R mutant was created using Modeller 3.2. A Proposed Method to Increase the Probability of
9v8 [117]. The resulting model was solvated in water and Virtual Screening Hits: Application on the RXR(cid:1) Nu-
employed in Molecular Dynamics (MD) simulations using clear Receptor
the NAMD package [118] for ~70ns. The final snapshot of
The availability of multiple solved protein structures of
the simulation was extracted and used for binding site identi-
the same protein may offer the opportunity to increase the hit
fication calculations through SiteMap module of Schrödinger
rate in biological assays of compounds selected in silico. The
v2.4. A non ATP binding site close to the H1047R mutation
case of receptors in particular, which represent the majority
was identified to be among the top-ranked and was used in
of targets for pharmaceutical intervention, could be good
the present study. After binding site identification, we per-
examples for such approaches since several crystal structures
formed VS using the docking program Glide 5.7 [82]. The
of a particular receptor with agonists or antagonists are
drug-like subset of the HitFinder collection from the May-
available. We propose to use such available structures in
bridge database (www.maybridge.com) was used for the VS
combination with the protocol developed below in order to
exercise [119]. All structures were docked and scored using
increase the rate of compound identification that can indeed
the Glide standard precision (SP) mode. The 10,000 top-
modulate the target in question.
ranked structures from the SP filter were redocked and res-
cored using the Glide extra precision (XP) mode. The com- Here, we use the nuclear receptor Retinoid X receptor al-
plexes for the top-ranked 1,000 compounds resulting from pha (RXR(cid:1)) as an example for a selective SBVS screening
the XP processing were submitted to further post-processing protocol, which is based on ensemble docking in order to
with the ChemBioServer. In order to filter out poses far from discover novel selective agonists. Retinoid X receptor (RXR)
the energy minimum, we used the van der Waals filter of the is a heterodimer partner for about one third of the 48 human
server to remove compounds with steric clashes. The re- nuclear receptor superfamily members, thus, its ligand bind-
maining compounds were then subjected to physicochemical ing pocket may be altered upon binding to a different het-
property filtering based on the “Jorgensen rule of 3” [52] as erodimerization partner. Heterodimerization greatly en-
well as toxicity filtering based on a database available in hances DNA binding and transcriptional activation [121] and
ChemBioServer, which contains known toxic moieties. Sub- RXR(cid:1) overexpression has been reported to enhance the tran-
sequently, a hierarchical clustering was performed for the scriptional response to ligand binding. RXR-selective reti-
remaining compounds using the Tanimoto coefficient and noids can potentiate the antiproliferative and apoptotic re-
the Ward Clustering Linkage in order to maximize chemical sponses of breast cancer cell lines to PPAR ligands. Re-
diversity but at the same time minimize visual inspection cently, RXR-selective ligands were discovered that inhibited
efforts. Finally, the resulting cluster representatives were proliferation of all-trans RA resistant breast cancer cells in
Fig. (2). Workflow for the discovery of mutant-specific PI3K(cid:1) inhibitors based on a SBVS protocol involving conformer generation, binding
site prediction, and compound post-processing.
Structure-Based Virtual Screening for Drug Discovery Current Topics in Medicinal Chemistry, 2014, Vol. 14, No. 16 1933
vitro and caused regression of the disease in animal models. ies of chemicals against a biological target. Recent advances
Therefore, RXR(cid:2) is potentially a therapeutic target for can- in computer-aided drug design allow the tailored design of
cer [121, 122]. drugs for a target protein, shortening the development cycle
of new drugs. The advent of Structure Based Virtual Screen-
Based on the fact that multiple RXR(cid:2) receptor conforma-
ing has undoubtedly changed and improved the drug discov-
tions exist depending on binding of the receptor to different
ery process and has been established as one of the most
heterodimerization partners, we seek to increase the specific-
promising in silico techniques for drug design. The focal
ity of identified binders for a given heterodimer partner by
point of this review is the detailed description of the SBVS
carefully choosing the RXR(cid:2) receptor structure for SBVS. In
steps in drug design, in combination with the presentation of
our method, the choice of RXR(cid:2) conformations for the
recent advances and the introduction of various protocols
SBVS is based on four criteria: a) Pairwise comparison of
the receptor conformations according to RMSD calculations, that facilitate the identification of inhibitors with nM po-
b) analysis and clustering of RXR(cid:2) structures comparing the tency.
binding-site shape and volume using SiteMap (Fig. 3), c) Furthermore, we also propose herein two novel VS pro-
docking of a small-database of known actives for a specific tocols that aim to enhance inhibitor selectivity for the target
heterodimer partner to the resulting shape-diverse subset of protein against close homologs. First, a SBVS workflow,
binding sites resulting from (a) and (b) using Glide 5.8 SP
which was utilized to discover novel inhibitors of the
and XP [82], d) retrieving representative protein conforma-
H1047R mutant form of PI3K(cid:2) is presented. In this
tions for the structure of interest from MD simulations using
workflow, MD simulations in aqueous solution were carried
GROMACS [123]. VS performed on three different subsets
out for both WT and mutant PI3K(cid:1) proteins. Binding site
of RXR(cid:2) receptor conformations, which arise by binding to
analysis in the kinase domain identified cavities in the vicin-
different heterodimerization partners, selected as mentioned
ity of the H1047R mutation and the membrane binding re-
above, may enhance the success rate of the process (Fig. 3).
gions. SBVS was performed in several binding pockets and
Docking compound databases for this SBVS exercise en- top-ranked compounds in terms of predicted binding affinity
tails pre-processing to assign protonation and tautomeric were carefully post-processed to ensure the validity of
states as described in [119]. Compounds for assying are se- docked poses, chemical diversity, desirable physicochemical
lected as follows: Molecules that score high when docked in properties and the absences of toxic or metabolically liable
the RXR(cid:2) protein ensemble that binds to the heterodimer moieties. Finally, ten promising compounds were selected
partner of interest and at the same time score low for RXR(cid:2) for in vitro assaying, four of which emerged as (cid:1)M inhibitors
structures that bind to heterodimer partners of no interest, of the H1047R mutant PI3K(cid:2) protein validating our ap-
may be selected in order to achieve selectivity. Finally, a proach [120]. A second SBVS protocol is contributed for the
post-processing step is imposed to the top-scoring com- identification of binders for the RXR(cid:2) nuclear receptor that
pounds by using Chembioserver [58] and FAF-Drugs2 [60] are selective depending on the protein’s heterodimer partner.
filtering tools as well as pharmacological property prediction A structural RXR(cid:2) ensemble was created for this purpose by
with the QikProp software [124]. The workflow of this pro- selecting different RXR(cid:2) crystal structures based on (i)
tocol is shown in Fig. (4). RMSD calculations, (ii) binding-site shape and volume, (iii)
docking of a small database of known actives, and (iv)
CONCLUSION
choosing representative structures from MD simulations.
For decades, drug discovery was carried out using trial SBVS was then performed on three different subsets of
and error experimental techniques for screening large librar- RXR(cid:2) arising from different heterodimer complexes of
Fig. (3). (A) Superposition of different RXR(cid:2) receptor structures arising from different heterodimer complexes and/or binding to different
ligands and (B) shape-based binding site comparison using SiteMap 2.6 (Schrödinger, LLC).
1934 Current Topics in Medicinal Chemistry, 2014, Vol. 14, No. 16 Lionta et al.
Fig. (4). Workflow for the discovery of selective RXR(cid:1) ligands based on a SBVS protocol of ED and counter-screening.
Table 3. Advantages and Drawbacks of SBVS.
Virtual Screening
Advantages Limitations
Time and cost reduction of screening process of millions of small mole- Many VS tools are applicable and successful to specific case studies
cules, compared to HTS (based on the training set) and not in general cases.
There is no need for physically existing compounds to perform the Compounds being identified by HTS are usually more bioactive than
screening process, unlike HTS. compounds identified by VS.
Different approaches of VS have been created for lead discovery depending Weakness in perfect inclusion of receptor structural flexibility and of
each time on the availability of experimental information (SBVS water in docking computations due to computational-cost and high com-
Ligand-Based VS, Fragment-Based VS,etc.) plexity of its modeling
Several successful examples of identifying low nM leads that show the
Very potent leads (i.e. low nM) are rarely identified through VS.
intended biological activity
Scoring is still challenging in predicting accurately the correct binding pose
and ranking of the compounds due to the difficulty in parameterizing the
A large number of docking programs and scoring functions
complexity of the ligand-receptor binding interactions and the
approximations in calculating desolvation and entropic terms.
Predicted protein structures from homology modeling and predicted
VS can use as input a desirable target structure complexed with a specific
protein-ligand complexes may result to increased rates of
ligand even if there are no experimental data, through molecular modeling.
false positive/negative results.
Does not perform in congeneric series.
RXR(cid:1) and/or its binding to different ligands. Candidate Although SBVS is widely used nowadays by multiple
binders of RXR(cid:1) were selected for purchase with an eye on academic and industrial research groups in the drug discov-
their different orientation at the binding site of the various ery process, it suffers from limitations that restrict its effec-
structures and different interactions with specific surround- tiveness (reviewed in Table 3). Significant breakthroughs are
ing residues in order to maximize their selectivity potential. required in order to address fundamental challenges such as,
In vitro assying of these compounds is still pending experi- for example, scoring, target flexibility and appropriately
mental testing. treating water molecules. Such challenges ultimately lead to
Structure-Based Virtual Screening for Drug Discovery Current Topics in Medicinal Chemistry, 2014, Vol. 14, No. 16 1935
the query: Is SBVS an indispensable tool for modern drug binding ligands: an orthogonal lead discovery approach. J. Med.
design? The significant reduction in time and cost compared to Chem., 2013, 56, (4), 1478-1490.
[9] Kolb, P.; Rosenbaum, D.M.; Irwin, J.J.; Fung, J.J.; Kobilka, B.K.;
the high-throughput screening process, the continuous efforts
Shoichet, B.K. Structure-based discovery of beta2-adrenergic re-
in improving the efficiency of docking programs and scoring ceptor ligands. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U S A, 2009, 106, (16), 6843-
functions, and the plentiful successful case studies that have 6848.
led to low nM leads are only a few representative examples [10] Köppen, H. Virtual screening - what does it give us? Curr. Opin.
showing that SBVS is here to stay. However, prospective us- Drug Discov. Devel., 2009, 12, (3), 397-407.
[11] Sastry, G.M.; Adzhigirey, M.; Day, T.; Annabhimoju, R.; Sherman,
ers of the method should remember that SBVS is not as simple
W. Protein and ligand preparation: parameters, protocols, and in-
as running a computer program. Careful choices need to be fluence on virtual screening enrichments. J. Comput. Aided. Mol.
made; appropriately selecting the structural ensemble for the Des., 2013, 27, (3), 221-234.
screening exercise, cautious preparation of the biological tar- [12] Pitt, W.R.; Calmiano, M.D.; Kroeplien, B.; Taylor, R.D.; Turner,
J.P.; King, M.A. Structure-based virtual screening for novel
get and the database to be used, treatment of water molecules
ligands. Met. Mol. Bio., 2013, 1008, 501-519.
in the cavity, and careful post-processing of SBVS results are
[13] Li, H.; Robertson, A.D.; Jensen, J.H. Very Fast Empirical Predic-
of utmost importance that ultimately result in enhancing lead tion and Interpretation of Protein pKa Values. Proteins, 2005, 61,
identification and selectivity rates. 704-721.
[14] Anandakrishnan, R.; Aguilar, B.; Onufriev, A.V. H++ 3.0: auto-
CONFLICT OF INTEREST mating pK prediction and the preparation of biomolecular struc-
tures for atomistic molecular modeling and simulation. Nuc. Acids
The authors confirm that this article content has no con- Res., 2012, 40, (W1), W537-541.
flict of interest. [15] ten Brink, T.; Exner, T.E. pKa Based Protonation States and Mi-
crospecies for Protein-Ligand Docking. J.Comput. Aided Mol.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS Des., 2010, 24, 935-942
[16] Dolinsky, T.J.; Czodrowski, P.; Li, H.; Nielsen, J.E.; Jensen, J.H.;
The initial part of this work was co-funded by the NSRF Klebe, G.; Baker, N.A. PDB2PQR: Expanding and upgrading
2007-2013, the European Regional Development Fund and automated preparation of biomolecular structures for molecular
national resources, under the grant “Cooperation" [No. 09 simulations. Nuc. Acids Res., 2007, 35, W522-W525.
[17] Kovalenko, A. Three-dimensional RISM theory for molecular
(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:3) 11-675]. This work has been also supported by a Marie
liquids and solid-liquid interfaces, in: Molecular Theory of Solva-
Curie Reintegration Grant (FP7-PEOPLE-2009-RG, No
tion, F. Hirata (Ed.) Series: Understanding Chemical Reactivity,
256533) and an AACR Judah Folkman Fellowship for Can- vol.24, P.G. Mezey (Ed.), (Kluwer Academic Publishers,
cer Research in Angiogenesis (08-40-18-COUR). EL was Dordrecht, 2003, 360, p.) 169-275.
[18] Young, T.; Abel, R.; Kim, B.; Berne, B.J.; Friesner, R.A. Motifs
supported by an IKY graduate scholarship from funds of the
for molecular recognition exploiting hydrophobic enclosure in pro-
“Education and lifelong learning” of the European Social
tein-ligand binding. PNAS, 2007, 104, 808-813.
Fund 2007-2013. Part of the computational work was per- [19] Abel, R.; Young, T.; Farid, R.; Berne, B.J.; Friesner, R.A. The role
formed. of the active-site solvent in the thermodynamics of factor Xa ligand
binding. J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 2817-2831.
Computational analyses presented herein were performed [20] Rashin, A.A.; Bukatin, M.A. Continuum based calculations of
on resources of PRACE-PR and LinkSCEEM/Cy-tera, which hydration entropies and the hydrophobic effect. J. Phys. Chem.,
are also gratefully acknowledged. Part of the computational 1991, 95, (8), 2942-2944.
[21] Michel, J.; Tirado-Rives, J.; Jorgensen, W.L. Prediction of the
work was performed at BRFAA using a cluster funded from
water content in protein binding sites. J. Phys. Chem. B., 2009,
European Economic Area Grant No. EL0084.
113, (40), 13337 -13346.
[22] WaterMap, Schrödinger, LLC, New York, NY, 2014.
REFERENCES [23] Molecular Operating Environment (MOE), 2013. 08; Chemical
Computing Group Inc. 1010 Sherbooke St. West, Suite #910,
[1] Lavecchia, A.; Di Giovanni, C. Virtual screening strategies in drug Montreal, QC, Canada, H3A 2R7, 2013.
discovery: a critical review. Curr. Med. Chem., 2013, 20, (23), [24] Jorgensen, W.L.; Tirado-Rives, J. Molecular modeling of organic
2839-2860. and biomolecular systems using BOSS and MCPRO. J. Comput.
[2] Reddy, A.S.; Pati, S.P.; Kumar, P.P.; Pradeep, H.N.; Sastry, G.N. Chem., 2005, 26, (16), 1689-1700.
Virtual screening in drug discovery – a computational perspective. [25] SZMAP; OpenEye Scientific Software, Inc.: Santa Fe, NM.
Curr. Pro. Pept. Sci., 2007, 8, (4), 329-351. [26] Protein Preparation Wizard, Maestro, Schrodinger LLC.
[3] Jorgensen, W.L. The Many Roles of Computation in Drug Discov- [27] Repasky, M.; Murphy, R.; Banks, J.; Greenwood, J.; Tubert-
ery. Science, 2004, 303, 1813-1818. Brohman, I.; Bhat, S.; Friesner, R. Docking performance of the
[4] Benod, C.; Carlsson, J.; Uthayaruban, R.; Hwang, P.; Irwin, J.J.; glide program as evaluated on the Astex and DUD datasets: a com-
Doak, A.K.; Shoichet, B.K.; Sablin, E.P.; Fletterick, R.J. Structure- plete set of glide SP results and selected results for a new scoring
based Discovery of Antagonists of Nuclear Receptor LRH-1. J. function integrating WaterMap and glide. J. Comput. Aided Mol.
Biol. Chem., 2013, 288, (27), 19830-19844. Des., 2012, 26, (6), 787-799.
[5] Cheng, T.; Li, Q.; Zhou, Z.; Wang, Y.; Bryant, S.H. Structure- [28] Corbeil, C.R.; Williams, C.I.; Labute, P. Variability in docking
based virtual screening for drug discovery: a problem-centric re- success rates due to dataset preparation. J. Comput. Aided Mol.
view. AAPS J., 2012, 14, (1), 133-141. Des., 2012, 26, (6), 775-786.
[6] Andricopoulo, A.D.; Salum, L.B.; Abraham, D.J. Structure-based [29] SiteMap, Schrodinger, LLC, 2013, 2013.
drug design strategies in medicinal chemistry. Curr. Top. Med. [30] Ngan, C.H.; Bohnuud, T.; Mottarella, S.E.; Beglov, D.; Villar,
Chem., 2009, 9, 771-790. E.A.; Hall, D.R.; Kozakov, D.; Vajda, S. FTMAP: extended protein
[7] Heifetz, A.; Barker, O.; Verquin, G.; Wimmer, N.; Meutermans, mapping with user-selected probe molecules. Nuc. Acids Res.,
W.; Pal, S.; Law, R.J.; Whittaker, M. Fighting obesity with a sugar- 2012, 40, (Web Server issue), W271-W275.
based library: discovery of novel MCH-1R antagonists by a new [31] le Guilloux, V.; Schmidtke, P.; Tuffery, P. Fpocket: An open
computational-VAST approach for exploration of GPCR binding source platform for ligand pocket detection. BMC Bioinformatics,
sites. J. Chem. Inf. Model., 2013, 53, (5), 1084-1099. 2009, 10, 168.
[8] Schröder, J.; Klinger, A.; Oellien, F.; Marhöfer, R.J.; Duszenko, [32] Schmidtke, P.; Bidon-Chanal, A.; Luque, F.J.; Barril, X.
M.; Selzer, P.M. Docking-based virtual screening of covalently MDpocket: open-source cavity detection and characterization on
molecular dynamics trajectories. Bioinformatics, 2011, 27, (23),
3276-3285.
1936 Current Topics in Medicinal Chemistry, 2014, Vol. 14, No. 16 Lionta et al.
[33] Laurie, A.; Jackson, R. Q-SiteFinder: an energy-based method for [53] Bickerton, G.R.; Paolini, G.V.; Besnard, J.; Muresan, S.; Hopkins,
the prediction of protein-ligand binding sites. Bioinformatics, 2005, A.L. Quantifying the chemical beauty of drugs. Nat. Chem., 2012,
21, (9), 1908-1916. 4, (2), 90-98.
[34] Doppelt-Azeroual, O.; Delfaud, F.; Moriaud, F.; de Brevern, A.G. [54] Zuegg, J.; Cooper, M.A. Drug-likeness and increased hydrophobic-
Fast and automated functional classification with MED-SuMo: an ity of commercially available compound libraries for drug screen-
application on purine-binding proteins. Protein Sci., 2010, 19, (4), ing. Curr. Top. Med. Chem., 2012, 12, (14), 1500-1513.
847-867. [55] Blagg, J. Structure–Activity Relationships for In vitro and In vivo
[35] Hernandez, M.; Ghersi, D.; Sanchez, R. SITEHOUND-web: a Toxicity. Annu. Rep. Med. Chem., 2006, 41, 353-368.
server for ligand binding site identification in protein structures. [56] Baell, J.B.; Holloway, G.A. New Substructure Filters for Removal
Nuc. Acids Res., 2009, 17, W413-W416. of Pan Assay Interference Compounds (PAINS) from Screening
[36] Seco, J.; Luque, F.J.; Barril, X. Binding site detection and drugga- Libraries and for Their Exclusion in Bioassays. J. Med. Chem. ,
bility index from first principles. J. Med. Chem., 2009, 52, (8), 2010, 53, 2719–2740.
2363-2371. [57] Metz, J.T.; Huth, J.R.; Hajduk, P.J. Enhancement of chemical rules
[37] Raman, E.P.; Yu, W.; Guvench, O.; Mackerell, A.D. Reproducing for predicting compound reactivity towards protein thiol groups. J.
crystal binding modes of ligand functional groups using Site- Comput. Aided. Mol. Des., 2007, 21, (1-3), 139-144.
Identification by Ligand Competitive Saturation (SILCS) simula- [58] Athanasiadis, E.; Cournia, Z.; Spyrou, G. ChemBioServer: A web-
tions. J. Chem. Inf. Model., 2011, 51, (4), 877-896. based pipeline for filtering, clustering and visualization of chemical
[38] Lexa, K.W.; Carlson, H.A. Full protein flexibility is essential for compounds used in drug discovery. Bioinformatics, 2012, 28, (22),
proper hot-spot mapping. J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, (2), 200- 3002-3003.
202. [59] Lagorce, D.; Sperandio, O.; Galons, H.; Miteva, M.A.; Villoutreix,
[39] Buch, I.; Giorgino, T.; De Fabritiis, G. Complete reconstruction of B.O. FAF-Drugs2: Free ADME/tox filtering tool to assist drug dis-
an enzyme-inhibitor binding process by molecular dynamics simu- covery and chemical biology projects. BMC Bioinformatics, 2008,
lations. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U S A., 2011, 108, (25), 10184- 9, 396.
10189. [60] Lagorce, D.; Maupetit, J.; Baell, J.; Sperandio, O.; Tufféry, P.;
[40] Herbert, C.; Schieborr, U.; Saxena, K.; Juraszek, J.; De Smet, F.; Miteva, M.A.; Galons, H.; Villoutreix, B.O. The FAF-Drugs2
Alcouffe, C.; Bianciotto, M.; Saladino, G.; Sibrac, D.; Kudlinzki, server: a multistep engine to prepare electronic chemical compound
D.; Sreeramulu, S.; Brown, A.; Rigon, P.; Herault, J.P.; Lassalle, collections. Bioinformatics, 2011, 27, (14), 2018-2020.
G.; Blundell, T.L.; Rousseau, F.; Gils, A.; Schymkowitz, J.; [61] Kalliokoski, T.; Salo, H.S.; Lahtela-Kakkonen, M.; Poso, A. The
Tompa, P.; Herbert, J.M.; Carmeliet, P.; Gervasio, F.L.; Schwalbe, effect of ligand-based tautomer and protomer prediction on struc-
H.; Bono, F. Molecular mechanism of SSR128129E; an extracellu- ture-based virtual screening. J. Chem. Inf. Model. 2009, 49, (12),
larly acting; small-molecule; allosteric inhibitor of FGF receptor 2742-2748.
signaling. Cancer Cell., 2013, 23,(4),489-501. [62] Sadowski, J.; Rudolph, C.; Gasteiger, J. The generation of 3D-
[41] Shan, Y.; Kim, E.T.; Eastwood, M.P.; Dror, R.O.; D.; Seeliger, models of host-guest. Anal. Chim. Acta, 1992, 265, 233-241.
M.A.; Shaw, D.E. How does a drug molecule find its target binding [63] Milletti, F.; Vulpetti, A. Tautomer preference in PDB complexes
site? J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, (24), 9181-9183. and its impact on structure-based drug discovery. J. Chem. Inf.
[42] Grove, L.E.; Hall, D.R.; Beglov, D.; Vajda, S.; Kozakov, D. Model., 2010, 50, (6), 1062-1074.
FTFlex: accounting for binding site flexibility to improve frag- [64] Morris, G.M.; Huey, R.; Lindstrom, W.; Sanner, M.F.; Belew,
ment-based identification of druggable hot spots. Bioinformatics, R.K.; Goodsell, D.S.; Olson, A.J. Autodock4 and AutoDock-
2013, 29, (9), 1218-1219. Tools4: automated docking with selective receptor flexiblity. J.
[43] Lazaridis, T. Inhomogeneous Fluid Approach to Solva- Comput. Chem., 2009, 16, 2785-2791.
tion Thermodynamics. 2. Applications to Simple Fluids. J. Phys. [65] LigPrep, Schrödinger, LLC, New York, NY, 2013.
Chem. B, 1998, 102, 3542-3550. [66] MAPS, version 3.4, Scienomics SARL, Paris, France, 2014.
perimental and computational approaches to estimate solubility and [68] Pipeline pilot combinatorial library design chemistry component,
permeability in drug discovery and development settings. Adv. www.accelrys.com.
Drug Deliv. Rev., 2001, 46, (1-3), 3-26. [69] Hyperchem, HyperCube, Gainesville, FL.
[45] Zhang, M.Q.; Wilkinson, B. Drug discovery beyond the 'rule-of- [70] Grinter, S.Z.; Yan, C.; Huang, S.Y.; Jiang, L.; Zou, X. Automated
five'. Curr. Opin. Biotechnol., 2007, 18, (6), 478-488. Large-Scale File Preparation, Docking, and Scoring: Evaluation of
[46] Veber, D.F.; Johnson, S.R.; Cheng, H.Y.; Smith, B.R.; Ward, ITScore and STScore Using the 2012 Community Structure-
K.W.; Kopple, K.D. Molecular properties that influence the oral Activity Resource Benchmark. J. Chem. Inf. Model., 2013, 53, (8),
bioavailability of drug candidates. J. Med. Chem., 2002, 45, (12), 1905–1914.
2615–2623. [71] Song, C.M.; Bernardo, P.H.; Chai, C.L.; Tong, J.C. CLEVER:
[47] Congreve, M.; Carr, R.; Murray, C.; Jhoti, H. A rule of three for pipeline for designing in silico chemical libraries. J. Mol. Graph.
fragment-based lead discovery? Drug Discov. Today, 2003, 8, (19), Model., 2009, 27, (5), 578-583.
876-877. [72] Douguet, D. e-LEA3D: a computational-aided drug design web
[48] Köster, H.; Craan, T.; Brass, S.; Herhaus, C.; Zentgraf, M.; Neu- server. Nucl. Acids Res., 2010, 38, W615-W621.
mann, L.; Heine, A.; Klebe, G. A Small Nonrule of 3 Compatible [73] Harris, C.J.; Hill, R.D.; Sheppard, D.W.; Slater, M.J.; Stouten,
Fragment Library Provides High Hit Rate of Endothiapepsin Crys- P.F.W. The Design and Application of Target-Focused Compound
tal Structures with Various Fragment Chemotypes. J. Med. Chem., Libraries. Comb. Chem. High. Throug. Screen, 2011, 14, (6), 521-
2011, 54, (22), 7784–7796. 531
[49] Baell, J.B.; Congreve, M.; Leeson, P.; Abad-Zapatero, C. Ask the [74] Lisurek, M.; Rupp, B.; Wichard, J.; Neuenschwander, M.; von
experts: past, present and future of the rule of five. Fut. Med. Kries, J.P.; Frank, R.; Rademann, J.; Kühne, R. Design of chemical
Chem., 2013, 5, (7), 745-752. libraries with potentially bioactive molecules applying a maximum
[50] Yusof, I.; Segall, M.D. Considering the impact drug-like properties common substructure concept. Mol. Divers, 2010, 14, (2), 401-408.
have on the chance of success. Drug Discov. Today, 2013, 18, (13- [75] Wirth, M.; Zoete, V.; Michielin, O.; Sauer, W.H.B. SwissBioisos-
14), 659-666. tere: a database of molecular replacements for ligand design. Nucl.
[51] Hughes, J.D.; Blagg, J.; Price, D.A.; Bailey, S.; Decrescenzo, G.A.; Acids Res., 2013, 41, (D1), 1137-1143.
Devraj, R.V.; Ellsworth, E.; Fobian, Y.M.; Gibbs, M.E.; Gilles, [76] Weber, J.; Achenbach, J.; Moser, D.; Proschak, E. VAMMPIRE: A
R.W.; Greene, N.; Huang, E.; Krieger-Burke, T.; Loesel, J.; Wager, Matched Molecular Pairs Database for Structure-Based Drug De-
T.; Whiteley, L.; Zhang, Y. Physiochemical drug properties associ- sign and Optimization. J. Med. Chem., 2013, 56, (12), 5203–5207.
ated with in vivo toxicological outcomes. Bioorg. Med. Chem. Lett., [77] Vainio, M.J.; Kogej, T.; Raubacher, F. Automated Recycling of
2008, 18, (17), 4872-4875. Chemistry for Virtual Screening and Library Design. J. Chem. Inf.
[52] Kerns, E.H.; Di, L. Drug-like Properties: Concepts, Structure De- Model., 2012, 52, (7), 1777-1786.
sign and Methodsfrom ADME to Toxicity Optimization. 1st Ed. ed. [78] Baell, J.B. Broad Coverage of Commercially Available Lead-like
Academic Press, 2008. Screening Space with Fewer than 350,000 Compounds. J. Chem.
Inf. Model, 2013, 53, (1), 39-55.
Structure-Based Virtual Screening for Drug Discovery Current Topics in Medicinal Chemistry, 2014, Vol. 14, No. 16 1937
[79] Xing, L.; McDonald, J.J.; Kolodziej, S.A.; Kurumbail, R.G.; Wil- Variable Dielectric Model. J. Chem. Theory. Comput., 2011, 7,
liams, J.M.; Warren, C.J.; O'Neal, J.M.; Skepner, J.E.; Roberds, (12), 3859-3865.
S.L. Discovery of Potent Inhibitors of Soluble Epoxide Hydrolase [100] Korb, O.; Olsson, T.S.; Bowden, S.J.; Hall, R.J.; Verdonk, M.L.;
by Combinatorial Library Design and Structure-Based Virtual Liebeschuetz, J.W.; Cole, J.C. Potential and Limitations of En-
Screening. J. Med. Chem., 2011, 54, (5), 1211-1222. semble Docking. J. Chem. Inf. Model., 2012, 52, (5), 1262-1274.
[80] Ewing, T.J.; Makino, S.; Skillman, A.G.; Kuntz, I.D. DOCK 4.0: [101] Craig, I.R.; Essex, J.W.; Spiegel, K. Ensemble Docking into Multi-
search strategies for automated molecular docking of flexible ple Crystallographically Derived Protein Structures: An Evaluation
molecule databases. J. Comput. Aided. Mol. Des., 2001, 15, 411– Based on the Statistical Analysis of Enrichments. J. Chem. Inf.
428. Model, 2010, 50, (4), 511-524.
[81] Rarey, M.; Kramer, B.; Lengauer, T.; Klebe, G. A fast flexible [102] Rueda, M.; B.G, Abagyan R. Recipes for the selection of experi-
docking method using an incremental construction algorithm. J. mental protein conformations for virtual screening. J. Chem. Inf.
Mol. Biol., 1996, 261, (3), 470–489. Model, 2009, 50, (1), 186-193.
[82] Friesner, R.A.; Banks, J.L.; Murphy, R.B.; Halgren, T.A.; Klicic, [103] Osguthorpe, D.J.; Sherman, W.; Hagler, A.T. Generation of recep-
J.J.; Mainz, D.T.; al. e. Glide: a new approach for rapid, accurate tor structural ensembles for virtual screening using binding site
docking and scoring. 1. Method and assessment of docking accu- shape analysis and clustering. Chem. Biol. Drug Des., 2012, 80,
racy. J. Med. Chem., 2004, 47, 1739–1749. (2), 182-193.
[83] Jones, G.; Willett, P.; Glen, R.C.; Leach, A.R.; Taylor, R. Devel- [104] Kalid, O.; Toledo Warshaviak, D.; Shechter, S.; Sherman, W.;
opment and validation of a genetic algorithm for flexible docking. Shacham, S. Consensus Induced Fit Docking (cIFD): methodology,
J. Mol. Bio., 1997, 267, (3), 727–748. validation, and application to the discovery of novel Crm1 inhibi-
[84] Jain, A.N. Surflex: fully automatic flexible molecular docking tors. J. Comput. Aided. Mol. Des., 2012, 26, (11), 1217-1228.
using a molecular similarity-based search engine. J. Med. Chem., [105] Houston, D.R.; Walkinshaw, M.D. Consensus Docking: Improving
2003, 46, (4), 499–511. the Reliability of Docking in a Virtual Screening Context. J. Chem.
[85] Abagyan, R.; Totrov, M.; Kuznetsov, D. ICM: a new method for Inf. Model., 2013, 53, (2), 384-390.
protein modeling and design: applications to docking and structure [106] Waszkowycz, B. Towards improving compound selection in struc-
prediction from the distorted native conformation. J. Comput. ture-based virtual screening. Drug Discov. Today, 2008, 13, (5-6),
Chem., 1994, 15, 488–506. 219-226.
[86] Venkatachalam, C.M.; Jiang, X.; Oldfield, T.; Waldman, M. [107] Malmstrom, R.D.; Watowich, S.J. Using Free Energy of Binding
LigandFit: a novelmethod for the shape-directed rapid docking of Calculations to Improve the Accuracy of Virtual Screening Predic-
ligands to protein active sites. J. Mol. Graph. Model., 2003, 21, tions. J. Chem. Inf. Model, 2011, 51, (7), 1648–1655.
289–307. [108] Ding, B.; Wang, J.; Li, N.; Wang, W. Characterization of Small
[87] Vlachakis, D.; Tsagrasoulis, D.; Megalooikonomou, V.; Kossida, Molecule Binding. I. Accurate Identification of Strong Inhibitors in
S. Introducing Drugster: a comprehensive and fully integrated drug Virtual Screening. J. Chem. Inf. Model, 2013, 53, (1), 114(cid:1)122.
design; lead and structure optimization toolkit. Bioinformatics, [109] Ben Nasr, N.; Guillemain, H.; Lagarde, N.; Zagury, J.F.; Montes,
2013, 29,(1),126-128. M. Multiple Structures for Virtual Ligand Screening: Defining
[88] Zsoldos, Z.; Szabo, I.; Szabo, Z.; A.P.J. Software tools for structure Binding Site Properties-Based Criteria to Optimize the Selection of
based rational drug design. J. Mol. Struct. (THEOCHEM)., 2003, the Query. J. Chem. Inf. Model, 2013, 53, (2), 293–311.
666-667, 659-665. [110] Planesas, J.M.; Claramunt, R.M.; Teixidó, J.; Borrell, J.I.; Pérez-
[89] Guido, R.V.; Oliva, G.; Andricopulo, A.D. Virtual screening and Nueno, V.I. Improving VEGFR-2 Docking-Based Screening by
its integration with modern drug design technologies. Curr. Med. Pharmacophore Postfiltering and Similarity Search Postprocessing.
Chem., 2008, 15, (1), 37-46. J. Chem. Inf. Model., 2011, 51, (4), 777–787.
[90] Cross, J.B.; Thompson, D.C.; Rai, B.K.; Baber, J.C.; Fan, K.Y.; [111] Kumar, N.V.; Eblen, S.T.; Weber, M.J. Identifying specific kinase
Hu, Y.; Humblet, C. Comparison of several molecular docking substrates through engineered kinases and ATP analogs. Methods
programs: pose prediction and virtual screening accuracy. J. Chem. 2004, 32, (4), 389-397.
Inf. Model., 2009, 49,(6), 1455-1474. [112] Kumar, N.V.; Eblen, S.T.; Weber, M.J. Identifying specific kinase
[91] McGann, M. FRED and HYBRID docking performance on stan- substrates through engineered kinases and ATP analogs. Methods,
dardized datasets. J. Comput. Aided. Mol. Des., 2012, 26, (8), 897- 2004, 32, (4), 389-397.
906. [113] Islam, K.; Chen, Y.; Wu, H.; Bothwell, I.R.; Blum, G.J.; Zeng, H.;
[92] Liebeschuetz, J.; Cole, J.; Korb, O. Pose prediction and virtual Dong, A.; Zheng, W.; Min, J.; Deng, H.; Luo, M. Defining efficient
screening performance of GOLD scoring functions in a standard- enzyme-cofactor pairs for bioorthogonal profiling of protein
ized test. J. Comput. Aided. Mol. Des., 2012, 26, (6), 737-748. methylation. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U S A, 2013, 110, (42), 16778-
[93] Spitzer, R.; Jain, A. Surflex-Dock: Docking benchmarks and real- 16783.
world application. J. Comput. Aided. Mol. Des., 2012, 26,(6), 687- [114] Zhao, S.; Kumar, R.; Sakai, A.; Vetting, M.W.; Wood, B.M.;
699. Brown, S.; Bonanno, J.B.; Hillerich, B.S.; Seidel, R.D.; Babbitt,
[94] Neves, M.; Totrov, M.; Abagyan, R. Docking and scoring with P.C.; Almo, S.C.; Sweedler, J.V.; Gerlt, J.A.; Cronan, J.E.; Jacob-
ICM: the benchmarking results and strategies for improvement. J. son, M.P. Discovery of new enzymes and metabolic pathways by
Comput. Aided. Mol. Des., 2012, 26, (6), 675-686. using structure and genome context. Nature, 2013, 502, 698–702.
[95] Gkeka, P.; Eleftheratos, S.; Kolocouris, A.; Cournia, Z. Free En- [115] Stumpfe, D.; Bill, A.; Novak, N.; Loch, G.H.B.; Geppert, H.;
ergy Calculations Reveal the Origin of Binding Preference for Becker, T.; Schmitz, A.; Hoch, M.; Kolanus, W.; Famulok, M.; Ba-
Aminoadamantane Blockers of Influenza A/M2TM Pore. J. Chem. jorath, J. Targeting multifunctional proteins by virtual screening:
Theor. Comp., 2013, 9, (2), 1272–1281. structurally diverse cytohesin inhibitors with differentiated biologi-
[96] Baggett, A.W.; Cournia, Z.; Han, M.S.; Patargias, G.; Glass, A.C.; cal functions. ACS. Chem. Biol., 2010, 5, (9), 839-849.
Liu, S.Y.; Nolen, B.J. Structural characterization and computer- [116] Mandelker, D.; Gabelli, S.B.; Schmidt-Kittler, O.; Zhu, J.; Cheong,
aided optimization of a small-molecule inhibitor of the Arp2/3 I.; Huang, C.H.; Kinzler, K.W.; Vogelstein, B.; Amzel, L.M. A fre-
complex, a key regulator of the actin cytoskeleton. Chem.Med- quent kinase domain mutation that changes the interaction between
.Chem, 2012, 7, (7), 1286-1294. PI3Kalpha and the membrane. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 2009,
[97] Zilian, D.; Sotriffer, C. SFCscoreRF: A Random Forest-Based 106, (40), 16996-17001.
Scoring Function for Improved Affinity Prediction of Protein– [117] Sali, A.; Blundell, T.L. Comparative protein modelling by satisfac-
Ligand Complexes. J. Chem. Inf. Model., 2013. tion of spatial restraints. J. Mole. Bio., 1993, 234, (3), 779-815.
[98] Schneider, N.; Hindle, S.; Lange, G.; Klein, R.; Albrecht, J.; Briem, [118] Phillips, J.C.; Braun, R.; Wang, W.; Gumbart, J.; Tajkhorshid, E.;
H.; Beyer, K.; Claußen, H.; Gastreich, M.; Lemmen, C.; Rarey, M. Villa, E.; Chipot, C.; Skeel, R.D.; Kale, L.; Schulten, K. Scalable
Substantial improvements in large-scale redocking and screening molecular dynamics with NAMD. J.Comput. Chem., 2005, 26,
using the novel HYDE scoring function. J. Comput. Aided. Mol. (16), 1781-1802.
Des., 2012, 26, (6), 701-723. [119] Cournia, Z.; Leng, L.; Gandavadi, L.; Du, X.; Bucala, R.; Jorgen-
[99] Ravindranathan, K.; Tirado-Rives, J.; L, J.W.; Guimarães, C.R.W. sen, W.L. Discovery of Human Macrophage Migration Inhibitory
Improving MM-GB/SA Scoring through the Application of the Factor (MIF)-CD74 Inhibitors via Virtual Screening. J. Med.
Chem., 2009, 52, 416-424.
1938 Current Topics in Medicinal Chemistry, 2014, Vol. 14, No. 16 Lionta et al.
[120] Gkeka, P.; Athanasiadis, E.; Spyrou, G.; Cournia, Z. Enhancing the [128] Ouyang, X.; Zhou, S.; Su, C.T.; Ge, Z.; Li, R.; Kwoh, C.K. Cova-
effectiveness of virtual screening by using the ChemBioServer: lentDock: automated covalent docking with parameterized covalent
Application to the discovery of PI3K(cid:1) inhibitors. Bioinformatics & linkage energy estimation and molecular geometry constraints. J.
Bioengineering (BIBE), 2012 IEEE 12th International Conference, Comput. Chem., 2013, 34, (4), 326-336.
2012, 266-269. [129] Lill, M.A.; Danielson, M.L. Computer-aided drug design platform
[121] Crowe, D.L.; Chandraratna, R.A. A retinoid X receptor (RXR)- using PyMOL. J. Comput. Aided. Mol. Des., 2011, 25, (1), 13-19.
selective retinoid reveals that RXR-alpha is potentially a therapeu- [130] Truchon, J.F.; Bayly, C.I. GLARE: A free open source software for
tic target in breast cancer cell lines, and that it potentiates antipro- combinatorial library design. J. Chem. Inf. Model, 2006, 46, 1536–
liferative and apoptotic responses to peroxisome proliferator- 1548.
activated receptor ligands. Breast Cancer Res., 2004, 6, (5), R546- [131] Truszkowski, A.; Jayaseelan, K.V.; Neumann, S.; Willighagen,
R555. E.L.; Zielesny, A.; Steinbeck, C. New developments on the
[122] Tanaka, T.; de Luca, L.M. Therapeutic Potential of “Rexinoids” in cheminformatics open workflow environment CDK-Taverna. J.
Cancer Prevention and Treatment. Cancer Res., 2009, 69, 4945- Cheminform., 2011, 3, 54.
4947. [132] Schüller, A.; Hähnke, V.; Schneider, G. SmiLib v2.0: A Java-based
[123] van der Spoel, D.; Lindahl, E.; Hess, B.; Groenhof, G.; Mark, A.E.; tool for rapid combinatorial library enumeration. QSAR Comb. Sci.,
Berendsen, H.J.C. GROMACS: Fast, Flexible and Free. J. Comp. 2007, 26, (3), 407–410.
[124] QikProp, version 3.8, Schrödinger, LLC, New York, NY, 2013. [134] Reactor,www.chemaxon.com.
[125] Maestro, version 9.4, Schrödinger, LLC, New York, NY, 2013, 9.4; [135] OELib library enumeration,www.eyesopen.com.
2013. [136] CombiLibMaker and Legion,www.tripos.com.
[126] Schnecke, V.; Swanson, C.A.; Getzoff, E.D.; Tainer, J.A.; Kuhn, [137] QuaSAR-CombiGen,www.chemcomp.com.
L.A. Screening a Peptidyl Database for Potential Ligands to Pro- [138] ChemOffice,CombiChem,www.cambridgesoft.com.
teins with Side-chain Flexibility. Proteins, 1998, 33, (1), 74-87. [139] ICM-Chemist, www.molsoft.com.
[127] Chaudhury, S.; Gray, J.J. Conformer selection and induced fit in [140] LUCIA: Transform-based virtual library generation,www.eidogen-
flexible backbone protein-protein docking using computational and sertanty.com.
NMR ensembles. J. Mol. Bio., 2008, 381, (4), 1068-1087
Received: August 27, 2013 Revised: January 01, 2014 Accepted: February 18, 2014