Studying and Classification of the Most
Significant Malicious Software
Dr. Wajeb GHARIBI,
Computer Science & Information Systems College, Jazan University,
Jazan, KSA.
gharibi@jazanu.edu.sa
Abstract—As the cost of information processing and Internet University, this grandfather of modern computer virology,
accessibility falls, most organizations are becoming demonstrated a virus-like program on a VAX11/750
increasingly vulnerable to potential cyber threats which its system[2].
rate has been dramatically increasing every year in recent
Nevertheless, the idea for computer viruses actually
times.
appeared much earlier. Many consider the starting point to
In this paper, we study, discuss and classify the most be the work of John Von Neumann in his studies on self-
significant malicious software: viruses, Trojans, worms,
reproducing mathematical automata, famous in the 1940s.
adware and pornware which have made step forward in the
By 1951, Neumann had already proposed methods for
science of Virology.
demonstrating how to create such automata. In 1959, the
Keywords: Informatics; information Security; Virolog; British mathematician Lionel Penrose presented his view
Cyber threats. on automated self-replication in his Scientific American
article 'Self-Reproducing Machines'. Unlike Neumann,
I. INTRODUCTION
Penrose described a simple two dimensional model of this
Nowadays, there is a huge variety of cyber threats that
structure which could be activated, multiply, mutate and
can be quite dangerous not only for big companies but also
attack. Shortly after Penrose's article appeared, Frederick
for ordinary user, who can be a potential victim for
G. Stahl reproduced this model in machine code on an IBM
cybercriminals when using unsafe system for entering
650 [3]. It should be noted that these studies were never
confidential data, such as login, password, credit card
intended to providing a basis for the future development of
numbers, etc. Among popular computer threats it is
computer viruses. On the contrary, these scientists were
possible to distinguish several types of them depending on
striving to perfect this world and make it more suitable for
the means and ways they are realized. They are: malicious
human life. Afterwards, these works established the
software (malware), DDoS attacks (Distributed Denial-of-
foundation for many later studies such as robotics and
Service), phishing, banking, exploiting vulnerabilities,
botnets, threats for mobile phones, IP-communication artificial intelligence.
threats, social networking threats and even spam. All of
III. HISTORY: FROM THE FIRST VIRUSES TILL THE LAST
these threats try to violate one of the following criteria:
confidentiality, integrity and accessibility. Lately, EPIDEMICS
malicious software has turned into a big business. Cyber Sometime in the early 1970s, the Creeper virus was
criminals became profitable organizations and able to detected on ARPANET, a US military computer network
perform any type of attack. An understanding of today‘s which was the forerunner of the modern Internet. Written
cyber threats is vital part for safe computing and ability to for the then-popular Tenex operating system, this program
counteract the cyber invaders. was able to gain access independently through a modem
The rest of our paper is organized as follows: Section 2 and copy itself to the remote system. As computers gained
demonstrates the theory of computer viruses. Section 3 in popularity, more and more individuals started writing
proposes the history: from the first viruses till the last their own programs. Advances in telecommunications
epidemics. Section 4 defines and classifies Malware. provided convenient channels for sharing programs through
Conclusions have been made in Section5. open-access servers such as BBS - the Bulletin Board
System.
II. THEORY OF COMPUTER VIRUSES
Elk Cloner virus infected the boot sector for Apple II
The history begins in 1983, when American scientist Fred
computers and spread by infecting the operating system,
Cohen in the dissertational work devoted to research of
stored on floppy disks.
self-reproducing computer programs for the first time has
proposed the term ‗computer virus‘ and later on published Brain was the first global IBM-compatible virus epidemic,
the article «Computer Viruses: theory and experiments»[1]. which infected the boot sector, and was able to spread
practically worldwide within a few months. It was written
Len Eidelmen first coined the term 'virus' in connection
by a 19-year-old Pakistani programmer, Basit Farooq Alvi,
with self-replicating computer programs. On November
and his brother Amjad, and included a text string
10th, 1983, at a seminar on computer safety at Lehigh
containing their names, address and telephone number. In February 2004 appeared Bizex (also known as Exploit) -
Interestingly enough, Brain was the first 'stealth virus.'; the first ICQ-Worm. The unauthorized distribution of ICQ
virus would display the original, uninfected data. was used to spread widely. After installing into the system,
Bizex closed running ICQ-client and connected to ICQ
Another such hoax was released by Robert Morris about a
server with the data of the infected user and started up
virus spreading over networks and changing port and drive
delivery to all contacts from the list. At the same time, there
configurations. According to the warning, the alleged virus
was the theft of confidential data - banking data, various
infected 300,000 computers in the Dakotas in under 12
user logins and passwords.
minutes. November 1988: a network epidemic caused by
the Morris Worm. The virus infected over 600 computer In the same in 2004 the so-called war of malware writers is
systems in the US (including the NASA research center) occured. Several criminal gangs are known for worms
and almost brought some to a complete standstill. In order Bagle, Mydoom and Netsky released new versions of their
to multiply, the Morris Worm exploited vulnerability in programs literally every hour. Each new program carries a
UNIX operating systems on VAX and Sun Microsystems regular message to the opposing faction, full of threats,
platforms. As well as exploiting the UNIX vulnerability, Netsky even removed any found worms copies of Mydoom
the virus used several innovative methods to gain system and Bagle.
access such as harvesting passwords. The overall losses
Mail Worm Bagle was firstly detected on 18 January 2004.
caused by the 'Morris Worm' virus were estimated at
To spread, it used its own SMTP-client, the worm code are
US$96 million dollars - a significant sum at that time.
sent as an attachment with a random name and extension
CodeRed, Nimda, Aliz and BadtransII were the Malicious .exe. Delivery was made to addresses found on infected
programs that exploited vulnerabilities in applications and machine. Bagle also contained a built-backdoor- procedure
operating systems and caused serious epidemics in 2001. that opened port 6777 to run commands and download any
The large-scale epidemics caused by these worms changed files.
the face of computer security and set trends for malware
Mydoom is primarily known by a massive 12-day DDoS-
evolution for several years to come. Moreover, 2001 was
attack on the Web site of SCO company, which began on
also the year that instant messaging services, such as ICQ
the first of February 2004. In response, leaders of SCO
and MS Instant Messenger, were first used as channels for
announced a reward of $250 thousand dollars for
spreading malicious code [4].
information on the author of the worm. To spread,
Email worms, such as Klez and Lentin had already been Mydoom uses mail delivery through its own SMTP-client,
popular prior to 2002. However, a new breed of email as well as P2P-network (Kazaa)[5].
worms superseded the older versions: these new email
Sasser (May 2004) - struck more than 8 million computers,
worms spread by connecting directly to built-in SMTP
the loss from this worm are estimated in $979 millions. For
servers on infected machines. Worms multiplying in other
penetration Sasser used a vulnerability in Service LSASS
environments, such as LANs, P2P, IRC and so forth,
Microsoft Windows.
disappeared almost entirely in this year. Though Klez
caused the most serious outbreak during 2002, several other Cabir (June 2004) - the first network worm which
worms provided some stiff competition: Lentin and propagates via Bluetooth and infects mobile phones
Tanatos (aka Bugbear). running OS Symbian. The viruses for Pocket PC are
appeared soon (August 2004), - classic virus Duts and
In 2003 two global Internet attacks took place that could be
Trojan Horse Brador. However, malicious software - is not
called the biggest in the history of the Internet. The Internet
only viruses and Trojans. This class is also included adware
Worm Slammer laid the foundation for the attacks, and
- programs that perform unauthorized displaying on-screen
used vulnerability in the MS SQL Server to spread.
advertisment, and pornware - programs that self-initiate a
Slammer was the first classic fileless worm, which fully
connection to paid pornographic websites. Since 2004
illustrated the capabilities of a flash-worm - capabilities
indicated widespread use of viral technology to install
which had been foreseen several years before. The worm
adware/pornware on target computers. Next epidemic of
attacked computers through ports 1433 and 1434 and on
network Worm Kido/Conficker/ Downadup (November
penetrating machines did not copy itself on any disk, but
2008) - has struck more than 10 million computers, using
simply remained in computer memory. If we analyze the
vulnerability in service "Server" (MS08-067). The new
dynamics of the epidemic, we can assert that the worm
variant Kido loaded at night from 8 to 9 of April, 2009
originated in the Far East.
(Net-Worm. Win32. Kido.js). One more very dangerous
The second, more important epidemic was caused by the threat 2008/09 became bootkit Backdoor.Win32.Sinowal.
Lovesan Worm, which appeared in August 2003. The Bootkit 2009 is distributed through the cracked sites, porno
worm demonstrated just how vulnerable Windows is. Just resources and sites from which it is possible to download
as Slammer did, Lovesan exploited vulnerability in pirate software [6].
Windows in order to replicate itself. The difference was
that Lovesan used a loophole in the RPC DCOM service IV. MALWARE DEFINITION AND CLASSIFICATION
working under Windows 2000/XP. This led to almost every Computer virus definition is a complicated problem,
Internet user being attacked by the worm. because it‘s quite difficult to give an efficient virus
definition by showing properties attributable to viruses only Script viruses – viruses which are executable in the certain
and not concerning the other program systems. Let us give command frame environment: firstly bat-files in the
the following definitions: command frame DOS, nowadays VBS and JS – scripts in
the command frame Windows Scripting Host (WSH). For
Definition 4.1. The opportunity of making duplicates (the
example, Virus.VBS.Sling has been written by using
copies could not match with the original) and theirs
VBScript (Visual Basic Script) language. Once launched it
embedding into the computer network and/or files, system
searches files with .VBS and .VBE extension and infects
computer areas and other executive objects, is the most
them. On June, 16 or July, 16 this virus deletes all files with
required computer virus property. Meanwhile the
.VBS and .VBE extension including itself.
duplicates can be distributed.
Definition 4.3. Worm (net-worm) is a type of malicious
The other problem associated with computer virus
programs which can distribute by network channels.
definition is misapprehension of a virus. So any malware
Worms can run independently through security systems of
could be a virus. This leads to confusion in terminology,
automated and computer networks. They can create and
which is complicated by the ability of modern antivirus
distribute their duplicates which are not coinciding with the
programs to detect specified types of malware. That is why
original and realize different harmful operations.
the association ―malware-virus‖ is getting more settled.
Hence, malicious programs could mean viruses. Worm Life Cycle can be divided to the following stages:
Definition 4.2. Malware is a computer program or a o Penetration into computer
portable code which aimed to damage the information, o Activation
stored in computer network or hidden use of computer o ―Victims‖ search
network resources, or the other impact, which interrupt o Preparation of duplicates
normal operation of computer network. o Distribution of duplicates
Computer viruses, Trojans and Worms are the malware The stages 1 and 5 are symmetric and defined by the used
fundamental types. Every malware includes subclasses of of protocols and applications. There is no difference
malicious programs which named according those between stage 4 and the stage in virus distribution process.
functions, which were described above. This conception is applicable to worms which can be
divided by the types of the used protocol [7]:
Viruses can be classified according to distribution methods
because the distinctive feature is the ability to proliferate Network worms – worms that use Internet and local
within the computer. Distribution process could be divided networks protocols. Usually, the worms of this type can be
into several stages: distributed by mistake in processing of base packets in
TCP/IP by some applications.
o Penetration into computer
o Virus activation Email worms – worms that are distributed by email
o Objects search for infection messages.
o Preparation of virus duplicates
IRC worms – worms that are spread by IRC (Internet Relay
o Distribution of virus duplicates
Chat) channels.
It is necessary for virus activation that infected object gets a P2P worms – worms that are spread by P2P (peer-to-peer)
control. So viruses divided according to the objects types networks.
that can be infected:
IM worms – worms that are distributed by using instant
Boot viruses – viruses which infect boot sectors of hard and messaging applications (IM, Instant Messenger – ICQ,
removable disks. For example, malicious program MSN Messenger, AIM etc.)
Virus.Boot.Snow.a writes its code into HDD MBR or into
Definition 4.4. Trojan (Trojan Horse) is such type of
floppy disc boot sectors.
malicious programs which goal is harmful effect to
File viruses – viruses that infect files. This group is divided computer network. Trojans have no the mechanism of its
to three subgroups, depending on the environment where duplicates creation. Some Trojans can bypass computer
the code is executing. network security system to penetrate and infect system. In
general case Trojan gets into system with virus or worm by
Actually file viruses – viruses that work directly with OS
active intruder‘s acts or by heedless user‘s operations.
resources. For example, the virus: Virus.Win9x.CIH also
Trojans have no distribution function and its life cycle is
known as ―Chernobyl‖. It has little size (about 1 kb) this
short – only three stages:
virus infects PE-files (Portable Executable) under
Windows95/98 control in the way that size of the infected o Penetration to computer
files is not changed. o Activation
o Performing malicious functions
Macro viruses – viruses that are created by using the macro
command language and executable in the environment of Let us consider the Trojan classification by Kaspersky Lab
any application. It is talked of Microsoft Office Macro in grouped according to three types of information threat that
most cases. For example, Macro.Word97. may violate (Figure 1):
Type 1. Confidentiality Trojan-SMS – used for unauthorized sending SMS-
messages from the compromised mobile devices to
Backdoor – remote administration utilities that open
expensive paid numbers that are stored in the malware
infected machines to external control via a LAN or the
body.
Internet.
Rootkits – a collection of programs used by a hacker to
PSW Trojan – steals passwords from the system.
evade detection while trying to gain unauthorized access to
Trojan-Spy – includes a variety of spy programs and key a computer.
loggers, all of which track and save user activity on the
Type 3. Availability
victim machine and then forward this information to the
master. Trojan-DDoS – performs an unauthorized DoS (Denial of
Service) attack from infected computers to a computer-
Trojan-GameThief – steals the user information pertaining
sacrifice with the specified address.
to online games.
Trojan-Ransom - used for unauthorized data modification
Trojan-Banker – steals the user information pertaining to
on victim‘s computer to make it impossible to work with it
the banking system, the electronic money and plastic cards.
or block the normal functioning of the computer.
Trojan-Mailfinder – provides unauthorized collection of
ArcBomb - archived files coded to sabotage the de-
user email addresses with the subsequent transfer to the
compressor when it attempts to open the infected archived
attacker [3].
file.
Other malware includes a range of programs that do not
Trojan Classification
threaten computers directly, but are used to create viruses
or Trojans, or used to carry out illegal activities such as
DoS attacks and breaking into other computers [8].
Confidentiality Integrity Availability
V. CONCLUSIONS
Backdoor Trojan- Trojan-DDOS The given information cannot cover all variety of global
Clicker information threats, however shows the most actual trends
Trojan-PSW Trojan- Trojan- in area of cybercriminal. It is obvious the continuous
Trojan-Spy Downloader improvement of "white" and "black" technologies in
Trojan- Trojan- ArcBomb struggle of the anti-virus companies against army of
Banker Droper hackers. In the triangle « a hacker - AV company - a user »
Trojan- Trojan-Proxy the weak part still remains the user which should know the
GameThief information about existed cyber threats to be able to use the
Trojan- Trojan- installed protection system effectively.
Mailfinder