The 43rd Intl. Symp. on Robotics (ISR2012),Taipei, Taiwan, Aug. 29-31, 2012
Study of the Importance of Adequacy to Robot Verbal and Non
Verbal Communication in Human-Robot Interaction
Céline Jost Brigitte Le Pévédic Dominique Duhaut
Lab-STICC Lab-STICC Lab-STICC
Vannes, France Vannes, France Vannes, France
e-mail: celine.jost@univ-ubs.fr brigitte.le-pevedic@univ-ubs.fr dominique.duhaut@univ-ubs.fr
Grandgeorge, “interunderstanding” appears when com-
Abstract—The Robadom project aims at creating a munication signals are correctly perceived by the re-
homecare robot that help and assist people in their daily ceiver and when the emitter is able to distinguish the
life, either in doing task for the human or in managing good reception of his/her own message [9].
day organization. A robot could have this kind of role only
In a human-robot interaction context, communica-
if it is accepted by humans. Before thinking about the ro-
tion between the both entities reveals an unknown data:
bot appearance, we decided to evaluate the importance of
robot communication. Everything has to be created be-
the relation between verbal and nonverbal communica-
cause robots are empty boxes. Concerning robots ex-
tion during a human-robot interaction in order to de-
termine the situation where the robot is accepted. We pressions, Kirby decided that the robot behavior has to
realized two experiments in order to study this accept- mimic human behavior because it allows to obtain a
ance. The first experiment studied the importance of hav- fluent and natural interaction [10]. Moreover, Gong
ing robot nonverbal behavior in relation of its verbal be- and Kim consider that machines anthropomorphism in-
havior. The second experiment studied the capability of a creases positive human judgment and interaction qual-
robot to provide a correct human-robot interaction.
ity [11][12]. Thus, robots have verbal communication
Keywords: human-robot inreraction, robot acceptability,
which is speech and nonverbal communication which is
homecare robot, communication.
gesture, posture, facial expressions... Concerning verbal
communication, it is difficult to express emotions
I. INTRODUCTION
through speech because voice synthesis have technical
Communication is a complex domain. Everybody handicaps. They are not able to correctly express pros-
communicates whenever and everywhere. Communica- ody, tone, speed... as explained in [13]. Morris and
tion is omnipresent but is difficult to define. Since sixty Breazeal chose to add nonverbal communication in or-
years, researchers have suggested definitions. Lasswell der to increase the dialog understanding with physical
and Shannon gave basic components indicating that a evidences [14][15][16]. The literature shows a lot of
transmitter sends a message, through a communication work which make a robot communicating. But, does
channel, until a receiver [1][2]. The message can be af- the nonverbal communication really affect the human
fected by interferences and disturbances. These first being which interacts? Ekman showed that no channel
definitions have been followed by numerous models predominates in the human-human communication
and schemes. They added precisions or new communic- [17], but some studies underline that it is important to
ation points of view. For example, Cherry indicated consider several channels to recognize a human emo-
that a message depends on its content [3]. Riley added tion (see [18]). Is it the same process for a human
the importance of a group. A reciprocity phenomenon which wants to decode robot's expression? Tojo gave an
appeared showing that an individual communication is answer part in [19]: it seems that nonverbal behavior is
influenced by its group [4]. Picard specified that com- important to precise a speech or to make it understand-
munication is a social process [5] which is multichan- able. But, does a human really expect a robot to have a
nel according to Cosnier [6]. Signals can be sound; ges- similar communication? The answer is a fundamental
tures; comical expressions; posture; chemical, tactile, step toward “interunderstanding”. Indeed, this one can
thermal and electric exchanges. Gerbner explored a only exist if human correctly perceives robot signals.
new way: a person which communicates ensures to To answer these questions, two studied were carried
have sent correct signals by controlling each sending out. The first one aimed at compare a robot credibility
[7]. It is an introduction to feedback. This explanation and sincerity according to its gesture. The speech was
is simplistic and does not express each characteristic frozen. The problematic was to know whether a lack of
about communication: context, social conventions, adequacy between speech and gesture was able to affect
emitter intention, cooperation between individuals, the human perception. The second one aimed at study
metacommunication... (defined by Blanchet [8]). In the robot acceptability during an interaction with a human.
human-robot interaction context, a simplistic commu- Can some incoherence between a robot speech and ges-
nication definition is sufficient. Indeed, its purpose is to ture can affect its credibility and sincerity in the entire
put the human in contact with the robot in order to ob- interaction? The answer of these questions allows to de-
tain an “interunderstanding”. According to termine whether nonverbal communication is decisive
The 43rd Intl. Symp. on Robotics (ISR2012),Taipei, Taiwan, Aug. 29-31, 2012
for the human to understand robot. three different gestures for a single sentence. An ob-
server watched the interaction and gave her/his feeling
II. CONTEXT: THE ROBADOM PROJECT after. This experiment used the same experimental pro-
tocol that [20] in their virtual agent studies.
The Robadom project [21], which is supported by Participants were 60 French people (17 women and
the national research agency, aims at designing a home 43 men) between 10 and 57 years old (mean: 18.1).
care robot which will daily assist the elderly. This robot
has several roles: A. Experimental design
(1) it will supervise and protect the patient, it is im- The experiment was made at a robotic competition
portant to know whether the person is well and it is im- at an isolated stand. Participants were either competit-
portant to react whether the person has problems. But ors or spectators of the competition. Everyone of them
the protection begins with prevention. The robot can had knowledge about robotic and an interest for robots.
analyze what happens around it and must indicate if Each participant had to observe the robot and give
there is a danger. Moreover, it is a help for doctors her/his impression by completing a questionnaire.
when it reminds to patients to take their medicine.
(2) the robot is an assistant which manage the I. Equipment
shopping lists, appointments etc. A small humanoid robot (see Fig. 1) was placed on a
(3) It is an entertainment because, as a compan- table, face to participants. The experimenter was sitting
ion, the robot can speak with the person, can play with on the next in order to control a computer which allow
the person etc. to the robot to move.
(4) It is a social intermediary which can launch
visual communication with the family, or give informa- II. Experimental setting and data recording
tion about news etc.
First of all, the experimenter asked participants to
The current patient are people with cognitive imagine the following context: the robot had advised
impairment, so the robot has to offer cognitive exer- them to watch a movie. Back home, two scenarios were
cises. The project objective is to study the impact of possible. Scenario A: participants did not like the
such a robot on the elderly to know if it could be a solu- movie and reproached the robot for its advices. Scen-
tion to the ageing problems. The elderly is a concern in ario B: participants liked the movie and thanked the ro-
the entire world. For example, Heerink et al [22] tested bot. In the both cases, participants had to observe three
the influence of a robot's social abilities on acceptance possible behaviors and to indicate if the robot provided
of elderly users but no correlation has be found between a credible and sincere answer. Concerning the A scen-
social abilities and technology acceptance. It is difficult ario, the robot said: “I'm really sorry. This movie has
to know what the elderly need exactly and what they good critics. I thought you liked it.” Concerning the B
want exactly. A study about game design for senior cit- scenario, it said:”Thus, you liked the movie! I'm happy
izens [23] indicates that the elderly rejects computer to give you good advices.”. In both cases, the three sug-
because it can not replace a real person. It seems that gested behaviors were similar. The first behavior (Apo-
these persons need to be useful, need to cultivate them- logize on Fig. 1) was the apologize gesture. The second
selves and need to be connected to the society. The behavior (showed neutral on Fig. 1) was a neutral ex-
loneliness is the worst situation. That is why, the Roba- pression, slightly negative (the robot gently lowered its
dom project wants to fight against the loneliness of the head). The third behavior (Happiness on Fig. 1) was an
persons. Tefas et al [24] covered a part if this work by intense joy. The real neutral expression on Fig. 1 shows
developing an application which can: (1) supervise the the robot basic positioning, considered like its neutral
meal of the person and remind them to eat if they for- positioning. The A scenario congruent behavior was
get. (2) detect the facial expression of the person in or- the first behavior. The B scenario congruent behavior
der to analyze his/her emotion and express back an ap- was the third behavior.
propriate emotion.
The target population of the Robadom project are III. Data collection and analysis
the most difficult because they did not grow up with
Questionnaire: After each behavior, participants
technology, computing, robotics. They are often resist-
had to answer a two-question questionnaire: does the
ant to this project. That is why the question of credib- robot seem express what is thinks? (sincerity). Does its
ility, sincerity and acceptability is so important in expression seem plausible? (credibility). Available an-
this project. If the robot is not accepted, our patient swers were: not at all, rather not, rather, totally.
will never interact with it. Statistical analysis: Data analysis used Minitab
15© software. The Khi-Deux one sample test was used
to find significant answers. The accepted P level was
III. STUDY 1: IMPORTANCE OF ADEQUACY BETWEEN SPEECH 0.05. Data collected were sincerity and credibility
AND GESTURE points of view concerning the six behaviors (a total of
three in the A scenario and a total of three in the B
This study allowed to measure the importance of
scenario).
gesture according to a robot speech. The robot made
The 43rd Intl. Symp. on Robotics (ISR2012),Taipei, Taiwan, Aug. 29-31, 2012
Fig. 2. Robot Credibilty and sincerity results
Concerning the second behavior, 38/3% of parti-
cipants answered the robot was rather not sincere and
33.3% rather sincere (X²=29.9, df=3, p<0.001; Fig. 2).
Answers about credibility are more punctuated too:
only 8.3% found it totally credible whereas the majority
found it rather not or not at all credible (43.3% and
Fig. 1. Robot key positions
33.3% respectively, X²=42.7, df=3, p<0.001; Fig.2).
Concerning the third behavior, participants signific-
Results: In the A scenario – participants did not like
antly answered that the robot was sincere (38.3%
the movie – participants did not make their answers
rather and 41.7% totally, X²=56.5, df=3, p<0.001; Fig.
random (X²=189,1, df=33, p<0.001). Concerning the
2) and credible (36,7% rather and 35% totally,
first behavior, participants significantly answered that
X²=26.2, df=3, p<0.001; Fig. 2).
the robot was sincere (60% rather and 36.7% totally,
X²=132.7, df=3, p<0.001; Fig. 2) and credible (48.3%
rather and 35% totally, X²=63.0, df=3, p<0.001). Con- B. Discussion
cerning the second behavior, almost half of participants
Concerning A scenario – robot apologized for the
found it rather sincere (40%, X²=20.1, df=3, p<0.001;
wrong advice – the robot was judged credible and sin-
Fig. 2). However, answers were contrasted because
cere when it expressed the first behavior.
18.3% answered the robot was not at all sincere al-
This situation is the congruent one and is under-
though 15% found it totally sincere. On the contrary,
stood by a large sample group. Concerning both others
43% of participants judged the robot not at all credible
behaviors, answers were contrasted. No one seem cap-
(X²=39.7, df=3, p<0.001).
able to give their opinion. The uncertain answers may
Concerning the last condition, where robot ex-
reflect hesitation due to a misunderstanding of the situ-
pressed the third behavior, no statistical difference ap-
ation. For example, concerning the third behavior cred-
peared concerning the robot sincerity (X²=5.9, df=3,
ibility, participants answered around 25% to each pos-
p=0.117; Fig. 2). Notice a difference between gender:
sible answer. It may show that they make their answers
women had significantly more often judged the robot
random because they did not know how to think about
not at all sincere compared with men (41,2% of women
the behavior. Thus, the second and third behaviors
and 23,3% of men; X²=10.5, df=3, p=0.015). Concern-
seem difficult to measure. The robot intention is not ob-
ing the credibility, participants significantly gave con-
vious.
trasted answers (X²=12.4, df=3, p=0.006). Indeed, 30%
Concerning the B scenario – robot congratulated it-
of them judged the behavior not al all credible and
self for the good advice – participants judged that the
31.67% judged it totally credible. A minority of people
third behavior was credible and sincere. They chose the
expressed intermediate situations (25% and 13.3%).
congruent situation. Both others behaviors were judged
In the B scenario – participants liked the movie –
not credible whereas sincerity seemed difficult to estim-
participants did not make their answers random
ate. Actually, sincerity seem more difficult to tackle in
(X²=88.4, df=15, p<0.001). Concerning the first beha-
an uncertain context than credibility.
vior, 38.33% of participants answered that the robot
Generally, participants judged more easily that the
was rather not sincere and 33.33% rather sincere
robot expressed what it thought even if its expression
(X²=26, df=3, p<0.001; Fig. 2). Answers about credib-
did not seem plausible. In both scenarios, congruent
ility are more punctuated: only 3.3% found the robot
situation have been chosen, without ambiguity. Con-
totally credible whereas the majority found it rather
cerning non congruent behaviors, there were no hesita-
not or not at all credible (43,3% and 33,3% respect-
tion in the case of positive emotion. On the contrary, in
ively, X²=42.7, df=3, p<0.001; Fig. 2).
the case of negative emotion, the robot has been judged
The 43rd Intl. Symp. on Robotics (ISR2012),Taipei, Taiwan, Aug. 29-31, 2012
rather sincere, even if it was not totally credible and if Robot: "OK, I need information about your will-
it expressed positive gesture. Moreover, the second be- ing."
havior, which was a negative neutral, was not chosen. Human gives information about the holidays he
However, the robot lowered its head and did a small wishes
hand movement, keeping its arms along its legs. This Robot thanks human and says "OK, I'm doing it!"
behavior is widely used by humans whereas the third Human: "Thank you, goodbye."
behavior was exaggerated. Thus, since the exaggerated
behavior has been chosen, and since the sincerity is the Dialog 2
same for a neutral or positive behavior, it seems im- Robot: " I found a campground for you."
portant to emphasize a gesture in the case of negative Human: "Thank you, it looks great!"
emotion to make the robot more credible and sincere. Robot is happy.
To conclude, it is important that gesture and speech Robot: "Can I suggest you hiking?"
are in adequacy. By this way, humans judge a robot Human acquiesces.
more credible and sincere. Robot: "What kind of hiking?"
Human: " I don't have time to think about that,
IV. STUDY 2: A ROBOT ACCEPTABILITY DESPITE SOME make it yourself!"
COMMUNICATION INCOHERENCE Robot complains.
This experiment allowed to measure a robot accept-
ability during an interaction with a human. Each parti- Human: "Today I went hiking. It was great!"
cipant had to observe a human (the experimenter) and a Robot is happy.
robot which were speaking together. There were four Human: "There were a lot of garbage in the
different dialogs. The robot randomly expressed an in-
coherent gesture during the experiment. The purpose Robot expresses discontent
was to study whether these imperfections had an impact Human: "I collected everything in a bag to throw
on human perception. them away!"
Participants were 26 French students (9 women and Robot compliments human
17 men) between 18 and 28 years old (mean: 22.5).
Participants did not have the same knowledge in robot-
ics. They did not have the same specialty (computing, Human: "It was raining today for my hiking."
mathematics, statistics) and dis not have the same level Robot is sad.
(two years after A-level and four years after A-level). Human: "you might have given information about
The purpose of these differences was to obtain answers the weather."
which were not influenced by a common environment. Robot apologizes.
A. Experimental design Human: "It's your fault, I don't want you to apolo-
The experiment was made in an isolated room with Robot: "You didn't ask me to give information
a robot and an experimenter. During the interaction, about the weather"
participant has to observe the scene and to complete a Human: "Finally, I left the campground without
questionnaire. paying."
Robot reprimands human
I. Equipment
A small humanoid robot (see Fig. 1) was placed on a III. Data collection and analysis
table, face to the experimenter. Participants sat down
Questionnaire: The questionnaire asked questions
next to the experimenter.
about each robot action independently, about each dia-
log (general questions) and about the entire interaction.
II. Experimental setting and data recording
After each sentence, participants had to indicate
First of all, the experimenter introduced the robot to
whether they agree the following proposals:
participants and the context of human-robot interac-
• The gesture is in adequacy with the sen-
tion. Participants had to read the questionnaire before
tence content.
experiment started. When experiment started, the four
• The speed gesture is correct.
dialogs were played without any break. Participant had
• The gesture seems to be flexible and natural.
to answer questions during the interaction. No break al-
• The robot is credible when speaking.
lowed to stay concentrated on the interaction context.
After each dialog, participants has to indicate whether
Experiment dialogs were the following:
they agree the following proposals:
• The speech sequences are correct.
Human greetings
Robot greetings • Answers speed of the robot and the human
Human: "Help me to plan my holidays please!" is correct.
The 43rd Intl. Symp. on Robotics (ISR2012),Taipei, Taiwan, Aug. 29-31, 2012
• The expression of the robot is correct when
listening to human.
• The robot is attentive.
At the interaction end, participant had to give her/his
point of view concerning the following proposal: the
robot is pleasant/nice.
The possible answers were not at all, a little, a lot, no
idea; except for the second proposal: Too slow, slow,
normal, fast, too fast.
Statistical analysis: Data analysis used Minitab
15© software. The Khi-Deux one sample test was used
to find significant answers. The accepted P level was
0.05. Data collected were answers given by parti-
cipants.
Results: Gesture is significantly a little flexible and
natural (50.51%, X²=318.29, df=3, p<0,001), whereas
it was significantly a lot in adequacy with the sentence
content (62.31%, X²=365.03, df=3, p<0,001; Fig. 3).
Moreover, the gesture speed was significantly normal
(66.67%, X²=623.32, df=4, p<0,001; Fig. 3). The
speech sequences were significantly a lot correct
(67.31%, X²=69.57, df=2, p<0,001; Fig. 3). Only
4.81% of participants found that the robot or the hu-
man did not at all answered at the right speed
(X²=50.21, df=2, p<0,001; Fig. 3).
And only 6.73% of them found significantly that ro-
bot expressions are not correct when listening to the
human (X²=31.27, df=2, p<0,001; Fig. 3). Concerning
the robot, participants significantly judged it a lot cred-
ible (60%, X²=353.26, df=3, p<0,001; Fig. 3) and sig-
nificantly a lot attentive (67.31%, X²=64.18, df=2,
p<0,001; Fig. 3). Finally, no one significantly found the
robot unpleasant (X²=13.04, df=2, p=0,001; Fig.3).
B. Discussion
The human-robot interaction has positively been Fig. 3. Robot acceptability results.
A: The gesture is in adequacy with the sentence content.
perceived (see Fig. 3) by participants. Some proposals
B: The gesture seems to be flexible and natural.
did not have good results. Some proposals did not have C: The robot is credible when speaking.
good results. That illustrates the adequacy errors ran- D: The speech sequences are correct.
domly expressed by the robot. For example, its expres- E: Answers speed of the robot and the human is correct.
F: The expression of the robot is correct when listening to human.
sions have not always been judged correct when listen-
F: The robot is attentive.
ing to human. Robot gesture seemed only a few flexible G: The robot is pleasant/nice.
and natural. It is normal because the robot does not
have enough physical capacity and cannot express rich V. CONCLUSION
movements. In despite of the low quality of its actions,
A robot nonverbal behavior has to be in adequacy
the robot was widely judged attentive during the inter-
with its speech in order to increase its perceived sincer-
action and no one judged it was unpleasant.
ity and credibility. But, in a long-term interaction con-
This study showed that human perceived posit-
ively a robot, even if its nonverbal behavior is not occa- text, some rare incoherence does not alter the robot
sionally in adequacy with its speech. credibility and sincerity. It seems that humans can “for-
The robot do not have an object status. Indeed, if an give” a robot to be not perfect. That indicates that hu-
object in not efficient to do what it has to do, human is mans have a kind of feeling for robots. They do not
not anymore interested and throws it away. In the robot consider the robot like an ordinary object. But, con-
case, human judgment seems less severe or strict. The sciously or not, humans personified robots. That shows
robot seems to be a potential social partner for the hu- that the robot can be a social partner for the human.
man because it is accepted in spite of its “defects”. Moreover, we compared our first experiment results
with the virtual agent results showed in [20] in order to
understand the social position of robots compared to
The 43rd Intl. Symp. on Robotics (ISR2012),Taipei, Taiwan, Aug. 29-31, 2012
virtual agents. This comparison is interesting because [10] R. Kirby , J. Forlizzi and R. Simmons, "Affective social robots,
Robotics and Autonomous Systems", Elsevier, , vol 58, n°3, pp.
virtual agents are social partner for humans and inter-
322-332, 2010
act everywhere and whenever with humans. Notice that [11] L. Gong, "How social is social response to computers? The
the robot results are better than virtual agents results function of the degree of anthropomorphism in computer
representations," Computer in Human Behavior, Elsevier, vol 24,
(see Table 1). On average, a robot seems more cred-
n°4, pp. 1494-1509, 2008
ible and sincere than a virtual agent. But, it is not [12] Y. Kim, and S. Shyam Sundar, "Anthropomorphism of computers :
Is it mindful or mindless?", Computers in Human Behavior,
possible to affirm that because it is possible that experi-
Elsevier, 2011
ment has not exactly been the same. Maybe robot [13] C. Breazeal, "Emotive Qualities in Robot Speech, Intelligent
movement had been more explicit than agent move- Robots and Systems". Proceedings. 2001 IEEE/RSJ International
Conference on, IEEE, vol 3, 2001, pp. 1388-1394
ment. However, a new problematic follows from these
[14] M.W. Morris and D. Keltner, "How emotions work : the social
both studies: Is a robot a better social partner than a functions of emotional expression in negotiations, Research in
virtual agent? Our future work will be to answer this organizational behavior", JAI Press, vol 22, n°1, pp 1-50, 2000
[15] C. Breazeal, "Emotion and sociable humanoid robots, International
question. We will realize a study which will compare
Journal of Human-Computer Studies", Elsevier, vol 59, n°1, pp.
the impact of a robot, a computer and a virtual agent on 119-155, 2003
[16] C. Breazeal , "Robot Emotion : A Functional Perspective, Who
the human-machine interaction.
needs emotions?", Oxford University Press. : New York, pp. 271-
TABLE I 310, 2005
COMPARISON BETWEEN AGENT AND ROBOT SINCERITY AND CREDIBILITY [17] P. Ekman et W.V. Friesen, M. O'Sullivan, K. Scherer, "Relative
Importance of Face, Body, and Speech in Judgments of Personality
Apologize JOY
and Affect", American Psychological Association, pp. 270-277,
SINCERITY CREDIBILITY SINCERITY CREDIBILITY
[18] G. Castellano , L. Kessous , and G. Caridakis, "Emotion
Recognition through Multiple Modalities : Face, Body Gesture,
65.00% 70.00% 74.00% 78.00%
Speech, Affect and emotion in human-computer interaction",
AGENT Rather: 39% Rather: 52% Rather: 52% Rather: 52% Springer, pp. 92-103, 2008
[19] T. Tojo, Y. Matsusaka, T. Ishii and T. Kobayashi, "A
Totally:26% Totally: 18% Totally: 22% Totally: 26% conversational Robot Utilizing Facial and Body Expressions,
Systems, Man, and Cybernetics", 2000 IEEE International
97,00% 83,00% 80.00% 72,00%
Conference, IEEE, vol 2, pp. 858-863, 2000
ROBOT Rather: 60% Rather: 48% Rather: 38% Rather: 37% [20] J. Riviere et al, "Expressive Multimodal Conversational Acts for
SAIBA Agents", Intelligent Virtual Agents, Springer, pp. 316-
Totally: 37% Totally: 35% Totally: 42% Totally: 35% 323, 2011
[21] A. Tapus, M. Chetouani, “ROBADOM: The Impact of a Domestic
Robot on Psychological and Cognitive State of the Elderly with
Mild Cognitive Impairment” in 5th CRI (Companion Robotics In-
stitute) Workshop AAL User-Centric Companion Robotics Experi-
ACKNOWLEDGMENT(S)
mentoria, 2011.
[22] M. Heerink, B. Krose, V. Evers, B. Wielinga, 'The influence of a
This work has been supported by French National Robot's Social Abilities on Acceptance by Elderly Users”, Robot
Research Agency (ANR) through TecSan program and Human Interactive Communication, 2006. ROMAN 2006.
The 15th IEEE International Symposium on, pp. 512-526, 2006
(project Robadom n°ANR-09-TECS-012).
[23] V.A. Vanden Abeele, V. Van Rompaey, "Introducing Human-
Thanks to Nhung Nguyen Thuy for her help during
Centered Research to Game Design: Designing Game Concepts for
the experiments. and with Senior Citizens", CHI'06 extended abstracts on Human
factors in computing systems, ACM, pp 1469-1474 2006
[24] A. Tefas, I. Pitas, "Human Centered Interfaces for Assisted
Living", Man-Machine Interactions, Springer, pp 3-10, 2011
VI. REFERENCES
[1] H.D. Lasswell, "The Structure and Function of Communication in
Society". In The Communication of Ideas. , New York : Harper,
pp. 37-51, 1948
[2] C.E. Shannon, W. Weaver, "A Mathematical Model of Commu-
nication". Urbana, IL: University of Illinois Press. 1949
[3] C. Cherry, "On Human Communication". Cambridge, Mass: The
M.I.T. Press. 1957
[4] J. Riley, M. Riley, "Mass communication and the social system".
Sociology Today, pp 537, 1959
[5] D. Picard, "De la communication à l'interaction : l'évolution des
modèles". Communication et Langage, pp. 69-83, 1992,
[6] J. Cosnier, "Communication verbale et Langage", Psychologie
Médicale (Numéro spécial, Ethologie humaine), pp. 2033-2049,
[7] G. Gerbner, "Toward a General Model of Communication". Au-
dio-Visual Communication Review, pp. 171-199, 1956
[8] P. Blanchet, "Linguistique de terrain, méthode et théorie (une ap-
proche ethnosociolinguistique)". Presses Universitaires de Rennes :
Rennes, 2000
[9] M. Grandgeorge "L'intercompréhension et l'acceptabilité dans les
interactions". III conference, University of south Britany, 2011