R. E. Scherr and D. Hammer, “Student Behavior and Epistemological Framing” Page 1 of 22
Submitted to Cognition and Instruction, November 2007
Student Behavior and Epistemological Framing:
Examples from Collaborative Active-Learning Activities in Physics
Rachel E. Scherr and David Hammer
Physics Education Research Group, Department of Physics
University of Maryland, College Park, MD 20742
Questions of participant understanding of the nature of an activity have been addressed in
anthropology and sociolinguistics with the concepts of frames and framing. For example,
a student may frame a learning activity as an opportunity for sensemaking or as an
assignment to fill out a worksheet. The student’s understanding of the nature of the
activity affects what she notices, what knowledge she accesses, and how she thinks to act.
Previous analyses have found evidence of framing primarily in linguistic markers
associated with speech acts. In this paper, we show that there is useful evidence of
framing in easily observed features of students’ behavior. We apply this observational
methodology to explore dynamics among behavior, framing, and the conceptual
substance of student reasoning in the context of collaborative active-learning activities in
an introductory university physics course.
I. INTRODUCTION
Large college physics courses are especially challenging settings for physics instruction. Among
the challenges is the difficulty of providing opportunities for student discussion of physics concepts. For
about twenty years, reform-minded physics professors have been using “tutorials” (McDermott, Shaffer,
& the Physics Education Group at the University of Washington, 1998), worksheets that guide
collaborative active learning in small groups around core conceptual issues identified by research as
essential for students to address. Tutorials can be implemented as a relatively small modification of the
conventional lecture-based course, and there is now a substantial body of evidence that they lead to
substantial improvement in students’ conceptual understanding (Redish & McDermott, 1999).
That evidence, however, is almost exclusively in the form of pre- and post-testing with qualitative
and quantitative examinations. While gains in student scores support researchers’ conjectures regarding
what contributes to student learning, there has been little direct investigation of what happens during the
instructional activities. Meanwhile, these curricula have not led to corresponding gains in scores on
measures of student expectations and epistemologies — how students understand what knowledge,
reasoning, and learning in physics entail. In fact, students in most introductory courses, including those
that use tutorials, tend to come away with evidently less sophisticated views of knowledge and learning in
physics courses (Redish, Saul, & Steinberg, 1998). This seems discrepant: Shouldn’t students who are
apparently more successful at learning also become more aware of what successful learning entails? Why
would experiences that improve conceptual understanding lead to “deterioration” (Redish et al., 1998) of
expectations?
There are several possibilities, some of which give cause for concern. One is that students come
to see introductory physics as detached from everyday experience: surveys at the end of every course in
Redish et al.’s (1998) study indicated students saw physics as less connected to their experience than they
did at the start. Another possibility is that student epistemologies as measured by an explicit survey do not
reflect their epistemologies in contexts of reasoning within the course; responding to a survey is a very
R. E. Scherr and D. Hammer, “Student Behavior and Epistemological Framing” Page 2 of 22
Submitted to Cognition and Instruction, November 2007
different context from reasoning about physical phenomena (Hammer, 1994). Perhaps students’ “practical
epistemologies” (Sandoval, 2005) come to be more sophisticated than the survey detects.
The possibly problematic relationship between students’ conceptual and epistemological learning
motivates us to study students’ work during tutorials in detail. In particular, we hope to learn how they
understand the activity of tutorials with respect to knowledge, reasoning, and learning. What are their
perceptions of its goals, and what methods do they believe will serve them best? In other words, as we
elaborate below, we are interested to study students’ epistemological framing of the activity. To address
the possibility of contextual dependence, we study their work in situ, rather than interrupting it with a
survey or specialized interview.
At the start of this study, the first author set out to formulate a systematic observational protocol:
what could we look for in the video data as evidence of how students understand the activity? Initial
exploration of video data led to the discovery of four distinct patterns of the students’ physical behavior.
In some segments of video, for example, the students are bent over their worksheets, talking in subdued
voices with their hands relatively still; in other segments, they are sitting up straight, looking at each
other, speaking in loud voices, and gesturing prolifically. These clusters of co-occurring behaviors stand
out clearly; having had them described, and with very little training, independent coders achieve 90%
agreement in classifying 5-second video segments into one of four clusters.
Our purpose in this paper is to argue that these different behavioral clusters are evidence of —
and in dynamic interaction with — student epistemologies. Roughly, we will show, the behavioral cluster
of sitting up, speaking clearly and gesturing supports and is supported by a framing of the activity as
discussing each others’ conceptual ideas. In this way, we hope to contribute to research methodology for
the study of student learning, and specifically students’ epistemological framing. As well, we discuss how
this work furthers a resource-based account of knowledge, reasoning, and learning.
We begin with the construct of epistemological framing, which we develop from previous work
on framing and student epistemologies. We then present the behavioral clusters evident in tutorial video
data and our arguments for their connection to epistemological framing.
II. THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK
A. Epistemological framing
Framing is a construct developed in anthropology and linguistics1 to describe how an individual
or group forms a sense of “What is it that’s going on here?” (Bateson, 1972; Goffman, 1986; MacLachlan
& Reid, 1994; Tannen, 1993). To frame an event, utterance, or situation in a particular way is to interpret
it based on previous experience: to bring to bear a structure of expectations about a situation regarding
what could happen, what portions of the information available to the senses require attention, and what
might be appropriate action. For example, monkeys engaged in biting each other are skilled at quickly and
tacitly “deciding” whether the biting is aggression or play (Bateson, 1972). An employee may frame a gift
from her supervisor as kind attention or as unwelcome charity. A student may frame a physics problem as
an opportunity for sensemaking or as an occasion for rote use of formulas.
In school settings, epistemological framing is of particular importance: students form a sense of
what is taking place with respect to knowledge, including, for example, what portions of information and
experience are relevant for completing assignments. Other aspects of framing are important as well,
including social framing, in which students form a sense of what to expect of each other, of their
instructor, and of themselves. For groups of students working together collaboratively, different aspects
of framing interact.
R. E. Scherr and D. Hammer, “Student Behavior and Epistemological Framing” Page 3 of 22
Submitted to Cognition and Instruction, November 2007
Previous analyses have found evidence of framing primarily in linguistic markers associated with
speech acts.2 Nonetheless, because frames “emerge in and are constituted by verbal and nonverbal
interaction” (Tannen, 1993, p. 60), evidence of framing can come in a variety of forms. In our work we
have found a wealth of paraverbal and nonverbal cues of framing, and so have focused on those cues in
addition to linguistic markers. In any social interaction, framing presents a communicative task in which
participants collaboratively establish the nature of their shared activity (Tannen, 1993, p. 66).
Conversational partners both indicate the nature of the activity they’re engaged in by means of verbal and
nonverbal interactions, and observe others’ behavior in order to learn what kind of activity is taking place.
If a speaker makes eye contact, gestures while speaking, and uses an animated voice, she is both
experiencing an engaged discussion herself and displaying to others that they are mutually engaged in a
discussion.3 Participants interpret one another’s signals regarding the nature of the activity by means of
contextualizing cues that include body language (e.g., facial expression, gesture, and posture), prosodic
features of utterances (e.g., pitch variation, loudness, pausing, pacing), and linguistic signals (choice of
vocabulary, level of formality, choice of pronouns) (Goodwin, 2000; Tannen, 1993, p. 62).
For example, in an excerpt from students working on a tutorial we quote and analyze more
extensively below, Jasmin4 says:
In summary, for most people blah blah blah blah... We shouldn’t dwell on this kind of question
and instead focus on learning exactly when... This is like one of the questions.
On video, we observe a close
correspondence between the substance of
Jasmin’s speech and her physical behavior. The
italicized portion of her statement consists of
abbreviated but otherwise verbatim statements
from the worksheet. While she says those words,
Jasmin is leaning over and looking at the
worksheet, using a singsong tone, speaking softly,
using non-words (“blah blah”), and hugging her
arms closely to her body. Her behavior matches
the evidence from her speech, which is that she
frames the activity as form of reading aloud from
a common text. Jasmin’s expectations for this
activity are indicated both physically and verbally:
Figure 1. Nonverbal cues indicate reading from a
When you read, you look at what you are reading.
shared text.
A singsong tone and lack of gestures signal
recitation (Gerwing & Bavelas, 2004; Scherr, in press). If one’s peers are reading the same text, it is
appropriate to speak quietly and abbreviate, since the point is more to indicate what you’re reading than to
insure others’ comprehension.
Then, when Jasmin says, “This is like one of the questions,” she speaks more loudly without the
singsong recital tone, pushes back from the table, and points at her paper with her pencil. These
paraverbal and nonverbal behaviors help her peers to recognize that she’s doing something different now:
Jasmin frames the new activity as commenting on what she’s just read (in particular, pointing out a
similarity between the worksheet task and another question she expects is familiar to her peers). Again,
her behavior matches the substance of what she is saying. Her clear, loud voice denotes original speech
rather than recitation; she indicates that she is now talking about the worksheet (rather than reading from
it) both by pointing to it and by distancing her body from it. One of her partners, Sheryl, recognizes this
change in the moment and knows what she’s referring to: she sits up, looks at Jasmin, and says, “Yeah,
this is question six on the homework.”
R. E. Scherr and D. Hammer, “Student Behavior and Epistemological Framing” Page 4 of 22
Submitted to Cognition and Instruction, November 2007
Humans are continually confronted with interpretive tasks such as the one Sheryl faced in
understanding Jasmin. In order to understand what an utterance means, we have to sense what kind of
activity the utterance is part of: that is, we have to frame the activity. Is it reading, commenting,
explaining, imitating, chatting? We make this interpretation based on verbal, paraverbal, and nonverbal
cues in the interaction – based not only on what people say but also on how they say it – and we think and
act in response to the interpretation we make.
In the examples of behavioral analysis that follow, we articulate a dynamic between readily
observable behavior and epistemological framing. In doing so, we make a methodological case that
observations of physical behavior can provide evidence of epistemological framing, as well illustrating
how epistemological framing can promote particular kinds of behavior.
B. Continuity between cognitive and group dynamics
The other task of this paper is to articulate the dynamic between epistemological framing and the
substance of student thinking. This interplay between students’ behavior, conceptual reasoning, and
epistemological framing calls for theoretical continuity between individual cognition and group dynamics.
A resource model of knowledge and reasoning provides this continuity. Our larger program of
research to develop resource models (Hammer, 2000; Redish, 2004; Scherr, 2007) is in line with
diSessa’s (1993) model of intuitive physics as made up of fine-grained, context sensitive
“phenomenological primitives” and, more generally, with Minsky’s (1986) model of mind as consisting
of manifold cognitive “agents.” Hammer and Elby (2002) proposed modeling intuitive epistemologies in
terms of epistemological resources, rather than using beliefs, theories or stages of development as the
units of cognitive structure. That is, rather than attributing unitary epistemologies to students, such as that
knowledge is received from authority, certain, or simple (see review in Hofer & Pintrich (Eds.), 2002),
this view attributes a variety of resources for thinking about knowledge in different ways at different
times. From early ages, students have resources for thinking of knowledge as received, as inferred from
other knowledge, as invented or as perceived. They have resources as well for understanding a wide
variety of kinds of knowledge, epistemic activities, and stances—facts, stories, lists, rules, suppositions,
doubt, certainty, and so on—resources they may activate or not depending on the particular situation.
Thus a resource-based view of epistemologies accounts for the variability and multiple coherences in
student reasoning, as evident in studies focused on individual students across different contexts (Knight &
Sweeney, under review; Leach, Millar, Ryder, & Sere, 2000; Lising & Elby, 2005) and on groups or
classes (Louca, Elby, Hammer, & Kagey, 2004; Rosenberg, Hammer, & Phelan, 2006; Roth &
Roychoudhury, 1994; Sandoval, 2003).
Redish (2004) proposed the idea of epistemological frames to connect this work to the construct
of framing in linguistics and anthropology. At the level of resources, we take a frame to be a locally
coherent pattern of activations – “coherent” in that the pattern holds together for some length of time and
“local” in that the coherence may be particular to the moment or context (Hammer, Elby, Scherr &
Redish, 2005). This is a dynamic systems account of framing; coherences emerge from the activations
and interactions of many cognitive elements. They may involve resources within an individual’s mind or
across multiple individuals or a group. Framing is defined in the literature in terms of individual
reasoning (Tannen, 1993) and of social dynamics (Goffman, 1986); a resource-based model of framing
smoothly links this discourse dynamics with models of individual cognition (Brown & Hammer, in
press). In the examples of behavioral analysis that follow, we show connections between the substance of
individual students’ thinking and the nature of interactions among members of the group.
R. E. Scherr and D. Hammer, “Student Behavior and Epistemological Framing” Page 5 of 22
Submitted to Cognition and Instruction, November 2007
III. CONTEXT FOR RESEARCH
The tutorials took place as part of a two-semester algebra-based introductory physics course at the
University of Maryland, with approximately 160 students in each lecture section, most of whom are
junior and senior health and life science majors. More than half are female and there is wide ethnic
diversity reflecting the student population of the University of Maryland. The course was reformed as part
of a project titled Learning How to Learn Science: Physics for Bioscience Majors, carried out at the
University of Maryland from 2000-2005. The goal of this project was to determine whether an
introductory physics course could serve as a venue to help biology students learn to see science as a
coherent process and way of thinking, rather than as a collection of independent facts, and whether this
goal could be achieved within the context of a traditional large-lecture class without a substantial increase
in instructional resources. The project adopted reforms that were well-documented to produce conceptual
gains and adapted them to try to create a coherent package that produced epistemological and
metacognitive gains. We hoped that this could be done without sacrificing the conceptual gains associated
with these reforms and this indeed turned out to be the case.5
As part of the course reform, the traditional teaching-assistant-led recitation was replaced with
worksheet-based group-learning activities (“tutorials”) based on the model developed at the University of
Washington (McDermott et al., 1998; McDermott, Shaffer, & Somers, 1994). In the tutorial sessions,
students worked in small groups on worksheets that led them to make predictions and compare various
lines of reasoning in order to build an understanding of basic concepts. Teaching assistants (TAs) served
as facilitators rather than as lecturers: instead of demonstrating problem solutions to students, they
engaged the students in discussions of difficult concepts. Each class section consisted of five groups of
four students each, supervised by two TAs. The tutorials were constructed to emphasize the reconciliation
of everyday, intuitive thinking and experience with formal scientific thinking and to encourage explicit
epistemological discussions about the learning process (Elby, 2001). They are published as part of a
project whose purpose is to provide instructors with the materials and resources to implement similar
tutorials at their own institutions (titled Helping Students Learn How To Learn: Open-Source Physics
Worksheets Integrated With TA Development Resources).
The Helping Students Learn How To Learn project made extensive use of video of students
working on these tutorials, both to assess the effectiveness of the tutorials and to develop resources for
instructors who wanted to implement them. Approximately 380 hours of student tutorial groups were
collected during the Learning How To Learn Science project. From that library, the Helping Students
Learn How To Learn project selected videotapes from a single academic year in which the students rated
the tutorials highly, most of the TAs were members of the Physics Education Research (PER) Group
experienced with tutorial instruction, and the lecturers were PER experts who supported the tutorial part
of the curriculum. From the collection of tapes from that academic year, the project selected seven groups
that observers identified as being “watchable”: They were consistently on-task and talked to each other
frequently.6
For the study reported in this paper, we selected three of the best-tested tutorials from the set of
tutorials published in the Helping Students Learn How To Learn project – tutorials that cover basic topics
common to most introductory physics curricula (Newton’s third law, free-body diagrams, and
electrostatics). We randomly selected three student groups from the groups published with that project.
We represent the student groups with letters (A, B, and C). We analyzed group A doing the Newton’s
third law tutorial and a tutorial on free-body diagrams, group B doing the tutorial on electrostatics, and
group C (in the same classroom and with the same TA as group A) doing the tutorial on Newton’s third
law. The final data set for this study thus consists of four hours of tutorial videotape documenting three
different groups of students working on three different tutorials. In what follows we describe in some
detail our analysis of group A working on the Newton’s third law tutorial, and give one example from our
analysis of group B working on the electrostatics tutorial.
R. E. Scherr and D. Hammer, “Student Behavior and Epistemological Framing” Page 6 of 22
Submitted to Cognition and Instruction, November 2007
In selecting the data for the study presented in this paper, we did not attempt to create a
representative set of videotapes. Instead, our data set represents a small set of examples drawn from a
“best-case scenario”: a carefully designed, well-functioning class with experienced TAs, supportive
instructors, well-tested tutorials, and relatively engaged students.
IV. IDENTIFYING AND INTERPRETING BEHAVIORAL CLUSTERS
As mentioned in the introduction, we have found four distinct patterns of students’ physical
behavior in the data for this study. In what follows we present the method we used to identify these
behavioral clusters and the content of each of the four clusters that we identified.
A. Methodology
In order to identify clusters of behaviors that appear in our data set, coders independently watch
video of small groups of students and note the exact time of changes in the students’ vocal register, affect,
grammar, gesture production, and body language. Having noted changes in behavioral clusters, we then
systematically identify the features of the behavioral cluster: hand motions including gestures (Goldin-
Meadow, 2003), facial aspect, body position and/or movement, vocal register, gaze, and so on. We label
the behavioral clusters with meaning-neutral labels (colors). Identifying the behaviors within each cluster
permits coders to reliably observe when students participate again in a behavioral cluster the coder had
previously identified (i.e., shift back into a certain cluster after engaging in other behaviors).
Coding is performed in real time without transcript. At least two researchers code the changes
independently. Tannen’s (1993) research led us to expect that clusters of behaviors typically change all at
once for an entire group of participants, and that is generally the case in our data. Coders are able to code
the whole group reliably (peers typically share the same behavioral cluster7). The behavioral clusters are
distinct and easy to identify, with 90% inter-rater reliability before discussion, to five seconds’ accuracy.
Working in this way, we identified four clusters of behavior that applied to all three groups we
studied. The fact that the behavioral clusters identified for one group appeared in others as well is a
finding in itself, probably reflecting a set of cultural norms shared by the participants (almost all of whom
are junior and senior university students).
B. Behavioral clusters defined
1. Blue behavioral cluster
In the behavioral cluster that we have labeled “blue,” students’ eyes are primarily on their papers
with brief glances up at their peers. Their bodies lean forward at an angle of about 30° to the vertical,
their hands are mainly at rest (few gestures), and their faces are relatively neutral; Figure 1 is typical.
Their tone of voice is low, quiet, and indistinct, and
their speech consists largely of phrases read from
their worksheets; when they speak to one another,
they briefly and quietly speak with rising intonation,
and answer briefly and quietly with falling
intonation. The initiator often utters an incomplete
sentence that is completed by a peer.
2. Green behavioral cluster
In the “green” behavioral cluster, students
sit straight up and make frequent eye contact with
one another, as shown in Figure 2. Their faces and
Figure 2. Students in the green behavioral cluster
typically sit straight up, make eye contact, and
gesture.
R. E. Scherr and D. Hammer, “Student Behavior and Epistemological Framing” Page 7 of 22
Submitted to Cognition and Instruction, November 2007
voices are animated; they gesture relatively prolifically and engage in clear, loud, original speech.
3. Red behavioral cluster
The “red” behavioral cluster involves the students’ interaction with a teaching assistant, although
students need not exhibit the red behavioral cluster all the time that a TA is present.8 The students speak
little and make eye contact with the TA. They sit straight with their bodies still, and their hands are
relatively quiet except for habitual movements.
4. Yellow behavioral cluster
In the “yellow” behavioral cluster, students giggle or smile, and have hedging or joking tones of
voice. They shift their bodies around in their seats and touch their own faces and hair. Their gaze is
unsettled, moving among peers, papers, and other points in the room. The yellow behavioral cluster
appears to be somewhat less stable than the other three clusters identified in our examples: although it
recurs regularly, it rarely lasts even as much as thirty seconds, whereas the other three clusters often
persist for minutes at a time.
A summary of the features of the four behavioral clusters appears in Table I.
TABLE I. Features of the four observed behavioral clusters.
BLUE GREEN
Eyes on paper or glance at peers Eye contact with peers
Bodies lean forward about 30° Sit up straight
Hands at rest or holding pencil Prolific gestures
Neutral tone and face Animated tone and face
Voice low, quiet, indistinct Voice clear, loud
Read aloud or briefly consult peers Original speech
RED YELLOW
Eye contact with teaching assistant Unsettled gaze
Sit up straight Fidget in seat
Hands quiet or reduced gestures Self-touch, shrugging
Minimal speech Hedging or joking tone; giggling, smiling
C. Behavioral clusters interpreted
We labeled the behavioral clusters with colors, in an attempt to suspend our inclinations to
interpret them while we defined the specific physical behaviors involved. Having arrived at these
definitions and shown inter-rater reliability, we shifted to interpretation; what do these different
behavioral clusters suggest with respect to epistemological framing? For us, as we expect for the students,
this interpretation is automatic and unconscious—it is difficult not to do it. That is reason for attending to
it systematically in analyzing student thinking.
The behaviors associated with the blue and green behavioral clusters indicate very different
framings of the tutorial activity, in spite of the fact that both might loosely be called “working
collaboratively on the tutorial.” In the blue behavioral cluster, the fact that students’ eyes are on their
papers and their bodies lean over the desks sends the message that their main interaction is with the
worksheet. Students’ neutral facial expressions and lack of gestures further suggest that they expect
minimal interaction with their peers; the tutorial activity is, apparently, primarily expected to be
individual at this point. They do glance occasionally at one another, indicating an expectation of “check-
R. E. Scherr and D. Hammer, “Student Behavior and Epistemological Framing” Page 8 of 22
Submitted to Cognition and Instruction, November 2007
ins” with peers from time to time, and they read aloud, indicating that they expect their partners to
coordinate with them. The reading aloud, however, is indistinct, indicating that they expect their peers are
already reading the same thing on their own. The students evidently frame the activity as primarily
completing the tutorial worksheet.
The green behavioral cluster, on the other hand, is characterized by original speech delivered in
relatively loud, animated voices, indicating intellectual and/or emotional engagement. Sitting up straight
and making eye contact with one another, students display an expectation that their attention belongs on
their peers. Their clear speech and prolific gestures indicate further that they expect their peers to pay
attention not only to the fact that they’re talking, but also to the details of what they’re trying to express.
Watching students behave in this way, we understand them and they understand each other to be engaged
in a discussion.
In the red cluster, students display expectations that their attention belongs on the TA, suggesting
that they frame the activity as listening to the TA. Variations of the red behavioral cluster sometimes
include students responding to TA requests for explanations of phenomena that the students had already
discussed among themselves. In those cases, the red behavioral cluster includes students making more
original contributions to the conversation, as well as gesturing. The verbalizations and gestures, however,
have a different quality than those observed in the green frame; the gestures, for example, are often
reduced versions of gestures originally made during the green behavioral cluster (Scherr, in press).
Students’ attention remains primarily on the TA, as indicated by gaze and body orientation. In those
cases, however, it might be more accurate to label the activity as responding to (rather than listening to)
the TA.
The behaviors associated with the yellow behavioral cluster are less straightforward to interpret
than those of the other clusters. On the one hand, they seem to indicate social discomfort or perceived
vulnerability: students avoid direct eye contact, fidget in their seats, and fiddle with objects. On the other
hand, they laugh, smile, and appear to joke with one another, behavior that indicates play. These
characterizations are not mutually exclusive; play is a “nonliteral orientation” (Tannen, 1993, p. 114) that
may be initiated as a cover for actions involving some personal risk. This behavioral ambiguity
corresponds to ambiguity in the communicated substance of student thinking; we describe an example
below. We refer to the frame indicated by the yellow behavioral cluster as the joking frame to include the
sense that students are signaling that the content of their speech should not be taken literally (even though
they may also intend, on some level, to explore the ideas that they express; see below).
Table II details the behaviors characterizing the different behavioral clusters and the expectations
we take as indicated by those behaviors. To be clear, we are describing our interpretations as what we
expect is shared cultural knowledge, shared among students, researchers, and most readers of this journal.
The analyses of specific episodes below will support these interpretations.
V. ANALYSES OF STUDENT BEHAVIOR AND EPISTEMOLOGICAL FRAMING
In what follows we describe in detail some of the shifts in behavioral clusters that we observed in
our analysis of the selected groups and tutorials, and we show that those shifts correspond to shifts in the
substance of students’ reasoning as evident in their speech and gestures. Taken together, the students’
behavior, speech and gestures support interpretations of the students’ epistemological framing.
A. First episode: Group A on Newton’s third law
In the first three minutes of working actively on the tutorial worksheet on Newton’s third law, the
students in group A consider the first several questions that the worksheet poses. The tutorial begins by
stating Newton’s third law and admitting that in some cases it seems not to make sense (an admission that
is well supported by research into student understanding of Newtonian mechanics (Boyle & Maloney,
R. E. Scherr and D. Hammer, “Student Behavior and Epistemological Framing” Page 9 of 22
Submitted to Cognition and Instruction, November 2007
TABLE II. Specific behaviors found in each cluster and expectations likely to be associated with those
behaviors.
BLUE: Worksheet frame GREEN: Discussion frame
Behavior Expectation Behavior Expectation
Hands quiet, Minimal interaction, Prolific gesturing Peers are watching and
face neutral individual activity want to understand
Body leans forward, Attention belongs Animated tone, face Intellectual and/or
eyes on paper on the worksheet emotional engagement
Brief glances at peers “Check-ins” expected Sit up straight, Attention belongs
eye contact on peers
Read aloud Peers coordinate, Clear, original speech Peer interest
without clarity but read on their own in details of thinking
RED: TA frame YELLOW: Joking frame
Behavior Expectation Behavior Expectations
Sit up straight; Attention belongs Giggle, smile, Embarrassment,
eye contact with TA on TA self-touch, fidget, perceived
Reduced gestures Rehashing thinking unsettled gaze vulnerability
1991; Hestenes, Wells, & Swackhamer, 1992; Maloney, 1984)). The worksheet asks students to consider
a heavy truck ramming into a parked, unoccupied car: “According to common sense, which force (if
either) is larger during the collision: the force exerted by the truck on the car, or the force exerted by the
car on the truck?” The instructional activity is described in detail in (Elby, 2001). Figure 3 shows the
tutorial excerpt containing the questions they’re discussing.
In the episode below, “Kendra” (K) expresses a common concern about whether the third law
applies to the situation described; “Alan” (A) and “Jasmin” (J) try to reconcile the third law with the
common-sense intuition that the force by the truck would be larger. “Sheryl” (S) is present but does not
speak in this episode. Italics denote quotations from the tutorial worksheet.
1 A: According to common... 16 J: question...
2 K: Yeah, I think I don’t understand this. 17 A: Is your group’s explanation in Part A
3 A: According to common sense, which 18 similar or different? It’s similar.
4 force, if either is larger during the 19 J: Intuitively, the car reacts more, you’d
5 collision: the force exerted by the truck 20 rather be riding in the truck, so the car
6 on the car, the force exerted by the car 21 feels... is your group’s explanation
7 on the truck? Oh... 22 similar or different?
8 K: I mean, the truck. 23 A: It’s the same. Right. OK, so, according
9 A: The truck, yeah. 24 to Newton’s Third Law, which of the...
25 which of those forces...
10 A: OK, so...
26 K: It says they’re equal, right?
11 J: According to common sense, which force
12 is larger in the collision? Tuh... 27 A: Yeah. Should be equal.
13 A: What? 28 K: I kinda, I could never understand that,
29 but.
14 J: Why are they asking that?
15 A: Oh, OK, the car...
R. E. Scherr and D. Hammer, “Student Behavior and Epistemological Framing” Page 10 of 22
Submitted to Cognition and Instruction, November 2007
30 K (cont.): Does this go against the law 42 J: Maybe they do exert the same force,
31 then, or is it that they are equal but we 43 but the truck doesn’t move.
32 just think it’s the truck? You 44 A: The truck doesn’t move cause I think
33 understand what my question... 45 it’s got the momentum going, and...
34 A: We think it’s the truck because the truck 46 you know.
35 doesn’t move backwards, I think. 47 K: So they, they are doing the same force,
36 Right? Cause if there’s equal and 48 it just doesn’t... it’s just not common
37 opposite forces, the truck... we would, 49 sense.
38 if we actually saw it, we’d think the
50 A: Yeah, it just doesn’t register because we
39 truck would hit the car and go
51 see the truck (K: It looks as being
40 backwards because of the force, but
52 bigger) still moving forward, right,
41 since...
53 right.
The main point of this tutorial is helping you learn more strategies for learning physics
concepts that seem to defy common sense.
I. Newton’s third law and common sense
According to Newton’s third law, when two objects interact,
The force exerted by object A on object B is equal in strength (but opposite in direction)
to the force exerted by object B on object A.
Often, this law makes perfect sense. But in some cases, it seems not to.
Consider a heavy truck ramming into a parked, unoccupied car.
A. According to common sense, which force (if either) is larger during the collision:
the force exerted by the truck on the car, or the force exerted by the car on the truck?
Explain the intuitive reasoning.
B. We’ve asked this question of many students, and a typical response goes like this:
“Intuitively, the car reacts more during the collision. (You’d rather be riding
in the truck!) So the car feels the bigger force.”
Is your group’s explanation in part A similar to or different from this? Explain.
C. According to Newton’s third law, which of those forces (if either) is bigger?
D. Experiment. Is this a case where Newton’s third law doesn’t apply? At the front
of the room, the TA has set up an experiment that simulates a truck ramming a car.
Go do the experiment and record the results here. You can also test whether
Newton’s third law holds for other collisions.
Figure 3. First excerpt of tutorial on Newton’s third law.
1. Behavioral coding
In the first part of the episode (lines 1-29), students lean over their papers and only
briefly glance up at their peers. They rarely gesture, and their faces and voices are relatively
neutral. Their speech consists largely of phrases read from their worksheets. Overall, their
behavior is well-characterized by the blue behavioral cluster. At the moment indicated by the
horizontal line in the transcript (beginning at line 30), however, the students’ behavior changes
R. E. Scherr and D. Hammer, “Student Behavior and Epistemological Framing” Page 11 of 22
Submitted to Cognition and Instruction, November 2007
abruptly to that of the green behavioral cluster: They sit up and make eye contact with one
another, make original statements in clear, loud voices, and gesture relatively prolifically. The
green behavioral cluster continues to the end of the episode.
There are exceptions to the above characterization of student behavior in the episode.
Right at the beginning of the episode (line 2), Kendra’s statement, “Yeah, I think I don’t
understand this,” is unusually clear, original speech compared to the other utterances that take
place shortly before and after it; she is not reading from the worksheet, and her voice is relatively
loud and animated. Other aspects of her behavior, though, remain consistent with the blue
behavioral cluster – for example, she remains bent over her worksheet. Kendra’s statement
appearing immediately before the shift from blue to green, “I could never understand that” (line
28), is similar in both content and tone to the slightly anomalous statement at the start of the
episode. We interpret the momentary contrast between her behavior and the group’s in the next
section.
2. Substance of student thinking
The contrast between the blue and green behavioral clusters is reflected in the substance
of students’ speech. While students are exhibiting the “blue” behaviors, their speech consists
mostly of reading worksheet questions aloud. They offer only brief answers to or comments about
the questions, and they ask only two questions of their own: one to verify an answer (“It says
they’re equal, right?”) and the other focused on the worksheet’s intention (“Why are they asking
that?”).
The green mode begins with Kendra’s question about the physics ideas: does this
situation violate Newton’s third law, or is there some misunderstanding? Alan responds with a
perceptual reason why we might think the truck’s force was larger (it “doesn’t move
backwards”), implicitly asserting that the forces are equal; his explanation is incomplete, perhaps
indicating that he’s constructing it as he speaks. Jasmin adds to Alan’s reasoning by suggesting
that perhaps Newton’s law holds in this situation (“they do exert the same force”) but it’s hard to
tell because “the truck doesn’t move” (by which she might mean that the truck’s motion is
relatively unaffected). Alan gesturally “waves off” the collision’s lack of effect on the truck with
reference to what he seems to identify as a different phenomenon (“momentum”). Kendra tries to
affirm that the vehicles exert equal forces on one another in spite of common-sense convictions to
the contrary. Alan agrees, and asserts that one may be misled by perceiving little change in the
motion of the truck (“it just doesn’t register because we see the truck still moving forward”).
3. Epistemological framing
The changes in behavioral cluster from blue to green correspond with changes in the
substance of the conversation. These two types of evidence together support our identification of
the students’ epistemological framing: They shift from framing their activity as completing the
worksheet to framing it as discussing the ideas. This is a local shift; we expect these two frames
are part of a larger framing of what is taking place in this tutorial session as a whole. Studying
student behavior at this grain-size, we believe, provides insight into that larger framing as well as
into its dynamics, including the coordination of the worksheet and discussion frames.
This identification of a shift in epistemological framing provides a basis for
understanding Kendra’s locally anomalous behavior in lines 2 and 28. Kendra’s initial statement
may have been a bid for the group to change its activity; the group accepted her bid the second
time she made it. We identify her bid for a frame change based entirely on her behaviors (e.g., she
is briefly more animated). The content of her speech, however, is also similar in the two cases:
she denies understanding the situation. Her peers are likely to interpret such a statement as an
R. E. Scherr and D. Hammer, “Student Behavior and Epistemological Framing” Page 12 of 22
Submitted to Cognition and Instruction, November 2007
implicit request for understanding. Such a request is more consistent with framing the activity as
a discussion than with framing it as filling out a worksheet.
B. Second episode: Group A on Newton’s third law, continued
Shortly after the episode described above, the same students consider the next question in
the tutorial. This question is epistemological: it prompts the students to reflect on their own views
of knowledge and learning. The question is reproduced in Figure 4.
II. What to do with the contradiction between common sense and Newton’s third law?
Before moving on to the next part of our Newton’s third law lesson, let’s consider the
contradiction we just found between physics and common sense.
A. In summary, for most people, Newton’s third law contradicts the common-sense intuition
that the car reacts more during the collision. Which one of the following best expresses your
attitude toward this contradiction?
i. We shouldn’t dwell on these kinds of contradictions and should instead
focus on learning exactly when Newton’s third law does and doesn’t apply.
ii. There’s probably some way to reconcile common sense with Newton’s third law,
though I don’t see how.
iii. Although physics usually can be reconciled with common sense,
here the contradiction between physics and common sense is so blatant
that we have to accept it.
Briefly explain why you chose the answer you chose.
B. Discuss your answer with your group. Is there a consensus or do people disagree?
Figure 4. Second excerpt of tutorial on Newton’s third law.
In the episode below, Kendra asserts that in this case the contradiction between physics
and common sense is so extreme that there’s no way to reconcile the two. Jasmin and Alan have
more faith that reconciliation is possible, and try to help Kendra see how the contradiction might
be resolved. A TA, who has been eavesdropping on the conversation, arrives and compliments
Kendra on her willingness to state that she doesn’t believe Newton’s third law can apply to this
situation. Again, statements that students read verbatim from the worksheet are italicized.
1 J: In summary, for most people blah blah 11 (pause)
2 blah blah... We shouldn’t dwell on this 12 K: Why? Six is just an explanation
3 kind of question and instead focus on 13 question?
4 learning exactly when... This is like
14 S: Mmmhmm.
5 one of the questions.
15 K: Oh really?
6 S: Yeah, this was question 6 on the
7 homework. 16 S: That’s why I said that was good.
8 A: Really? 17 A: What’d you put? Two? Three?
9 J: Mmmhmm. 18 S: Huh?
10 A: I haven’t gotten that far. 19 A: Three?
R. E. Scherr and D. Hammer, “Student Behavior and Epistemological Framing” Page 13 of 22
Submitted to Cognition and Instruction, November 2007
20 S: What do you mean? 50 A: OK, the Porsche would get totaled,
21 A: You put three? A? 51 right? But then I’m sure the truck’s...
22 S: Oh yeah. 52 J: Felt the same.
23 A: You put three too? 53 A: The fender probably got like, you know,
54 messed up.
24 K: Hell yeah.
55 K: Scratched?
25 J: I put two.
56 A: But you know, it still did get some
26 K: I’m mad, so I would have picked three.
57 damage, so, I mean, there’s still some...
27 S: Oh, you picked two?
58 K: No.
28 A: Yeah, because, I mean...
59 A: No?
29 J: That’s what he even said in class, there’s
60 K: No.
30 always some way to like...
61 A: It’s not working?
31 A: There’s always some way to explain
62 K: I just have to accept it.
32 K: You think so?
63 TA: So, this is cool. I just heard that you’re
33 J and A: Yeah.
64 having trouble getting, like, you’re
34 K: I don’t think there’s any way that you 65 saying no, I can’t believe that.
35 can explain to me how a massive truck
66 K: Yes.
36 is going to have the same forces on it...
67 TA: I can accept it, but I can’t believe it.
37 J: I mean, I think they do feel the same
68 And it’s cool that you can realize that,
38 force... (K: I just have to accept it), it’s
69 you know, if that’s how it is, but I
39 just one is like...
70 don’t get that. That’s what we’re gonna
40 K: I don’t see it! 71 work on later through this tutorial.
41 J: Just... it just looks like that one got the 72 We’re gonna try to understand how...
42 push. 73 J: Yeah, why that happened.
43 A: Yeah, it always looks like the one gets 74 TA: Yeah.
44 pushed...
75 K: OK.
45 K: No, like...
76 TA: But it’s cool that you could realize that
46 A: I’m sure the truck gets like... 77 “I don’t get that.”
47 K: Think of a Porsche versus a humongous 78 J: It’s cool.
48 truck, (S: I know, that doesn’t make
49 sense) how do you explain to me...?
1. Student behavior
During the first minute of this episode (lines 1-32), students exhibit the blue cluster of
behaviors: eyes primarily on their papers, bodies leaning forward, hands mainly at rest, faces
relatively neutral, and vocal tone low, quiet, and indistinct. There are two brief exceptions, first
when Jasmin says that “this is like one of the questions” (lines 4-5); she speaks more loudly,
glances up at her peers, pushes back from the table, and points at her paper with her pencil. The
second occurs when Kendra says, “Hell yeah” (line 24), a statement that is well outside the norm
of indistinct speech that characterizes the blue behavioral cluster.
The group’s behaviors do not change, however, until a few lines later, when Kendra says,
“You think so?” (line 32). Kendra’s two statements (lines 24 and 32) may again be characterized
as bids for frame change, only the second of which is successful. After line 32, the students
R. E. Scherr and D. Hammer, “Student Behavior and Epistemological Framing” Page 14 of 22
Submitted to Cognition and Instruction, November 2007
participate in behaviors characterizing the green behavioral cluster: they sit up, make eye contact
with one another, gesture relatively prolifically, and have animated faces and voices.
The TA’s arrival at the table precipitates another change, now to behaviors identified
with the red behavioral cluster. The students stop talking; their eye contact is with the TA; they sit
straight with their bodies still; and their hands are relatively quiet except for habitual movements
(Jasmin plays with her necklace, and Alan fiddles with his pen and paper). For part of the time
that the TA is present, Sheryl leans forward and writes on her worksheet, behaviors that are
typical of the blue behavioral cluster rather than the red. However, we recognize her as behaving
outside the designated activity of the moment. In some ways, her contrasting behavior draws our
attention to the dominant group activities, which are those of the red behavioral cluster (Goffman,
1986, Ch. 7).
2. Substance of student thinking
Again, we observe that the substance of students’ discussion changes markedly along
with their behaviors. While the students engage in the behaviors associated with the blue cluster,
the main substance of the students’ speech (other than conferring about the homework) is
consulting one another about their answers to the multiple-choice question (“What’d you put?
Two? Three?”); Jasmin refers to “what he even said in class” as justification for answer 2.
As students shift to the green cluster, Kendra challenges the idea that the collision forces
are in fact equal; she is willing to accept the result as fact, but asserts that it is beyond reason (“I
don’t think there’s any way that you can explain [it] to me”). Alan offers an explanation in terms
of damage to the truck (“the fender probably got messed up”), an explanation which appears to
strike Kendra as weak based on the incredulous tone of her reply (“Scratched?”). Alan
acknowledges that he’s not persuading her (“It’s not working?”) and Kendra states that she’s “just
going to have to accept it.” The dialogue is original, and its substance is both intellectually
demanding and emotionally charged; it is easy to distinguish from the relatively rote exchanges
that take place in the worksheet frame.
When the students shift to the red cluster of behaviors, they say little (as is generally the
case for that cluster), and we have little useful evidence of their reasoning other than their stated
agreement with the TA’s statements.
3. Epistemological framing
Again, we see a correspondence between the students’ behavior and the substance of their
speech. The blue cluster, with its physical indications of a focus on the worksheet, corresponds to
brief comments and questions about the answers and, again, a reference to authority. The green
cluster, with its physical indications of students’ attending to each other, corresponds to
discussion about ideas. Here the transition occurs at line 32, a shift to what “you think” from what
the professor “said in lecture” (29-30). Kendra challenges the idea that the force could be equal,
and the group takes that up as a topic. In this way, the students’ behavior and words support the
claim that they shifted from framing their activity as completing the worksheet to framing it as
discussing ideas.
At a larger grain-size, we might understand this group as framing tutorials in general as a
collection of activities for learning the concepts of the course, of making progress through the
worksheet while monitoring their understanding for gaps or discrepancies that require attention.
That interpretation would be supported by evidence to establish that the patterns in the two
episodes from this group applied more generally across their behavior and conversation in
multiple tutorials.
R. E. Scherr and D. Hammer, “Student Behavior and Epistemological Framing” Page 15 of 22
Submitted to Cognition and Instruction, November 2007
When the TA arrives, there is another shift. The red cluster, with its physical indications
of the students’ receptiveness to the teaching assistant, corresponds to the students providing only
affirmation of his remarks. Their bodies and faces are turned attentively to the TA, and they are
mostly quiet; their minimal speech appears to be entirely aimed at acknowledging the TA’s
speech (“Yes,” “Yeah, why that happened,” and “Okay”). Both behavior and speech indicate that
they are framing the activity as listening to the TA.
C. Third episode: Group B on electrostatics
We turn now to a different group working on a different tutorial, in order to provide an
example of the yellow behavioral cluster, which we did not observe in the above episodes with
group A. Group B was working on the tutorial on electrostatics. Early in the tutorial, students
rubbed a Styrofoam picnic plate with a piece of wool cloth and observed that the plate became
charged as a result. In the following episode, students discuss an exercise requesting them to draw
a diagram showing the charge on the plate and on the cloth after rubbing. The exercise is shown
in Figure 5.
Suppose you were to take one of the foam plates and rub it with a piece of cloth.
Draw a diagram showing the charge on the plate and on the cloth. Use “+” and “–” symbols
to indicate the parts that are charged and the type of the charge. (Can you tell whether the plate
is + or –? If not, just pick one!)
Figure 5. Excerpt of tutorial on electrostatics.
In this episode, student discussion focuses on which object is positive and which is
negative. “Megan” (M) proposes that it’s not possible to tell which is which, and “Vicki” (V)
initially agrees with her. “Dalia” (D) thinks a test probably exists. “Chris” (C) offers a guess that
the plate is positive; when Vicki says she would have guessed the opposite, Chris gives a half-
joking explanation of why the cloth would acquire negative charge more readily than the plate.
The rest of the group is amused by his idea, and Vicki offers to adopt his answer.
1 M: Take one of the foam plates and rub it 16 M: There’s no way, there’s no way to tell.
2 with 17 V: But I don’t think we know right now.
3 V: Take one of the foam plates and rub it 18 M: Yeah.
4 with a piece of cloth.
19 D: Right. That’s what I’m sayin’. All right
5 D: Here’s the plate; here’s the cloth. 20 that’s plus that’s minus. [Drawing.]
6 [Drawing.]
21 C: I mean, I’d say the plate, just guessing,
7 V: How could we tell if it’s positive? 22 I’d say the plate’s positive but I don’t
8 M: Can you tell whether the plate is – I 23 have a reason for that. I’d say that –
9 don’t think you can tell.
24 V: I was going to say the plate was
10 V: I don’t think you can tell. 25 negative, but that was just guessing.
11 C: Is there a rule that dictates which way 26 [Laughter.]
12 the electrons are going to go? 27 C: I like, I would say that, it just seems to
13 D: There’s probably a way to test it, like 28 me that electrons. This [the cloth] looks
14 somehow but – 29 like it could hold electrons to me.
30 [Laughter.]
15 V: I’m sure it depends on the material.
R. E. Scherr and D. Hammer, “Student Behavior and Epistemological Framing” Page 16 of 22
Submitted to Cognition and Instruction, November 2007
31 V: ‘Cause its soft. There’s room for them. 38 C: It’s quilted, you see.
32 [Laughter.] 39 D: It’s like toilet paper. [Laughter from
33 C: It’s soft. [Rubbing the cloth on his face.] 40 group.]
34 Yeah. 41 V: All right we’ll make the plate positive.
35 [Laughter from group,] 42 All right?
36 D: They’d slide off the plate. 43 C: Thank you. Appreciate that. [Laughter.]
37 V: It’s roomier.
1. Student behavior
In the first part of the episode (lines 1-24), students exhibit the behaviors characterizing
the blue behavioral cluster. Just as with group A, the students lean forward, eyes mainly on their
papers, speaking in soft voices with little body movement or gesturing. In this episode, however,
the students do not exhibit behavior in the green cluster. Rather, after line 26 we see the set of
behaviors identified with the yellow behavioral cluster: the students giggle and smile, use
noncommittal or gently mocking tones of voice, move around in their seats, and touch their own
hair or face. Their gaze shifts among peers, papers, and other points in the room.
2. Substance of student thinking
While students exhibit the behaviors in the blue cluster, the students have more of a
conversation than we saw in the episodes above of group A; they do not read as much from the
worksheet. The substance of the conversation, however, is limited to the instructions for what to
do (1-5), and questions and comments about the possibility of answering the worksheet questions.
They ask each other “how can we tell” and “is there a rule that dictates”; they comment about
whether there might be “no way to tell” or venture that “there’s probably a way to test it,” and
offer possible answers without evidence or argument to support them (“I’m sure it depends on the
material”; “that’s plus that’s minus”). Chris, in fact, remarks on not having a reason for his
answer that “the plate’s positive”: “I don’t have a reason for that” (24-27).
When Vicki responds that she was also “just guessing” the opposite answer, her behavior
shifts to the yellow cluster, and the rest of the group shifts with her for the remainder of the
excerpt. During this part of the conversation, the students introduce ideas in the way of
explanation, articulating their reasoning, but with a distinctively ambiguous tone. Chris, for
example, may be serious in his feeling that the texture of the cloth would make it more likely to
“hold electrons,” or he might be making a joke. Such ambiguity can be protective for a speaker
who ventures an idea the group might judge unfavorably; Chris may pose the idea as a joke in
order to incur less risk in sharing it. Similarly, Vicki may share Chris’s intuition as well as his
nervousness about committing to it, or she may be trying to make Chris comfortable by
elaborating on his suggestion (“it’s soft,” “there’s room for them”) – either seriously or in jest.
Dalia chimes in by offering a reason that the plate would not hold electrons so well (“they’d slide
off”), again perhaps in jest or perhaps not. Her claim that the cloth is like “toilet paper,” including
a reference to a feature of popular toilet tissues (“quilted”), is more overtly humorous, but retains
an association with a potentially mechanistic account of the greater electronegativity of some
materials. At the end of the episode, Vicki offers to adopt Chris’s answer, perhaps out of respect
for his reasoning or perhaps in a show of generosity unrelated to his ideas about the physical
phenomena. Chris expresses his appreciation, possibly for her social indulgence of his off-center
behavior as much as for her acceptance of his answer.
R. E. Scherr and D. Hammer, “Student Behavior and Epistemological Framing” Page 17 of 22
Submitted to Cognition and Instruction, November 2007
3. Epistemological framing
Group B’s behavior at the outset of this snippet fits the same pattern we saw with group
A, the blue cluster, and the substance of their conversation also fits the interpretation of
completing the worksheet (or trying to) as their framing of what is taking place.
At Vicki’s admission that she is “just guessing,” the students’ behavior and the substance
of their conversation both change, apparently in response to her lighthearted tone and altered
physical behavior. The students’ subsequent shifting gaze and fidgeting motions correspond to
their expressed awkwardness in not knowing the answers to the worksheet questions. At the same
time, their giggling and smiling, along with the unrealistic content of some of their proposals,
suggest that they are playing. In other words, the students communicate to each other that they
frame their activity here as “joking.” Still, they continue to propose and evaluate ideas: although
they signal that their proposals should not necessarily be taken literally, they may also intend, on
some level, to explore the ideas that they express. A framing of the activity as lighthearted can
give license to play with possibilities students would be reluctant to consider in a conversation
framed as “serious.”
D. Comparison across groups and tutorials
In sum, using data from three groups of four students, we found four distinct behavioral
clusters, all of which involve communication among the participants. They arose from student
behavior, not from top-down categorization, and account for nearly all of the time that students
spend engaged in the collaborative active-learning activities under study. The same behavioral
clusters were identified for all four groups, suggesting that the four frames indicated by the
behavioral clusters are common to many tutorial experiences. Tables I and II summarize the
features of each behavioral cluster we identified.
1. Timelines of behavioral clusters for tutorial groups in class periods
Figure 6a depicts the timeline of group A’s work on the Newton’s third law tutorial,
including the two episodes described above. The length of a color band represents the amount of
time the group evidenced that behavioral cluster and the pie chart shows the fractions of
cumulative time for each cluster during small group work. The gray band represents time in
which there was no small-group interaction (e.g., a demo was performed for the class). This level
of depiction allows simple comparisons across groups and tutorials. For example, Figure 6b is of
group B doing a tutorial on electrostatics (one episode of which is described above); Figure 6c
depicts group C working in the same class as group A, on the same tutorial (Newton’s third law);
and 6d is of group C working on a tutorial on free-body diagrams.
As Figure 6 illustrates, different groups and different activities show different patterns of
behavioral clusters in the course of a class. Group A, for example, spends about 50% of its time
in the green behavioral cluster during the Newton’s third law tutorial and about 30% in the blue
(Figure 6a); the pattern is similar for Group B doing the electrostatics tutorial (Figure 6b).
However, Group C, doing the third law tutorial, spends only 20% of its time in the green
behavioral cluster and about 65% of its time in the blue (Figure 6c). Group C shows a different
pattern of behavioral clusters in another tutorial (on free-body diagrams), spending about a third
of the time in each of the blue and green behavioral clusters (Figure 6d). The yellow behavioral
cluster accounts for only a small fraction of each group’s time or, in one case, does not appear at
all.
R. E. Scherr and D. Hammer, “Student Behavior and Epistemological Framing” Page 18 of 22
Submitted to Cognition and Instruction, November 2007
Figure 6. Timelines of behavioral clusters for tutorial groups in four different class
periods, showing blue, green, red, and yellow behavioral clusters. Gray areas represent
times in which there was no small-group interaction (e.g., a demo was performed for
the class). (a) Group A, tutorial on Newton’s third law; (b) Group B, tutorial on
electrostatics; (c) Group C (same classroom and TA as group A), tutorial on Newton’s
third law; (d) Group C, tutorial on free-body diagrams.
2. Correlation between green behavioral cluster and mechanistic reasoning
In addition to closely analyzing the interaction between student behavior and the
substance of conversation, as illustrated above, we are examining the data for statistical
correlations. Specifically, we have looked for correlation between the green behavioral cluster
(discussion frame) and reasoning about the causal mechanisms that underlie natural phenomena.
As defined by Russ, Scherr, Hammer, and Mikeska (under review), mechanistic reasoning about
a physical phenomenon involves several elements: describing the target phenomenon, identifying
setup conditions, identifying entities, identifying actions, identifying properties of entities,
identifying the organization of entities, and “chaining” (verbally expressed logical inference).
Russ et al. (under review) developed a coding scheme based on these elements as a systematic
means of analyzing student conversation for evidence that they are reasoning about physical
mechanism. In that scheme, the most convincing evidence of mechanistic reasoning is chaining.
For example, in the first episode above, at lines 36-40, Alan says “Cause if there’s equal and
opposite forces, the truck... we would, if we actually saw it, we’d think the truck would hit the car
and go backwards because of the force.” Alan’s statement contains evidence that he is reasoning
about how the collision works: specifically in the categories of entities (the truck and the car),
activities (the truck would hit the car, the truck would go backwards), and chaining, in the
student’s inference that if the forces were equal and opposite then the truck would go backwards
as a result of the collision — and therefore the forces cannot be equal and opposite.9
In a pilot project (Conlin, Gupta, Scherr, & Hammer, 2007), twenty-minute videoclips
from six tutorial sessions chosen at random were coded for behavioral clusters (without transcript,
as described above). In a separate analysis, the sessions were transcribed and coded for (1)
instances of some level of mechanistic reasoning and (2) instances of chaining. Two independent
coders agreed on 90% of the behavior codes and 87% of the mechanistic reasoning and chaining
codes before discussion. The codes for behavior, mechanistic reasoning, and chaining were then
matched for each five seconds of the tutorial session. Looking across groups, 81% of the chaining
occurred during the discussion frame (green behavioral cluster). This result further validates our
observation that the discussion frame consists primarily of substantive conversation about physics
ideas.
Our conjecture is that this correlation reflects a consonance between students’ framing
their activity as discussion and their reasoning about causal mechanisms, a consonance that may
occur for several reasons. First, gesturing can help individuals reason about mechanisms, by
performing simulations or depictions of the entities and their organization and activity; second
R. E. Scherr and D. Hammer, “Student Behavior and Epistemological Framing” Page 19 of 22
Submitted to Cognition and Instruction, November 2007
and similarly, they provide a means for communicating those ideas to others (Scherr, in press).
For these reasons, a conversational mode that affords gesturing may be more conducive to
mechanistic reasoning, and students interested to discuss mechanism may be more inclined to
enter such a mode. Another possibility is that the correlations we find between the discussion
frame and mechanistic reasoning may reflect more simply the fact that to engage in chaining
requires more extended conversational turns and more extended attention by conversational
partners. In any case, behaviors in the green cluster are associated with scientifically valuable
reasoning and interactions, and the absence of those behaviors may be cause for concern.
VI. SUMMARY AND QUESTIONS FOR FUTURE RESEARCH
The behavioral clusters identified in the above analysis are evidence of students’
epistemological framing. The behavioral cluster labeled “green,” for example, which includes
animated speech, eye contact, and gesturing, indicates a framing of the activity as discussing one
another’s conceptual ideas. Those behaviors not only display that type of discussion – they also
promote it. The association between framing and behavior advances the possibilities for
identifying students’ framing of collaborative active-learning activities. The methodology
presented is powerful, reliable, and efficient, and adds substantially to previous analysis methods
based on student speech acts.
Resource-based views of epistemological framing encourage theoretical continuity
between individual and group (i.e., cognitive and discourse) dynamics. A frame is a locally
coherent pattern of activations that emerges from the interactions of many cognitive elements;
these elements may be within an individual’s mind or across multiple individuals, and the
coherences may be within an individual’s reasoning or among members of a group. Our approach
illustrates an analyzable, codable dynamic between the way people behave in groups and the
substance of their thinking. For example, a student who makes a kinesthetically evocative gesture
may be at once using an intuitive sense of mechanism and, at the same time, communicating a
metamessage (Tannen, 1993) about what sort of conversation is taking place. Another student
may move from blue to green behaviors, stimulating others to follow her lead (or not). To the
extent that our account connects students’ behavior, conceptual reasoning, and epistemological
framing, it integrates individual cognition with group dynamics, and makes visible the interplay
between conceptual reasoning and views of knowledge and learning at the level of both the
individual and the group.
This analysis methodology makes a range of research questions empirically accessible.
The examples above suggest many such questions: What frames occur in various classroom
activities? In which frames do certain desirable activities (including cognitive activities) occur?
What precipitates shifts into (or out of) desirable frames? Do particular learning activities have
characteristic frames associated with them? Do student groups have characteristic framings of
particular activities that they undertake together? Does a group’s framing of particular activities
change over the course of an hour, or a term? How might we best promote the substantive student
discussion that we believe is essential to high-quality physics instruction? How can we account
for the observed deterioration in student expectations and epistemologies?
The question of how students frame tutorials does not appear to have a simple answer.
The methodology we have described focuses on framing and shifts of framing in the immediate
moment, and it provides evidence of both variability and local coherences. Within tutorial
sessions, we are developing case studies of the particular dynamics by which a group moves into
or out of framing the immediate activity as a discussion. These case studies may shed light on the
reasons for the correlations we noted between the discussion frame and mechanistic reasoning.
They may also shed light on how students’ framing of tutorials as a whole influences their
R. E. Scherr and D. Hammer, “Student Behavior and Epistemological Framing” Page 20 of 22
Submitted to Cognition and Instruction, November 2007
moment-to-moment activity, e.g. does the fact that group C spends so little time in discussion
reflect the students’ framing the tutorial session more as completing a task than as sensemaking?
Ultimately, we are interested in framing at the larger scale: that is, in students’ sense of “what is it
that’s going on here” in the tutorial as a whole. The timelines presented in Figure 6 present some
evidence of overall patterns: some groups spend the majority of some tutorials in animated
discussion, while for other groups and tutorials, the greater part of the time is spent concentrating
on the worksheet. Looking across sessions, we are studying how patterns of behavioral clusters
may vary for a particular group over the course of a term (e.g., does group C come to spend more
time in discussions during tutorial sessions later in the semester?) or whether the patterns vary by
tutorial (e.g., does one version of the third law tutorial lead to more student discussion?) But these
timelines clearly provide only a limited view, and “time on task” may not indicate the importance
of a particular framing to the experience of tutorials in general. Some activities might have, for
example, a short duration but high intensity, in the sense of having great importance for the
participants.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We are grateful to Andrew Elby, E. F. Redish, and the other members of the Physics
Education Research Group at the University of Maryland for substantive discussions of this
research. Raymond Hodges, Ayush Gupta, and Luke Conlin served as additional coders for inter-
rater reliability. This work was supported in part by the National Science Foundation (REC
0440113).
1 Frames, scripts, and schemata are related and overlapping terms in the fields of linguistics,
artificial intelligence, cognitive psychology, social psychology, sociology, anthropology, and
other disciplines. An overview and history of the uses of these related terms appears in Ch. 1 of
Tannen (1993).
2 Linguistic markers include omissions, repetitions, negatives, modals, etc. and are described in
Ch. 1 of Tannen (1993).
3 There is the possibility of the speaker acting as though she is engaged in a lively discussion
while in fact not experiencing genuine engagement. For frame analysis in the context of acting,
see Goffman (1986).
4 Students’ names are pseudonyms.
5 This turns out to be the case with epistemological state measured by pre-post MPEX and
conceptual state measured by fractional gains on the FCI. Strong gains were obtained in both
measures. These results will be documented elsewhere.
6 These groups were not the only “watchable” groups; some videotaped groups were not
classified. These groups included average, above-average, and below-average students as
measured by their overall performance in the course. “Watchable” groups were not typically
better than average or more successful in mastering the conceptual content of the tutorials, except
to the extent that on-task groups tend to do better than off-task groups.
7 This result is partially to be expected: since peers’ activity together is mutually constructed, it is
natural that they should share their framing of a given situation and therefore participate in the
same behavioral cluster. On the other hand, it seems possible that individuals could “opt out” of
the framing mutually constructed by the others in the group. This paper reports brief occurrences
of such opting-out or mismatch of framings. However, the great majority of the time, peers share
the same behavioral cluster.
8 Sometimes, for example, they exhibit “green” behaviors with a TA nearby or even joining the
discussion.
R. E. Scherr and D. Hammer, “Student Behavior and Epistemological Framing” Page 21 of 22
Submitted to Cognition and Instruction, November 2007
9 Her reasoning is not correct; see Russ & Hutchison (2006) for a discussion about correctness
and mechanistic reasoning.