1v2502100/tam-dnoc:viXra
Superfluid Helium 3:
Link between Condensed Matter Physics and Particle Physics∗
D. Vollhardt1 and P. W¨olfle2
1Theoretical Physics III, Center for Electronic Correlations and Magnetism,
University of Augsburg, 86135 Augsburg, Germany
2Institut fu¨r Theorie der Kondensierten Materie, Universit¨at Karlsruhe, D-76128 Karlsruhe, Germany
(November26, 2024)
The discovery of thesuperfluidphases of Helium 3 in 1971 opened thedoorto oneof themost
fascinatingsystemsknownincondensedmatterphysics. SuperfluidityofHelium3,originatingfrom
pair condensation of Helium 3 atoms, turned out to be the ideal testground for many fundamental
concepts of modern physics, such as macroscopic quantum phenomena, (gauge-)symmetries and
their spontaneous breakdown, topological defects, etc. Thereby the superfluid phases of Helium 3
enriched condensed matter physics enormously. In particular, they contributed significantly – and
continue to do so – to our understanding of various other physical systems, from heavy fermion
and high-T c superconductors all the way to neutron stars, particle physics, gravity and the early
universe. A simple introduction into thebasic concepts and questions is presented.
PACS numbers: 67.57.-z
I. THE QUANTUM LIQUIDS 3HE AND 4HE
There are two stable isotopes of the chemical element Helium: Helium 3 and Helium 4, conventionally denoted
by 3He and 4He, respectively. From a microscopic point of view, Helium atoms are structureless, spherical particles
interacting via a two-body potential that is well understood. The attractive part of the potential, arising from
weak van der Waals-type dipole (and higher multipole) forces, causes Helium gas to condense into a liquid state at
temperatures of 3.2 K and 4.2 K for 3He and 4He, respectively, at normalpressure. The pressure versus temperature
phase diagrams of 3He and 4He are shown in Fig. 1. When the temperature is decreased even further one finds that
the Helium liquids, unlike all other liquids, do not solidify unless a pressure of around 30 bar is applied. This is the
firstremarkableindicationofmacroscopicquantumeffects inthese systems. The originofthis unusualbehaviourlies
in the quantum-mechanicaluncertainty principle, which requires that a quantum particle can never be completely at
rest at given position, but rather performs a zero-point motion about the average position. The smaller the mass of
the particleandthe weakerthe binding force,the strongertheseoscillationsare. Inmostsolidsthe zero-pointmotion
isconfinedtoasmallvolumeofonlyafractionofthe lattice-cellvolume. InthecaseofHelium, however,twofeatures
combine to preventthe formationof a crystalline solid with a rigid lattice structure: (i) the strong zero-pointmotion
arisingfromthesmallatomicmass(Heliumisthesecond-lightestelementintheperiodictable);and(ii)theweakness
of the attractive interaction due to the high symmetry of these simple atoms. It is this very property of Helium
– of staying liquid – that makes it such a valuable system for observing quantum behavior on a macroscopic scale.
Quantumeffects arealsoresponsibleforthestrikinglydifferentbehaviorsof4Heand3He atevenlowertemperatures.
Whereas 4He undergoes a second-order phase transition into a state later shown to be superfluid, i.e. where the
liquid is capable of flowing through narrow capillaries or tiny pores without friction, no such transition is observed
in liquid 3He in the same temperature range (Fig. 1). The properties of liquid 3He below 1 K are nevertheless found
to be increasingly different from those of a classicalliquid. It is only at a temperature roughly one thousandth of the
transition temperature of 4He that 3He also becomes superfluid, and in fact forms several superfluid phases, each of
which has a much richer structure than that of superfluid 4He.
The striking difference in the behaviors of 3He and 4He at low temperatures is a consequence of the laws of
quantum theory as applied to systems of identical particles,i.e. the laws of quantum statistics. The 4He atom, being
composedofanevennumberofelectronsandnucleons,hasspinzeroandconsequentlyobeysBose-Einsteinstatistics.
In contrast, the 3He nucleus consists of three nucleons, whose spins add up to give a total nuclear spin of I = 1,
makingthe totalspinofthe entire3He atom 1 aswell. Consequentlyliquid 3He obeysFermi-Dirac statistics. Soit is
To be published in Acta Physica Polonica B [Proceedings of the XL Jubilee Cracow School of Theoretical Physics on
”Quantum Phase Transitions in High Energy and Condensed Matter Physics”; 3-11 June, 2000, Zakopane, Poland]
thetinynuclearspin,burieddeepinsidetheHeliumatom,thatisresponsibleforallthedifferencesofthemacroscopic
properties of the two isotopes.
Since in a Bose system single-particle states may be multiply occupied, at low temperatures this system has a
tendency tocondenseinto the lowest-energysingle-particlestate (Bose-Einsteincondensation). Itis believedthatthe
superfluid transition in 4He is a manifestation for Bose-Einstein condensation. The all-important qualitative feature
oftheBosecondensateisitsphaserigidity,i.e. thefactthatitisenergeticallyfavourableforthe particlestocondense
into a single-particle state of fixed quantum-mechanical phase, such that the global gauge symmetry spontaneously
broken. As a consequence, macroscopic flow of the condensate is (meta-)stable, giving rise to the phenomenon of
superfluidity. In a Fermi system, on the other hand, the Pauli exclusion principle allows only single occupation of
fermionstates. ThegroundstateoftheFermigasisthereforetheoneinwhichallsingle-particlestatesarefilledupto
alimitingenergy,theFermienergyE . AspredictedbyLandau1 andlaterverifiedexperimentally(forareviewsee2),
the properties of 3He well below its Fermi temperature T =E /k ≈1K are similar to those of a degenerate Fermi
gas. In particular the formation of a phase-rigid condensate is not possible in this framework. Until the mid-1950s
a superfluid phase of liquid 3He was therefore believed to be ruled out. On the other hand, it is most remarkable
thatthe propertyofsuperfluidity3,4 wasindeedfirstdiscoveredexperimentallyina Fermi system,namely thatofthe
“liquid” of conduction electrons in a superconducting metal5. The superfluidity of 4He was only found more than 25
years later.
II. PAIR CONDENSATION IN A FERMI LIQUID
As demonstrated by Bardeen,Cooper and Schrieffer (BCS) in 19576 the key to the theory of superconductivity is
theformationof“Cooperpairs”,i.e. pairsofelectronswithoppositemomentumkandspinprojectionσ: (k↑,−k↓).
In the case of conventional superconductors the Cooper pairs are structureless objects, i.e. the two partners form a
spin-singlet state in a relative s-wave orbital state. These Cooper pairs have total spin zero and may therefore be
lookeduponinawayascompositebosons,whichallhavethesamepairwavefunctionandareallinthesamequantum-
mechanical state. In this picture the transition to the superconducting state corresponds to the Bose-condensation
of Cooper pairs, the condensate being characterized by macroscopic quantum coherence. The concept of Bose-
Einstein condensation is appealing since key features of superconductivity like the Meissner effect, flux quantization
and superfluid mass currents in conventional superconductors are naturally implied. Nevertheless, since the theory
of conventional superconductivity is firmly based on BCS theory, the concept of a Bose-Einstein condensation of
Cooper pairs traditionally did not receive much attention (or was even considered to be downright wrong). Within
the context of superfluid 3He, this notion was taken up again by Leggett7,8, who argued that tightly bound Bose-
Einstein-condensedmolecules onthe one handand Cooper pairs onthe other may be viewedas extreme limits of the
same phenomenon. This approach, which was quite provocative at the time, is now well
accepted9–11.
However, the
originalidea that at T Cooper pairs formand automatically Bose-condensehas been revisedsince then. Apparently
Cooper pair formation is not a separate phase transition but is rather a matter of thermal equilibrium: for any finite
coupling there exists a finite density of pairs even above T , although in conventional superconductors – and even in
highT materials–theirdensityisnegligiblysmall. Atweakcoupling(BCSlimit)the condensationtemperatureand
the (not well-defined) temperature of pair formation practically coincide; they become different only at very strong
coupling (Bose limit). Similar ideas are also implicit in several theoretical approaches to high-T superconductivity.
While in free space an attractive force has to be sufficiently strong to bind two electrons, inside the metal the
presence ofthe filled Fermi seaof conductionelectrons blocks the decayof a Cooper pair,so that anarbitrarily small
attractiveinteractionleads to the formationofstableCooperspairs. The attractiveinteractionbetweenthe electrons
ofa Cooper pair in a conventionalsuperconducting metalis due to the exchangeofvirtualphonons (electron-phonon
interaction). If the phonon-mediated interaction is strong enough to overcome the repulsive Coulomb interactions
between the two electrons then a transition into a superconducting state may occur. On the other hand, any other
mechanismleadingto attractionbetweenelectronsatthe Fermisurfaceis equallywellsuited forproducingsupercon-
ductivity.
Given the success of the BCS theory in the case of superconductivity, it was natural to ask whether a similar
mechanismmightalsoworkforliquid3He. Sincethereisnounderlyingcrystallatticeintheliquidthatcouldmediate
the attractive force, the attraction must clearly be an intrinsic property of the one-component 3He liquid itself. The
main feature of the interatomic 3He potential is the strong repulsive componentat shortdistances, and the weak van
der Waals attraction at medium and long distances. It soon became clear that, in order to avoid the hard repulsive
coreandthusmakeoptimaluseoftheattractivepartofthepotential,the3HeatomswouldhavetoformCooper-pairs
inastateofnonzero relativeangularmomentuml. InthiscasetheCooper-pairwavefunctionvanishesatzerorelative
distance, thus cutting out the most stronglyrepulsive partof the potential. In a complementary classicalpicture one
might imagine the partners of a Cooper pair revolving about their centre of gravity, thus being kept away from each
other by the centrifugal force.
When the superfluid phases of 3He were finally discovered in 1971 at temperatures of about 2.6 mK and 1.8 mK,
respectively, by Osheroff, Richardson and Lee12, in an experiment actually designed to observe a magnetic phase
transition in solid 3He, the results came as a great surprise.
III. THE SUPERFLUID PHASES OF 3HE
Soon after the discovery of the phase transitions by Osheroff et al.12 it was possible to identify altogether three
distinct stable superfluid phases of bulk 3He ; these are referred to as the A, B and A1 phases. In zero magnetic
field only the A and B phases are stable. In particular, in zero field the A phase only exists within a finite range of
temperatures,aboveacriticalpressureofabout21bar. Henceitsregionofstabilityinthepressure-temperaturephase
diagram has a roughly triangular shape as shown in Fig. 1a. The B phase, on the other hand, occupies the largest
part of this phase diagramand is found to be stable down to the lowest temperatures attained so far. Application of
an external magnetic field has a strong influence on this phase diagram. First of all, the A phase is now stabilized
downtozeropressure. Secondly,anentirelynewphase,theA1 phase,appearsasanarrowwedgebetweenthenormal
state and the A and B phases.
Owing to the theoretical work on anisotropic superfluidity that had been carried out before the actual discovery
of superfluid 3He, progress in understanding the detailed nature of the phases was very rapid. This was clearly also
due to the excellent contact between experimentalists and theorists, which greatly helped to develop the right ideas
at the right time; see the reviews by Leggett14, Wheatley15, and Lee and Richardson16. A comprehensive discussion
ofthe superfluidphases of3He with a veryextensivelist ofreferencescanbe found inour book13 whichalsoprovides
most of the material presented in this article.
In particular, it fairly soon became possible to identify the A phase and the B phase as realizations of the states
studied previously by Anderson and Morel17 and Balian and Werthamer18, respectively. Therefore the A phase is
described by the so-called“Anderson-Brinkman-Morel”(ABM) state, while the B phase is described by the “Balian-
Werthamer” (BW) state. Consequently, “A phase” and “ABM state” are now used as synonyms; the same is true in
the case of “B phase” and “BW state”.
Althoughthe threesuperfluidphasesallhaveverydifferentproperties,they haveoneimportantthing incommon:
the Cooper pairs in all three phases are in a state with parallel spin (S = 1) and relative orbital angular momentum
l = 1. This kind of pairing is referred to as “spin-triplet p-wave pairing”. In contrast, prior to the discovery of the
superfluid phases of 3He, Cooper pairing in superconductors was only known to occur in a state with opposite spins
(S = 0)andl =1, i.e. in a “spin-singlets-wavestate”. It shouldbe notedthat Cooper pairsin a superconductorand
in superfluid 3He are therefore very different entities: in the former case pairs are formed by point-like, structureless
electronsand are sphericallysymmetric, while in the case of3He Cooper pairsare made of actualatoms (or rather of
quasiparticles involving 3He atoms) and have an internal structure themselves.
A. The Cooper pair wave function
Quantum-mechanically,a spin-tripletconfiguration(S =1)oftwo particleshas threesubstates with differentspin
projection S . They may be represented as |↑↑i with S =+1,2
with S =0, and |↓↓i with S =−1.
The pair wave function Ψ is in general a linear superposition of all three substates, i.e.
where ψ1,+(k),ψ1,0(k) and ψ1,−(k) are the three complex-valued amplitudes of the respective substates. In the case
of a superconductor, where S = 0 and l =0, the pair wave function is much simpler, i.e. it is given by only a single
with a single amplitude ψ0.
So far we have only taken into account that, since S = 1, there are three substates for the spin. The same is
of course true for the relative orbital angular momentum l = 1 of the Cooper pair, which also has three substates
= 0,±1. This fact is important if we want to investigate the amplitudes ψ1,+(k) etc. further. They still contain
the complete information about the space (or momentum) dependence of Ψ. The pair wave function Ψ is therefore
characterizedbythreespinsubstatesandthreeorbitalsubstates,i.e. byaltogether3×3=9substateswithrespectto
thespinandorbitaldependence. Eachoftheseninesubstatesisconnectedwithacomplex-valuedparameter. Herewe
seetheessentialdifferencebetweeenCooperpairswithS =l=0(conventionalsuperconductors)andS =l =1(3He):
their pair wave functions are very different. In the former case a single complex-valued parameter is sufficient for
its specification, in the latter case of superfluid 3He nine such parameters are required. This also expresses the fact
that a Cooper pair in superfluid 3He has an internal structure, while that for a conventional superconductor does
not: because l =1, it is intrinsically anisotropic. This anisotropy may conveniently be described by specifying some
direction with respect to a quantization axis both for the spin and the orbital component of the wave function.
In order to understand the novelproperties of superfluid 3He, it is therefore important to keep in mind that there
aretwocharacteristicdirectionsthatspecifyaCooperpair. Hereliesthesubstantialdifferencefromasuperconductor
andtheoriginofthe multitude ofunusualphenomenaoccurringinsuperfluid3He: thestructureoftheCooperpairis
characterizedby internal degrees of freedom. Nevertheless,in both casesthe superfluid/superconductingstate can be
viewed as the condensation of a macroscopic number of these Cooper pairs into the same quantum-mechanicalstate,
similar to a Bose-Einstein condensation, as discussed above.
IV. ORDER PARAMETER AND BROKEN SYMMETRY
In the normal liquid state the Cooper pair expectation value is zero. Obviously in the superfluid a new state of
orderappears,whichspontaneously sets in atthe criticaltemperature T . This particulartransitionfromthe normal
fluid to the superfluid, i.e. into the ordered state, is called “continuous”, since the condensate – and hence the state
of order – builds up continuously. This fact may be expressed quantitatively by introducing an “order-parameter”
that is finite for T <T and zero for T ≥T .
Ferromagnets: A well-knownexample of such a transition is that from a paramagnetic to a ferromagnetic state
of a metal when the system is cooled below the Curie temperature. In the paramagnetic regime the spins of the
particles are disordered such that the average magnetization hMi of the system is zero. Mathematically speaking,
the magnetization M is a real three-component vector. Invariance in the paramagnetic phase under arbitrary global
rotations in the three-dimensional spin space implies that the spin system is invariant under a symmetry group
G = SO(3). (For an introduction into the mathematical description of broken symmetries by group theory see
Ref.13). By contrast, in the ferromagnetic phase the spins are more or less aligned and hMi is thus finite. In this
case the system exhibits long-range order of the spins. Clearly, the existence of a preferred direction M of the spins
implies that the symmetry of the ferromagnet under spin rotations is reduced (“broken”) when compared with the
paramagnet: thedirectionsofthespinsarenolongerisotropicallydistributed,andthesystemwillthereforenolonger
beinvariantunderthefullspinrotationgroupG=SO(3). So,intheferromagneticphasethesystemisonlyinvariant
underrotationsabouttheaxisM,correspondingtothegroupofrotationsH =U(1)–asubgroupofSO(3);H iscalled
the remaining symmetry in the ferromagnetic phase. This phenomenon is called “spontaneously broken symmetry”;
it is of fundamental importance in the theory of phase transitions. It describes the property of a macroscopicsystem
(i.e., a systemin the thermodynamic limit) that is in a statethat does nothave the full symmetry ofthe microscopic
dynamics. The degree of ordering is quantified by |hMi|, the magnitude of the magnetization. Hence |hMi| is called
the “order parameter” of the ferromagnetic state.
BCS superconductors and superfluid 4He: The concept of spontaneously broken symmetry also applies to
superconductors and superfluids. Here the order parameter measures the existence of Cooper pairs and is given by
the probability amplitude for a pair to exist at a giventemperature. In the case of conventionalsuperconductorsand
superfluid 4He the order parameter is givenby a single complex parameter ∆=∆0eiφ, with amplitude ∆0 and phase
(”gauge”) φ. Above T , in the normal phase, the system is invariant under an arbitrary change of the phase φ→φ,
i.e. under a gauge transformation. This gauge symmetry is due to the fact that the interparticle forces conserve
particle number, and is equivalent to the symmetry group G = U(1). Below T , when Cooper pairs have a finite
expectationvalue suchthat particle number is no longerconserved,a particularvalue ofφ is spontaneouslypreferred
and the U(1) symmetry is completely broken.
Gauge symmetry is spontaneously broken in any superfluid or superconductor. In addition, in an odd-parity
pairing superfluid, as in the case of 3He, where l = 1, the pairs are necessarily in a spin-triplet state, implying that
rotationalsymmetryinspinspaceisbroken,justasinamagnet. Atthesametime,the anisotropyoftheCooper-pair
wave function in orbital space calls for a spontaneous breakdown of orbital rotation symmetry, as in liquid crystals.
All three symmetries are therefore simultaneously broken in superfluid 3He. What then are the order parameter and
the spontaneously broken symmetries of superfluid 3He?
A. The order parameter and symmetry group describing superfluid 3He
Owing to the fact that the Cooper pair wave function of superfluid 3He is complex and has a spin-triplet (S =1),
p-wave(l=1)structurewith3×3=9substatestheorderparameterdescribingthesuperfluidphasemaybewrittenas
a3×3matrix A with complexcomponents. Here µ=1,2,3refersto spinspace andj=1,2,3to orbital(i.e. k-) space.
Obviously this order parameter has a considerably more complicated structure than conventional order parameters.
If we only consider the interactions responsible for the formation of the condensed state then the free energy of
the system has to be invariant under separate three-dimensional rotations in spin space, in orbital space and under
a gauge transformation. Hence the symmetry group that allows for these symmetries is given by a product of three
independent symmetries14
Here the indices L, S, and φ indicate orbital space, spin space and gauge, respectively.
Clearly,this symmetry groupis much richer in structure than those consideredbefore. In fact, it incorporatesthe
order parameter symmetries of liquid crystals, SO(3) , as well as of magnets, SO(3) , and of isotropic superfluids,
U(1) , all at the same time. This implies that the broken symmetries resulting from (3) will also be much more
intricate than, say, in the case of the ferromagnet, where only a single degree of freedom is relevant.
Onemightthink thatastudy ofthe abovementionedbrokensymmetriescouldbe performedmuchmoreeasilyby
investigatingthemseparately,i.e. withinthe isotropicsuperfluid,the magnet,the liquidcrystal,etc., itself. However,
thecombinationofseveralsimultaneouslybrokencontinuoussymmetriesismuchmorethanjustthesimplesumofthe
propertiesofalltheseknownsystems. Namely,someofthesymmetriesofsuperfluid3Hearejointlybroken,leadingto
what is called “relative”symmetries. For example, the spin-orbit rotationsymmetry, i.e., the SO(3) ×SO(3) -part
of (3), may be simultaneously broken to become SO(3) L+S , i.e. a (sub-)group describing a linear combination of
the individual groups SO(3) and SO(3) . This situation is realized in the B phase of superfluid 3He (see below).
Another example is the gauge-orbit symmetry, i.e., the SO(3) ×U(1) -part of (3), which may be simultaneously
broken to a single subgroup U(1) Lz+φ 19,20. This is the case in the A phase of superfluid 3He (see below). In both
cases a rigid connection is established between the previously independent degrees of freedom, leading to long-range
order in the condensate only in the combined (and not in the individual) degrees of freedom.
B. The structure of the superfluid phases of 3He
It is clear that in principle the internal degrees of freedom of a spin-triplet p-wave state allow for many different
Cooper-pair states and hence superfluid phases. (This is again different from ordinary superconductivity with S =
0,l = 0 pairing, where only a single phase is possible). Of these different states, the one with the lowest energy for
given external parameters will be realized.
1. B phase
In fact, Balian and Werthamer18 showed, that, within a conventional “weak-coupling” approach, of all possible
states there is precisely one state (the “BW state”) that has the lowest energy at all temperatures. This state is the
one that describes the B phase of superfluid 3He. The state originally discussed by these authors is one in which the
orbital angular momentum l and spin S of a Cooper pair couple to a total angular momentum J = l+S = 0. This
3P0 state is, however, only a special case of a more general one with the same energy (in the absence of spin-orbit
interaction), obtained by an arbitrary rotation of the spin axes relative to the orbital axes of the Cooper-pair wave
function. Such a rotationmaybe describedmathematically by specifying a rotationaxisnˆ anda rotationangleθ. In
the B phase all three spin substates in (1) occur with equal measure. This state has a rather surprising property: in
spite of the intrinsic anisotropy, the state has an isotropic energy gap. (The energy gap is the amount by which the
system lowers its energy in the condensation process, i.e. it is the minimum energy required for the excitation of a
singleparticleoutofthe condensate.) ThereforetheB phaseresemblesordinarysuperconductorsinseveralways. On
the other hand, even though the energy gap is isotropic, the B phase is intrinsically anisotropic. This is clearly seen
in dynamic experiments in which the Cooper-pair structure is distorted. For this reason the B phase is sometimes
referred to as “pseudo-isotropic”. Owing to the quantum coherence of the superfluid state, the rotation axis nˆ and
angle θ characterizing a Cooper pair in the B phase are macroscopically defined degrees of freedom, whose variation
is physically measurable.
In the B phase gauge symmetry is completely broken (as in conventional superconductors or superfluid 4He) and
a linear combination of the spin-orbit symmetry is broken; the remaining symmetry of the order parameter of that
phase corresponds to the group SO(3) L+S .
2. A phase
Since in weak-coupling theory the B phase always has the lowest energy, an explanation of the existence of the
A phase of superfluid 3He obviously requires one to go beyond such an approach and to include “strong–coupling
effects”21,22; for a review of a systematic approach see23. In view of the fact that, at present, microscopic theories
are not capable of computing transition temperatures for 3He, it is helpful to single out a particular effect that can
explain the stabilization of the A phase over the B phase at least qualitatively. As demonstrated by Anderson and
Brinkman21 such a conceptually simple effect – a feedback mechanism – indeed exists: the pair correlations in the
condensed state change the pairing interaction between the 3He quasiparticles, the modification depending on the
actual state itself. As a specific mechanism, these authors considered the role of spin fluctuations and showed that
a stabilization of the state first considered by Anderson and Morel17,24 is indeed possible. This only happens at
somewhat elevated pressures, since spin fluctuations become more pronounced only at higher pressures. This “ABM
state” does indeed describe the A phase. It has the property that, in contrastwith 3He-B,its magnetic suspectibility
isessentiallythe sameasthatofthe normalliquid. Thisis aclearindicationthatinthis phasethe spinsubstatewith
S = 0, which is the only one that can be reduced appreciably by an external magnetic field, is absent. Therefore
3He-A is composed only of |↑↑i and |↓↓i Cooper pairs. This implies that the anisotropy axis of the spin part of the
Cooper pair wave function, called dˆ, has the same fixed direction in every pair. (More precisely, dˆ is the direction
along which the total spin of the Cooper pair vanishes: dˆ ·S = 0). Likewise, the direction of the relative orbital
angular momentumˆl is the same for all Cooper pairs. Therefore in the A phase the anisotropy axes dˆ andˆl of the
Cooper-pairwavefunctionarelong-range-ordered,i.e. arepreferreddirectionsinthewholemacroscopicsample. This
implies a pronounced anisotropy of this phase in all its properties. In particular, the value of the energy gap now
explicitly depends on the direction in k space on the Fermi sphere and takes the form
Hence the gap vanishes at two points on the Fermi sphere, namely along ±ˆl. Because of the existence of an axisˆl,
thisstateisalsocalledthe“axialstate”. Theexistenceofnodesimpliesthatingeneralquasi-particleexcitationsmay
take place at arbitrarily low temperatures. Therefore, in contrast with 3He-B or ordinary superconductors, there is
a finite density of states for excitations with energies below the averagegap energy, leading for example to a specific
heat proportional to T3 at low temperatures. The existence of point nodes (”Fermi points”) of the A phase order
parameter allows one to draw detailed analogies with relativistic quantum field theory25,26, as will be discussed in
Section VI.
In the A phase the spin rotation symmetry is broken (as in a ferromagnet), as well as a linear combination of
the gauge-orbit symmetry. Neglecting an additional discrete Z2 symmetry, the remaining symmetry of the order
parameter of that phase therefore corresponds to the group U(1) Sz ×U(1) Lz+φ .
3. A1 phase
The third experimentally observable superfluid phase of 3He, the A1 phase, is only stable in the presence of an
external magnetic field. In this phase Cooper pairs are all in a single spin substate, the |↑↑i state, corresponding to
S = + 1; the components with |↑↓i + |↓↑i and |↓↓i states are missing. It is therefore a “magnetic” superfluid – the
first homogeneous magnetic liquid ever observed in nature. The remaining symmetry of that phase corresponds to
C. Broken symmetries in high-energy physics
Symmetriesandsymmetrybreakingareoffundamentalimportanceinhigh-energyphysics. Thishastodowiththe
close connection between symmetries and conserved quantities (Noether’s theorem). If, experimentally, a conserved
quantity is identified, the question arises as to what symmetry is responsible for it. For example, a one-parameter
quantity (a charge, say) involves an underlying U(1) symmetry. One then has to reconstruct the initial underlying
symmetry that by symmetry breaking leads to the experimentally observable lower symmetries. In this way high-
energyphysicsmaybeunderstoodasasequenceofsymmetrybreakings. Weshouldnote,however,thatinhigh-energy
physicstherelevantsymmetriesareusuallylocal(i.e. gauge-)symmetriesratherthantheglobalsymmetriesconsidered
in condensed-matter physics. (This implies an Anderson-Higgs mechanism rather than Goldstone modes27,28). On
the other hand, even in high-energy physics, namely in the theory of strong interactions, there is an example of a
globally broken symmetry that is very similar to those considered here.
For this let us consider an isodoublet of quarks with only two flavors, namely an up- and a down-quark (u,d).
Initially there is a chiral invariance between left-handed (L) and right-handed (R) states (we neglect the weak inter-
action):
(cid:18) d (cid:19) (cid:18) d (cid:19)
The corresponding symmetry, i.e. separate rotations with respect to left and right, is represented by
(For simplicity, we haveneglectedtwo additionalU(1)symmetries in (6): one relatedto baryon-numberconserva-
tion and another connected with an axial symmetry; the latter is not realized in nature and is believed to be broken
by strong interactions (”the U(1)problem”29)). Experimentally,however,we know that the invarianceunder the full
symmetry group (6) is not observed - a fact attributed to a broken symmetry. Indeed, one imagines a condensation
between quarks (u,d) and antiquarks (u,d) to take place - very similar to Cooper pairing. In this way the symmetry
(6) is broken down to a remaining SU(2) L+R , in analogy to the B phase. Here we again encounter a relative broken
symmetry where now the corresponding Goldstone bosons are the three pions.
A different example, now involving gauge symmetries in the theory of electroweak interactions, is a model due to
PatiandSalam30,anextensionoftheWeinberg-Salammodel. Againweconsiderleft/rightisodoubletsofu,dquarks,
and, in addition, a hypercharge. The left/right symmetries are both described by an SU(2), the latter one by a U(1)
symmetry. Hence the underlying symmetry is
(note that this group is essentially identical with the symmetry group (3) describing superfluid 3He!). On an exper-
imental level at low energies only the subgroup H = U(1) , i.e. ordinary QED, is realized. It involves the z
components of the left-handed isospin(the SU(2) is assumed to be completely broken)and the hypercharge,whose
generator is the ordinary electric charge Q = L +Y/2. This implies a broken ”relative” symmetry involving two
symmetries.
V. ORIENTATIONAL EFFECTS ON THE ORDER PARAMETER
Forapair-correlatedsuperfluid,thepairinginteractionisthemostimportantinteraction,sinceitisresponsiblefor
the formationofthe condensate itself. Nevertheless,there also existother,muchweaker,interactions,whichmay not
be importantforthe actualtransitionto the pair-condensedstate, but whichdo become importantif their symmetry
differs from the aforementioned. In particular, they may be able to break remaining degeneracies.
The dipole–dipole interaction: The dipole–dipole interaction between the nuclear spins of the 3He atoms leads
to a very weak, spatially strongly anisotropic, coupling. The relevant coupling constant g (T) is given by
D a3 (cid:18) E (cid:19)
Here µ0 is the nuclear magnetic moment, such that µ2
/a3 is the average dipole energy of two particles at relative
distance a (the average atomic distance), while the second factor measures the probability for these two particles
to form a Cooper pair and n is the overall particle density. Since µ2/a3 corresponds to about 10 −7K, this energy
is extremely small and the resulting interaction of quasiparticles at temperatures of the order of 10
expected to be completely swamped by thermal fluctuations. This is indeed true in a normal system. However, the
dipole-dipole interaction implies a spin-orbit coupling and thereby has a symmetry different from that of the pairing
interaction. In the condensate the symmetries with respect to a rotation in spin and orbital space are spontaneously
broken,leadingtolong-rangeorder(forexampleofdˆ
ˆlinthecaseof3He-A).Nevertheless,thepairinginteraction
does not fix the relative orientation of these preferred directions, leaving a continuous degeneracy. As pointed out
Leggett31–33,14,
in this situation the tiny dipole interaction is able to lift the degeneracy,namely by choosing that
particular relative orientation of the long-range ordered preferred directions for which the dipolar energy is minimal.
Thereby this interaction becomes of macroscopic importance. One may also view this effect as a permanent local
magneticfieldofabout3mTatanypointinthesuperfluid(inaliquid!). In3He-Athedipolarinteractionisminimized
by a parallel orientation of
ˆl.
Effect of a magnetic field: An external magnetic field acts on the nuclear spins and thereby leads to an ori-
entation of the preferred direction in spin space. In the case of 3He-A the orientation energy is minimal if dˆ is
perpendicular to the field H, since (taking into account dˆ ·S = 0) this orientation guarantees SkH.
Walls: Every experiment is performed in a volume of finite size. Clearly, the walls will have some effect on the
liquid inside. In superfluid 3He this effect may readily be understood by using a simple picture. Let us view the
Cooper pair as a kind of giant “molecule” of two 3He quasiparticles orbiting around each other. For a pair not to
bump into a wall, this rotation will have to take place in a plane parallel to the wall. In the case of 3He-A, where
the orbital angular momentum
has the same direction in all Cooper pairs (standing perpendicular on the plane of
rotation), this means that
has to be oriented perpendicular to the wall. So there exists a strict orientation of
caused by the walls34. In the B phase, with its (pseudo) isotropic order parameter, the orientational effect is not as
pronounced, but there are qualitatively similar boundary conditions.
A. Textures and defects
From the above discussion, it is clear that the preferred directions ˆl and dˆ in 3He-A are in general subject
to different, often competing, orientational effects (for simplicity, we shall limit our description to 3He-A). At the
same time, the condensate will oppose any spatial variation of its long-range order. Any “bending” of the order-
parameter field will therefore increase the energy, thus giving an internal stiffness or rigidity to the system. While
the orientational effects might want
to adjust on the smallest possible lengthscale, the bending energy wants
to keep the configuration as uniform as possible. Altogether, the competition between these two opposing effects
will lead to a smooth spatial variation of
throughout the sample, called a “texture”. This nomenclature is
borrowedfrom the physics of liquid crystals, where similar orientational effects of the preferred directions occur.
The bending energy and all quantitatively important orientational energies are invariant under the replacement
dˆ →−dˆ,ˆl→−ˆl. Astatewheredˆandˆlareparallelthereforehasthesameenergyasonewheredˆandˆlareantiparallel.
This leads to two different, degenerate ground states. There is then the possibility that in one part of the sample
the system is in one ground state and in the other in a different ground state. Where the two configurations meet
they form a planar “defect” in the texture, called a “domain wall”35. This is in close analogy to the situation in
a ferromagnet composed of domains with different orientations of the magnetization. Domain walls are spatially
localized and are quite stable against external perturbations. In fact, their stability is guaranteed by the specific
nature of the order-parameter structure of 3He-A. Mathematically, this structure may be analysed according to its
topological properties; for reviews see the articles by Mermin36 and Mineev37. The stability of a domain wall can
thenbetracedbacktotheexistenceofaconserved“topologicalcharge”. Usingthesamemathematicalapproach,one
canshowthat the order-parameterfields ofthe superfluid phases of3He notonly allowfor planardefects but also for
point and line defects, called “monopoles” and “vortices”, respectively. Defects can be “non-singular” or “singular”
, depending on whether the core of the defect remains superfluid or whether it is forced to become normal liquid.
The concept of vortices is, of course, well-known from superfluid 4He. However, since the order-parameter structure
of superfluid 3He is so much richer than that of superfluid 4He, there exist a wide variety of different vortices in
these phases. Their detailed structure has been the subject of intensive investigation, in particular in the context of
experiments on rotating superfluid 3He, where they play a central role38,39.
VI. RELATION TO OTHER FIELDS
Why spend so much effort on sorting out the strange behavior of states of matter only found at temperatures
so low that they are even outside the reach of most low-temperature laboratories? Partly, of course, “because it’s
there”, and because – like any other system – superfluid 3He deserves to be studied in its own right. However, what
is even more important is that superfluid 3He is a model system that exemplifies many of the concepts of modern
theoretical physics and, as such, has given us, and will further provide us, with new insights into the functioning of
quantum-mechanical many-body systems close to their ground state.
Quantum amplifier: Themacroscopiccoherenceofsuperfluid3Hemayserveasa”quantumamplifier”ofweakand
ultraweakinteractioneffects. Oneexample(seeSectionV)isthe dipole-dipoleinteractionbetweentheHeliumnuclei.
Even more spectacular is the prediction by Leggett40 of a permanent electric dipole moment of the Cooper pairs in
the B phase due to the amplification of the parity-violating part of the electron-proton interaction (”weak neutral
currents”) mediated by the exchange of Z0 bosons; for a detailed discussion see13. The permanent parity-violating
dipole moment in the B phase is quite small but is not hopelessly outside the experimentally accessible range. The
weakinteractionbetweenelectronsandhadronsalsohasaT-(i.e. CP-)violatingpart. Ameasurementoftheelectric
dipole moment of the B phase would then allow one to determine the strength of the T-odd interaction41.
Unconventional superconductors: Anisotropic superconducting states are particularly exciting. It is now well
established that superconductivity in the high-T cuprates and, at least in some cases, in the so-called “heavy-
fermion” systems, is due to the formation of anisotropic pairs with d-wave symmetry42. Many of the concepts and
ideas developed for superfluid 3He have been adapted to these systems.
Neutron stars: There are several other physical systems for which the ideas developed in the context of superfluid
3Hearerelevant. Oneorthemisananisotropicsuperfluidsystemthatalreadyexistsinnaturebutisnotaccessiblefor
laboratory experiments: this is the nuclear matter forming the cores of neutron stars. There the pairing of neutrons
has been calculated to be of p-wave symmetry. Because of the strong spin-orbit nuclear force, the total angular
momentum of the Cooper pairs is predicted to be J = 243,44.
Cosmologyand early universe: Recentlysuperfluid3Hehasbeenusedasatestsystemforthecreationof“cosmic
strings”in the earlystagesofthe universe. According toKibble45 andZurek46 the observedinhomogeneityofmatter
in the universe may be understood as the result of the creation of defects generated by a rapid cooling through
second-order phase transitions, which led to the present symmetry-broken state of the universe. In two different
experiments with superfluid 3He, performed at the low-temperature laboratories in Grenoble47 and Helsinki48, a
nuclear reaction in the superfluid, induced by neutron radiation, caused a local heating of the liquid into the normal
state. Duringthesubsequent,rapidcoolingbackintothesuperfluidstatethecreationofavortextanglewasobserved.
The experimentallydetermineddensity ofthis defectstatewasfoundto be consistentwith Zurek’sestimate andthus
gives important support to this cosmological model; see also49. Furthermore, a recent experimental verification
of momentogenesis in 3He-A by Bevan et al.50 was found to support current ideas on cosmological baryogenesis.
(Baryogenesis during phase transitions in the early universe is believed to be responsible for the observed excess of
matter over antimatter). In view of these exciting new developments it may become possible in the future to model
and study cosmologicalproblems in the low-temperature laboratory in much more detail.
Particle physics and gravity: As discussed in Section IV, the key to understanding superfluid 3He is “sponta-
neously broken symmetry”. Volovik showed that the existence of point nodes (”Fermi points”) in the A phase order
parameter allows one to draw detailed analogies with relativistic quantum field theory51,25,52,53,26. Thereby funda-
mental connections with particle physics exist which derive from the interpretation of the order-parameter field as a
quantum field with a richgroupstructure. The collective modes of the order parameter as well as the localizedtopo-
logicaldefects in a givenground-state configurationare the particles of this quantum field theory. Various anomalies
(e.g. the axial anomaly) known from particle physics can be identified in the 3He model system, and it appears that
fundamental insight gained from the experimental study of superfluid 3He will be useful in particle theory. Indeed,
both the A phase of superfluid 3He and the electroweak vacuum belong to the class of gapless Fermi systems with
topologically stable point nodes25. The fermionic (quasi-)particles in this class are chiral, and the collective bosonic
modes arethe effective gaugeand gravitationalfields52,26. This providesa directlink between the dynamics of quan-
tum liquids and gravity53. In particular, in the limit of very low energies these condensed matter systems reproduce
allsymmetries knowntoday in highenergy physics, e.g. Lorentzinvariance,gauge invariance andgeneralcovariance.
Clearly,theuniquerichnessofthestructureofthe superfluidphasesof3Hecontinuestoleadtonewaspectswhose
investigation provides unexpected insights.
1L.D. Landau,Zh. Eksp. Teor. Fiz. 30, 1058 (1956)[Sov. Phys. JETP 3, 920
(1957)]; Zh. Eksp. Teor. Fiz., 32, 59 (1957)[Sov. Phys. JETP 5, 101
(1957)]; Zh. Eksp. Teor. Fiz., 35, 97 (1958)[Sov. Phys. JETP 8, 70
(1959)].
2J.C. Wheatley,in Quantum Fluids, Vol. VI,D.F. Brewer, ed.,
North-Holland,Amsterdam 1966, p. 183.
3F. London,Superfluids, Vol. I,Wiley, New York 1950.
4F. London,Superfluids, Vol. II,Wiley, New York1954.
5H.Kamerlingh Onnes,Proc. R. Acad. Amsterdam 11, 168 (1911).
6J. Bardeen, L.N.Cooper, and J.R. Schrieffer, Phys. Rev. 108, 1175 (1957).
7A.J. Leggett, in Proceedings of the XVI Karpacz Winter School of
Theoretical Physics (Lecture Notes in Physics, Vol.115), A. Pekalski and
J. Przyslawa, eds., Springer, Berlin 1980, p. 13.
8A.J. Leggett, J. Physique 41, 19 (1980).
9W. Zwerger, Ann. der Physik 1, 15 (1992).
10P. Nozi`eres, in Bose-Einstein Condensation, A. Griffin et al., eds., Cambridge
UniversityPress, Cambridge 1995.
11M. Randeria, in Bose-Einstein Condensation, A.Griffin et al.,
eds., Cambridge UniversityPress, Cambridge 1995.
12D.D.Osheroff, R.C. Richardson,and D.M. Lee, Phys. Rev. Lett. 28,
885 (1972).
13D.Vollhardt, and P. W¨olfle, The Superfluid Phases of Helium 3, Taylor
and Francis, London 1990.
14A.J. Leggett, Rev. Mod. Phys. 47, 331 (1975).
15J.C. Wheatley,Rev. Mod. Phys. 47, 415 (1975).
16D.M. Lee, and R.C. Richardson, in The Physics of Liquid and Solid Helium, Part II,K.H. Bennemann and J.B. Ketterson,
eds., Wiley, New York1978, p. 287.
17P.W. Anderson,and P. Morel, Physica 26, 671 (1960).
18R.Balian, and N.R.Werthamer, Phys. Rev. 131, 1553 (1963).
19A.J. Leggett, Phys. Rev. Lett. 29, 1227 (1972).
20M. Liu, and M.C. Cross, Phys. Rev. Lett. 41, 250 (1978).
21P.W. Anderson,and W.F. Brinkman, Phys. Rev. Lett. 30, 1108 (1973).
22P.W. Anderson, and W.F. Brinkman, in The Physics of Liquid and Solid Helium, Part II, K.H. Bennemann and J.B.
Ketterson, eds., Wiley, New York 1978, p. 177.
23J.W. Serene, and D. Rainer, Phys. Rep. 101, 221 (1983).
24P.W. Anderson,and P. Morel, Phys. Rev. 123, 1911 (1961).
25G.E.Volovik, Exotic properties of superfluid 3He, World Scientific,
Singapore 1992.
26G.E.Volovik, cond-mat preprint 0005091.
27P.W. Anderson,Phys. Rev. 130, 439 (1963).
28P.W. Higgs, Phys. Rev. Lett. 12, 132 (1964).
29E. Witten, Nucl. Phys. B156, 269 (1979).
30J.C. Pati and A.Salam, Phys.Rev. D10, 275 (1974).
31A.J. Leggett, Phys. Rev. Lett. 31, 352 (1973).
32A.J. Leggett, J. Phys. C6, 3187 (1973b).
33A.J. Leggett, Ann. Phys. (N.Y.)85, 11 (1974).
34V.Ambegaokar, P.G. deGennes, and D.Rainer, Phys. Rev. A9, 2676 (1974).
35K.Maki, Physica 90B, 84 (1977).
36N.D.Mermin, Rev. Mod. Phys. 51, 591 (1979).
37V.P.Mineev, in Soviet Scientific Reviews, Sect. A., Physics Reviews, Vol. 2
Harwood Academic Publishers, Chur1980, p.173.
38P. Hakonen,and O.V. Lounasmaa, Phys. Today 40, 70 (1987).
39M.M. Salomaa, and G.E. Volovik, Rev. Mod. Phys., 59, 533 (1987).
40A.J. Leggett, Phys. Rev. Lett. 39, 587 (1977).
41I.B. Khriplovich, Pis’ma Zh. Eksp. Teor. Fiz. 35, 392 (1982)[JETP Lett. 35, 485
(1982)].
42D.L. Cox, and M.B. Maple, Physics Today, 48, No. 2, 32 (1995).
43J.A. Sauls, D.L. Stein, and J.W. Serene, Phys. Rev. D25, 976 (1982).
44D.Pines, and A. Alpar, Nature 316, 27 (1985).
45T.W.B. Kibble, J. Phys., A9, 1387 (1976).
46W.H.Zurek, Nature 317, 505 (1985).
47C. B¨auerle, Yu.M. Bunkov,S.N.Fisher, H.Godfrin, and G.R. Pickett,
Nature 382, 332 (1996).
48V.M.H. Ruutu,V.B. Eltsov, A.J. Gill, T.W.B. Kibble, M. Krusius, Yu.G.Makhlin,
B. Pla¸cais, G.E. Volovik,and W. Xu, Nature 328, 334 (1996).
49V.B. Eltsov, T.W.B. Kibble, M. Krusius, V.M.H. Ruutu,and G.E. Volovik, cond-mat preprint 0007369.
50T.D.C. Bevan, A.J. Manninen, J.B. Cook, J.R. Hook, H.E. Hall, T. Vachaspati,
and G.E. Volovik,Nature 386, 689 (1997).
51G.E. Volovik,J. Low Temp. Phys. 67, 301 (1987).
52G.E. Volovik,Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 96, 6042 (1999).
53G.E. Volovik,preprint gr-qc/0004049.
FIGURE CAPTIONS
Fig. 1: Pressurevs. temperature phase diagramfor (a) 3He (logarithmic temperature scale); (b) 4He (linear temper-
ature scale).