1v8511120/hp-tnauq:viXra
SUPERCONDUCTING QUANTUM COMPUTING
WITHOUT SWITCHES
MarcJ.FeldmanandXingxiangZhou
DepartmentofElectricalandComputerEngineering
UniversityofRochester
Rochester,NY14627,USA
feldman@ece.rochester.edu
xizhou@ece.rochester.edu
Abstract Thispaperpresentsaverysimplearchitectureforalarge-scalesuperconducting
quantumcomputer. AlloftheSQUIDqubitsarefixed-coupledtoasinglelarge
superconductingloop.
1. Introduction
Whatphysicalsystemismostappropriateforbuildingaquantumcomputer?
Theproponentsofoneimplementationoranotherusuallydiscussthisquestion
by reference to DiVincenzo’s criteria [1]. These fivecriteria very nicely sum-
marizetherequirements forthephysical realization ofaquantum information
processing system.
For our purposes, four of these criteria can be combined into a single one:
good qubits. That has many implications, but we will say no more about it
here. For this paper, let us assume ideal qubits. The other criterion, number
four, is “A ‘universal’ set of quantum gates”. This addresses the interactions
between qubits rather than the nature of the qubits themselves. A quantum
computeris,atleast,asetofinteracting qubits.
In this paper we will first discuss the “no switch” problem regarding su-
perconducting implementations of quantum computing. In brief, it has been
difficulttocomeupwithasatisfactory schemetoswitchthecouplingbetween
two superconducting qubits on and off. Then we will mention several possi-
bilities for quantum computing using fixed, rather than switchable, couplings
betweenqubits, andindicate whytheseareunsatisfactory forsuperconducting
qubitsaswell.
Our solution to this situation is based on recent work [2] in which a vir-
tual switch, rather than a substantial physical switch, is realized by carrying
out the steps of the quantum computation in and out of designed “interaction
free subspaces” which are analogous to decoherence free subspaces. We will
give examples of how these virtual switches can be employed in a variety of
differentarchitectures forasuperconducting quantum computer.
Finallyweexploreoneparticulararchitectureatmuchgreaterlength. Many
SQUID qubits are fixed-coupled to a single large superconducting loop. We
show thatthis isadequate forlarge-scale quantum computing, and specify the
requisite parameters. The parameters are chosen for rf-SQUID qubits [3, 4]
butthisarchitectureisequallyappropriateforpersistentcurrentSQUIDqubits
[5]aswell.
2. The “No-Switch” Problem
Quantum algorithms are generally formulated in terms of a collection of
qubits subject toasequence ofsingle-qubit operations andtwo-qubit gates. A
two-qubitgatesuchastheCNOTcanberepresented byaunitary4×4matrix
over the bases of the two qubits. Taken literally, such an algorithm implies
that there are three distinct modes of operation of a quantum computer. Two
qubits have: 1) the idle mode in which information is stored in qubits which
donotevolve, 2)thesingle-qubit operation modeinwhichlocalfieldsapplied
to qubit 1 have no effect on qubit 2, and 3) the two qubit operation mode in
whichqubit 1and qubit2arecoupled together and aquantum gateisrealized
through the coupling Hamiltonian. The two-qubit Hamiltonian that expresses
where σ’sare the Paulimatrices, B~
isthe local field atqubit i, and J12 isthe
coupling strength. B~
and J12 are time dependent under external control. To
alternatebetweenthethreeoperational modesitisnecessary thatB~ beturned
onandoffasrequiredandJ12 beturnedonandoffasrequired. Inotherwords,
theremustbeaswitchbetweenqubit1andqubit2.
In both flux and charge [7, 8] superconducting qubits, the control of the
time dependence of B and B is relatively “easy”. As illustrated in Fig. 1,
time dependent B and B fields on superconducting qubits are achieved by
simplyvaryingthebiases. Thefixedcoupling betweenqubitsis“easy”forthe
superconducting qubits as well, as shown in Figure 2. The flux qubits can be
coupledbyasimpleinductiveconnection,andthechargequbitscanbecoupled
byasimple capacitive connection between them. Thisiscertainly “easy” too.
In fact a fixed inductive coupling between rf-SQUID qubits was diagrammed
inthefirstpaperwrittenonsuperconducting quantumcomputing [3].
Variable coupling between superconducting qubits is much harder. There
are many proposed schemes, but it is generally agreed that none of these
SuperconductingQuantumComputingwithoutSwitches 3
Figure1. (a)AfluxqubitbiasednearΦ 0/2,forwhichtheremovefromone-halffluxquantum
actsastheBzfield,andthesuppressionoftheeffectivecriticalcurrentactsastheBxfield.(b)
Achargequbit,forwhichtheremovefromasingle-chargevoltagebiasactsastheBzfield,and
thesuppressionoftheeffectivecriticalcurrentactsastheBxfield.
Figure2. (a)Inductivelycoupledfluxqubits.(b)Capacitivelycoupledchargequbits.
proposed switches is completely satisfactory [9]. Some early examples are
Averin’s proposal [10] to couple charge qubits by moving the charge among
the charge islands, and Scho-n et al.’s LC resonator “bus” [9, 11]. Perhaps
the simplest variable superconducting switch was first described by Mooij et
al. [6]. It is essentially a solid superconducting loop broken by a Josephson
junction which can be open circuited - it is an rf SQUIDin which the critical
currentcanbereduced tozero. Morerecent schemesareadifferential version
of the rf-SQUID switch [12], the “Bloch transistor” [13], and the INSQUID
[14].
These are only a few of the proposals for switches linking the qubits in a
superconducting quantum computer. Someofthese schemesarenotpractical,
but for the most part they could possibly be used but they just seem awk-
ward. Manyofthemrequireexternalcontrols,whicharelikelytobeimportant
sourcesofdecoherence. Manyrequireanunrealisticlevelofparametercontrol
to operate successfully. Others appear to be difficult to scale to a many qubit
system. Inanycase,noneoftheseproposalshasgarneredoutsidesupport,and
newandmoreelaborate proposals keepappearing intheliterature.
3. Fixed-Coupled Quantum Computer
One may consider making a quantum computer without switches. Any in-
teractionbetweenqubits,fixedorvariable,issufficientforauniversalquantum
gate. Suchacomputerhowevermaybemoredifficulttorealizeinpractice.
An early example is the spin-lattice quantum computer [15], in which the
“spins”(qubits)arehard-wiredintoalattice. Therearenoswitches;rather,the
entirelatticeisaddressedbyglobalfields. Thisparadigmforquantumcomput-
ingrequiresmorecomplexmanipulations toperformsimpleoperations, andit
canbetedioustorenderquantumalgorithmsintolatticeinteractions. Although
widely referenced, this scheme has not been much adopted by others. Forsu-
perconducting systems, the spin lattice architecture seems a particular waste
ofresources,inthatsingle-bitoperationswhichare“easy”forsuperconducting
qubitsarenotatallutilized.
A prominent quantum computer architecture today is the NMR molecular
system. In NMR, coupling between the qubits is indeed fixed. There is no
reason in principle not to build a hard-wired superconducting quantum com-
puter following the NMR model. In the NMR model, complex synthesized
“refocusing pulses” are required to reverse the evolution of unwanted phase-
shiftsincurredbythealways-oncouplings. Thecomplexityofsuchrefocusing
pulses grows with the size of the system. More discouraging, the refocusing
pulses for asuperconducting system would need be at many orders of magni-
tude higher frequency than for NMR, and this may be impossible to achieve
withtheprecision required, withtoday’stechnology.
So it is seen that switches between qubits are not absolutely essential for
quantum computing, but they are likely to be a practical necessity for large
qubitsystems.
4. Interaction Free Subspaces
Recent work [2] has shown that logical qubits consisting of two or more
physical qubits can be constructed to code quantum information in an “in-
teraction free subspace” (IFS) such that there is no interaction between these
qubits eventhough theyarephysically coupled. Thisisanalogous tothemore
familiar“decoherencefreesubspace”(DFS),whichcanbeemployedtoisolate
quantuminformationfrominteractingwithenvironmentalmodeswhichwould
lead todecoherence [16]. TheDFSconcept iswidelyutilized; itassumes that
there are symmetries in the coupling of the qubits to their environment, and
employsthosesymmetriestoavoiddecoherence. TheIFSisdifferentinthatit
relies on symmetries in the coupling between qubits which can be created by
theexperimenter. Informationiscodedinsuchawaythatwhenalogicalqubit
is in its IFS it is not affected by other qubits it is physically coupled to (i.e.,
switch is open). Single bit operations can be performed when the neighbor-
ingqubitsareintheirIFS.Whentwocoupledlogicalqubitsareremovedfrom
theirIFS,twobitgatescanbeperformed (i.e.,switchisclosed). Otherlogical
qubitsintheirIFSarenotaffected bytheseoperations.
SuperconductingQuantumComputingwithoutSwitches 5
IFSoperationsarediscussedatlengthin[2]. Herewewillmerelypresentan
example. Weassumediagonalinteractionsbetweenphysicalqubitsoftheform
z. Ourquantum computer is aone-dimensional Ising lattice of logical
IFSqubitsasillustratedinFig. 3. FortheIsinginteractionitissufficienttouse
twophysical qubits, thedotslabelled ‘a’and‘b’intheFigure,tocomposethe
logical qubit, “qubit 1”. The coupling between the physical qubits are either
J orJ aslabelled. Thenitiseasytoseethatthefollowingbasisstates
are annihilated by the interaction Hamiltonian H = J ′ (σz + σz )(σz +
int 1a 1b 2a
σz ).Therefore, ifthesestates areused tocodequantum information, thelog-
icalqubitsdonotaffecteachother.
Arbitrary single bit operations can be performed on logical qubit 1 using
B~ (t) and B~ (t) withthe fixeda -b coupling J . Neighboring logical qubits
mustremaineachinitsIFSduringtheoperationsonqubit1. Reference[2]de-
tailshowaCNOTgatecanbeperformedonqubit1andqubit2. TheCPHASE
gate (equivalent to CNOT up to single bit gates) is achieved by: first flip the
stateofbothqubit1bandqubit 2btoremovethelogical qubits fromIFS;then
follow a set of prescribed rotations of the physical qubits and allow the logi-
cal qubits to interact for a certain amount of time; then again flip the state of
both qubit 1b andqubit 2btoreturn thelogical qubits back intoIFS.Thetime
requiredforthisisπ/16J .
qubit 1 qubit 2
Figure3. ExamplequantumcomputerArchitecture.Eachdotisaphysicalqubitandthelines
representcouplings. Twoqubits(a,b)connectedbyaverticallineisanencodedqubit.
The linear architecture shown in Fig. 3 is one of many possibilities, cho-
sen for clarity of explanation alone. It is equally as possible to make a two-
dimensionalarray. Inthenextsectionwewillconsiderindetailaverydifferent
architectureinwhichallofthephysicalqubitsareinductivelyfixed-coupledto
asinglelargesuperconducting loop. Noticethatthispreventstheuseofparal-
lel operations because only a few qubits can be out of their IFS at once. The
lineararraywouldallowgreatparallelismiftwo-thirdsofallqubitsareconcur-
rentlyundergoingtwo-qubitgateoperations. Betweenthesetwoextremesisan
architecture withqubit clusters coupled together by link qubits. Itisseen that
theIFSvirtualswitchencourages greatversatility inquantumcomputerarchi-
tecture. Eventually, one may hope that the computer architecture be designed
forgreatestsuitability forclassesofquantum algorithmstobeaddressed.
5. The Inductor Bus Quantum Computer
Figure3seemstoimplythatclose-coupled physicalqubitsshouldcompose
a logical qubit, and this logical qubit is coupled to only several other logical
qubits. In fact, neither of these constraints is necessary. An architecture in
which every physical qubit is coupled to every other physical qubit, with all
equalcouplingstrength,satisfiestheconditionsforIFSaswell. Therearevery
natural implementations for this kind of quantum computer architecture us-
ing superconducting qubits. Forinstance, manysuperconductor charge qubits
could be capacitively coupled to a single floating conductor island. We will
examine the situation where many SQUIDqubits are coupled each by a fixed
mutualinductance toasinglelargesolidsuperconducting loop–the“inductor
bus”.
The inductor bus quantum computer is illustrated in Fig. 4. N (an even
number) identical rf-SQUIDS are inductively coupled to a superconducting
inductor loopwithselfinductance L (bstands for“bus”). Allcouplings have
the same mutual inductance M. The flux linking the bus inductor loop is Φ .
Its external flux bias is Φ . The current in the bus is I . All rf-SQUIDS
have the same inductance L, the same capacitance C and the same Josephson
Φ0/2π). Thetotalflux,thefluxbiasandthecurrentoftheith
(i = 1,2...N) rf-SQUID are Φ , Φ and I . Note that Φ , the total magnetic
flux in the loop cannot change because it is a solid superconducting loop. So
whenthecurrentinoneoftherf-SQUIDSchangesthecurrentintheloopmust
changeslightly tomaintainΦ . Thiscouples toalloftheotherrf-SQUIDS.
5.1 The System Hamiltonian
Wementioned that the flux in the inductor loop must be quantized in units
of the flux quantum h/2e: Φ
= nΦ0, n being any integer. For simplicity let
us take n = 0 and Φ = 0. We can write down the flux equations for the
rf-SQUIDSandthebus,takingintoaccountallbiasesontheinductive loops:
Φ = Φ +MI +LI ,i = 1,2...N, (3)
Theseequationsallowustosolveforthecurrentsintermsofthefluxes,which
canbeused tocalculate theinductive energy E = 1 N LI 2 + 1 L I 2 +
ind 2Pi=1 i 2 b b
SuperconductingQuantumComputingwithoutSwitches 7
. . . .
. . . .
. . . .
superconducting loop
Figure4. The“inductorbus”quantumcomputer.
N MI I ofthesystem. Weareinterested inthelimitofweakcoupling,
NM /LL ≪ 1. (5)
KeepingtermstolowestorderinM /LL ,andaddingthechargingandJoseph-
sonenergies oftherf-SQUIDS,weobtainthesystemHamiltonian
where H ’s are the self Hamiltonians of the rf-SQUIDS (with the normalized
selfinductance),
andH istheinteraction Hamiltonian betweenpairsofrf-SQUIDS,
H int = X . (8)
The summation in Eq. (8) is between each pair of rf-SQUIDS. Eq. (8) de-
scribes the coupling between each pair of isolated rf-SQUIDS through an ef-
fective mutual inductance M = M /L . The other effect seen here is that
theselfinductance oftherf-SQUIDSisrenormalized slightly:
Under low temperatures, if we bias the rf-SQUIDS appropriately they are ef-
fectivelytwostatesystems. ThenwecanrewriteEq. (6)usingthePaulimatri-
H = X{−¯h∆
where ∆ and ε are the tunneling matrix element and energy offset between
thetwopotentialwellsoftheithrf-SQUID,controllable viaitscriticalcurrent
Ic and flux bias Φ . The eigenstates of σz correspond to the left and right
well localized states. J is the always on and fixed coupling strength between
therf-SQUIDSproportional totheeffectivemutualinductance M /L .
5.2 Initialization and computation
This has been discussed in Ref. [2]. The first step is to flux bias all the
rf-SQUIDSneartothesymmetricalpointΦ0/2,butfarenoughawaytoassure
that they end up in the lower of their two flux localized states. Then raise
the barrier height of the rf-SQUID potential such that there is no tunneling
between the two flux states (∆ = 0), and turn their flux bias to the symmetry
pointΦ0/2. Therf-SQUIDSareleftintheleft(orright)well. Atthesymmetry
pointε = 0aswell,therefore theHamiltonianofthequbitsis0,andthequbit
stateisfrozen.
Two of the physical qubits are chosen to constitute a logical qubit. (The
choice is arbitrary!) The next step is to flip the state of one of these physical
qubits. This can be done by lowering its potential barrier to obtain a finite
tunnelingrate∆andlettingitevolvefort = π/¯h∆(aπ pulse). Thequbitwill
shift from the left well to the right well. The potential barrier is restored to
freeze thestateofthequbit. Nowthetwophysical qubits areintheIFS(| ↑↓i
and|↓↑i)andthelogicalqubitisdecoupledfromthebus. IntheirIFS,thetwo
physical qubits applya0netfluxonthebus. Theother qubits arestillintheir
left wellsand they do apply afluxto thebus. Then, all ofthe other qubits are
treatedthesamewayuntilalllogicalqubitsaredrivenintotheIFS.
Thelargesuperconductingloopmaystartwithfluxinit,n 6= 0. Evenifn =
0,duringtheinitialization thereisalargecurrentintheloopandsomecurrent
I 6= 0 will remain because of inevitable variations in SQUID parameters.
ThesecurrentshavenoeffectontheIFScodestates. Still,oneisuncomfortable
that,forlargeN,smallunforseen errorsmightcompound. Ifthisisaconcern,
itispossibletokeepI = 0bychangingthebusfluxbiasΦ alittle. Another
possibility is to break the solid superconducting loop by a very small series
SuperconductingQuantumComputingwithoutSwitches 9
resistor, sub-µΩ, such that L /R is comparable to the initialization time but
muchlongerthantheruntimeofthequantum computer.
The computation proceeds through a series of single physical qubit opera-
tionsthatinducerotationsaroundthexandzdirectionsofeachphysicalqubit.
Theseoperations arerealizedbychangingthetunnelingrate∆andtheenergy
offset ε of the rf-SQUIDS (cf. Eq. (10) and Fig. 1a). Then a computation of
anycomplexitycanbeperformedusingthelogicalqubitsinandoutoftheIFS,
accessingonlythesesinglephysicalqubitoperations,asprescribedinRef. [2].
5.3 Parameters
Finally letus specify the parameters required for the inductor bus quantum
computerinFig. 4. Wewillseethatthecomputermayincludealargenumber
of qubits, at least N ∼ 1000, for realistic parameters allowed by the current
technology, assumingasalwaysidealqubits.
Therelevantparametersforasinglerf-SQUIDareL,I ,andC. Wechoose
L = 150pH, C = 80fF, and Ic = 3µA. These are familiar numbers, very
similar to the values considered in [17]. Solving the Schro-dinger equation
numerically, we find when the critical current is unsuppressed, the tunneling
matrix element ∆ is about 30Hz, therefore the tunneling can be considered
completelyoffinthiscase. SuppressingI downto2.375µAgivesatunneling
matrix element ∆ ≈ 2.6GHz, which allows to flip the state of the rf-SQUID
(a π pulse in the x direction) in about 0.4ns. Flux biasing the rf-SQUID off
the symmetrical point Φ0/2 by 0.15mΦ0 gives an ε of about 2.7GHz. This
allowsrotationsaround thez direction withaspeedofafewGHz.
Thetwo-bitoperationspeedisdeterminedbythestrengthofqubitcoupling,
J. The single physical bit operations should be much faster than the two bit
operations. Referring toEq. (10), thismeans that ∆andε(whenthey areon)
should bemuchlarger thanJ(whichisalwayson). Wechoosethetwo-bitop-
erationtimetobetensofns. EvaluatingtheinteractionHamiltonianEq. (8)in
thequbitbases,wefindthataneffectivemutualinductance (M /L )ofabout
2fH results in a coupling strength J of about 25MHz. This is comfortably
satisfiedwithL = 2nH andM = 2pH. Thisissatisfactory becauseM ≪ L
andM ≪ L ,soM /LL ≪ 1.
How many qubits N can be attached to the bus? First of all, the weak
coupling limit(Eq. (5))requires
N ≪ LL /M . (11)
Theother practical consideration isN < L /M, just byasimple geometrical
argument. We assume a planar circuit geometry where all inductors are real-
izedbysingleturnthinfilmconductors lithographed overagroundplane[17].
Thentheinductance perunitlength ofconductor willberoughly thesamefor
all inductors, and M ∼ kL , where L is the section of L coupled to the
ithrf-SQUID,andk isthecoupling constant, necessarily less than 1. Clearly,
the maximum N = L /L ∼ kL /M, as stated above. For L = 2nH and
M = 2pH, N = 1000, which satisfies the weak coupling limit Eq. (11).
N in the inductor bus quantum computer can be made larger than 1000 only
by the undesirable recourse ofdecreasing the coupling strength and the speed
oftwobitoperations.
6. Conclusions
We give a prescription for a large-scale N ∼ 1000 superconducting quan-
tumcomputer. Itisbased ontheidea of“interaction freesubspace” presented
in [2]. Solving the “no switch” problem without the need to use a physical
switch, itwillhelpintheefforttoconstruct apractical superconducting quan-
tumcomputer.