Draft (18 January 2021)
SURFACEACCUMULATIONOFSPERMATOZOA:AFLUIDDY-
NAMIC PHENOMENON
D. J. SMITH,∗ University of Birmingham
J. R. BLAKE,∗∗ University of Birmingham
Recentmathematicalfluiddynamicsmodelshaveshedlightintoanoutstanding
probleminreproductivebiology: whydospermatozoacellsshowa‘preference’
forswimmingneartosurfaces? Inthispaperwereviewquantitativeapproaches
to the problem, originating with the classic paper of Lord Rothschild in 1963.
A recent ‘boundary integral/slender body theory’ mathematical model for
the fluid dynamics is described, and we discuss how it gives insight into the
mechanisms that may be responsible for the surface accumulation behaviour.
We use the simulation model to explore these mechanisms in more detail, and
discuss whether simplified models can capture the behaviour of sperm cells.
Thefar-fielddecayofthefluidflowaroundthecelliscalculated,andcompared
with a stresslet model. Finally we present some new findings showing how,
despitehavingarelativelysmallhydrodynamicdrag,thespermcell‘head’has
very significant effects on surface accumulation and trajectory.
Keywords: fluid dynamics, Stokes flow, spermatozoa, slender body theory
2000 Mathematics Subject Classification: Primary 76Z10
Secondary 92C05, 92C17
∗Postaladdress: SchoolofClinicalandExperimentalMedicineandSchoolofMathematics,University
of Birmingham, Edgbaston, Birmingham, B15 2TT, UK; Centre for Human Reproductive Science,
BirminghamWomen’sNHSFoundationTrust,MetchleyParkRoad,Edgbaston,B152TG,UK
∗∗Postal address: School of Mathematics, University of Birmingham, Edgbaston, Birmingham, B15
2TT, UK; Centre for Human Reproductive Science, Birmingham Women’s NHS Foundation Trust,
MetchleyParkRoad,Edgbaston,B152TG,UK
]nyd-ulf.scisyhp[
1v3512.7001:viXra
2 D. J. SMITH AND J. R. BLAKE
1. Introduction
Approximately one in six couples in the world experiences difficulties conceiving
children, and on clinical examination male factors are found to contribute in at least
half of all cases. A critical aspect of the function of the human male gamete is its
motility: the sperm’s ability to swim through the liquids of the female reproductive
tract to the vicinity of the egg, penetrate the surrounding layers and fertilise. Motility
is therefore an important target for novel diagnostic and therapeutic techniques, and
advances in this area would have considerable financial and quality-of-life implications
in human fertility, domestic animal breeding and wildlife conservation. The ability of
sperm to swim is perhaps their most obvious function to the physical scientist, having
long-provided an important archetype in mathematical fluid dynamics modelling. In
this article, we discuss an important and surprisingly elusive aspect of the swimming
behaviour of sperm both in vivo and in vitro—the phenomenon of ‘surface accumula-
tion’.
Rothschild [24] famously observed the non-uniform distribution of sperm in a drop
of bull semen: spermatozoa typically exhibit a ‘preference’ for surfaces, with by far
the greatest concentrations being found near to the inner faces of imaging chambers
or the microscope slide and coverslip (Figure 1). Moreover, once in the vicinity of a
surface,spermcellstendtoremainataconstantdistance,afactthatisveryconvenient
in microscopical imaging of the sperm and its flagellar movement, Smith et al. [28].
In the sperm of humans and the majority of other species studied, gravity has not
been observed to have a significant effect, so that the number of cells accumulating on
upper and lower surfaces is typically similar, Winet et al. [29]. A related phenomenon
occurs in other motile microscopic cells such as bacteria, and this has long interested
researchers, particularly at the interface of mathematical modelling and experimental
biology (see [2], [5], [17], [29]).
A recent study of surface accumulation of sperm by Smith et al. [27] predicts that,
at least for the human gamete, the effect can occur through fluid mechanics alone,
resulting from the viscous-dominated regime of microscopic swimming, without the
needforaspecialised‘bias’oftheflagellarbeattopushthecelltowardsthesurface. In
thispaperwereviewthefindingsofthisstudy,thendiscusshowthemodelgivesinsight
Surface accumulation of spermatozoa 3
Figure1: Micrographsshowing(a)highspermcellconcentrationnearamicroscopeslide,(b)
low sperm cell concentration at a level mid-way between the microscope slide and coverslip.
Unpublished data, Smith and Kirkman-Brown 2009.
into the mechanisms that may and may not be responsible for this behaviour, and
in particular some important and previously unexplored aspects that a fundamental
theory of surface accumulation must address.
2. Mathematical modelling of cell swimming at zero Reynolds number
FluidflowismodelledmathematicallybytheNavier-Stokespartialdifferentialequa-
tions. ForaconstantviscosityNewtonianincompressiblefluid,thesetakethefollowing
form:
(cid:18) (cid:19)
Thedependentvariablesarethevelocityfieldu=u(x,t)representingthefluidvelocity
at location x and time t, and the pressure field p=p(x,t). The constants ρ and µ are
density and viscosity, the latter quantity being measured in Pascal seconds (Pa s) in
SI units. The first equation is derived from the principle of momentum balance, with
the terms on the left hand side arising from inertia, while the terms on the right hand
side arise from pressure and viscosity respectively. The second equation corresponds
to the principle of mass conservation, combined with incompressibility.
The most famous source of mathematical difficulty is the nonlinear term (u·∇)u,
from which arises the great unsolved problem of turbulence and the open question of
4 D. J. SMITH AND J. R. BLAKE
whethertheNavier-Stokesequationsalwayshavesmoothsolutions. However,insperm
fluid mechanics it is possible to neglect this term: nondimensionalising the equations
with U as velocity scale, L as length scale, L/U as time scale and µU/L2 as pressure
scale, the momentum equation is simplified to
(cid:18) (cid:19)
where the coefficient on the left hand side is the Reynolds number R = ρUL/µ, first
identifiedbyOsborneReynoldsastheparametergoverningthetransitiontoturbulence.
A sperm cell has length approximately 50µm, swims with velocity approximately
50µm/s,andthedensityandviscosityofsalinesolutioncanbeestimatedas103 kg/m3
and10−3 Pas. WeestimatetheReynoldsnumberas2.5×10−3,andindeedinsolutions
of higher viscosity it will be smaller still. It is therefore an excellent approximation to
consider the ‘zero Reynolds number’ Stokes flow equations,
Solving this equation directly using the computational fluid dynamics approaches
generally applied to higher Reynolds number flows is computationally expensive, since
there are three spatial dimensions. Simulating the trajectory of a sperm additionally
involvessolvingtheequationatasequenceoftimesteps,andanadditionalcomplication
is the presence of moving boundaries due to the movement of the flagellum and
head, which in a computational fluid dynamics solution would necessitate moving the
computational mesh at every timestep, which incurs further expense. The analysis we
usein thispaper exploitsthelinearityof equation (3)to solve theproblem muchmore
efficiently.
Very low Reynolds number corresponds to the near-absence of inertia, and in this
respect,thefluidmechanicsofspermswimmingdifferssignificantlyfrommorefamiliar
situations such as human or fish swimming, or indeed most of the fluid dynamic
phenomena we encounter. An important property of equation (3) is the absence of
explicit time dependence, leading to time-reversal symmetry. Classic demonstrations
of this were given by Sir Geoffrey Taylor in his 1967 film Low Reynolds number flow,
including the ‘smearing’ and ‘unsmearing’ of an ink droplet in glycerine, and the
abolition of swimming of a model fish by high viscosity liquid. This latter effect is
Surface accumulation of spermatozoa 5
a crucial aspect of sperm swimming—only by performing a time-irreversible motion,
suchaspropagatingabendingwave,canspermswimeffectively. ‘Flapping’motionsof
afishtailorotherreciprocatingmovementsareineffective—laterreferredtobyEdward
Purcell [23] as the ‘Scallop Theorem’. Recent research by Lauga [16] has shown that
in non-Newtonian liquids, such as polymer suspensions, the introduction of an explicit
time-dependence results in the breakdown of this theorem.
3. Singular solutions of the Stokes flow equations
The problem of sperm swimming will be formulated using equation (3), together
with boundary conditions for the fluid velocity on the surface of the sperm tail,
head, and additionally a nearby glass surface. The linearity of equation (3) allows
the superposition of solutions in order to satisfy the boundary conditions, and the
techniques we shall use will be based on singular solutions, in particular the Stokeslet
(point-force), Stokes-dipole (point-force dipole) and the potential flow source dipole.
The Stokeslet S (x,y) is defined as the solution u(x) = (S (x,y), S (x,y),
S (x,y)) and p(x)=P (x,y) of
whichistheStokesflowequationwithaconcentratedunitforceperunitvolumelocated
at y, pointing in the k-direction, with δ(x−y) denoting the Dirac delta distribution.
ThesolutionforapointforceinaninfinitefluidisgivenbyS =(δ /r+r r /r3)/8π
and P = r /(4πr3), where r = x −y and r2 = r2 +r2 +r2, and δ denotes the
k j j j j 1 2 3 jk
Kronecker delta tensor. Other singular solutions include the Stokes-dipole, defined as
SD = (∂/∂x )S , and the potential source-dipole PD = (∂/∂x )(r /r3))/4π. The
jkl l jk jk k j
latter is named due to being a source-dipole solution of the potential flow equations,
and is a solution of equation (3) with zero pressure field.
TheStokeslet,coinedbyHancock[12]asanameforthepurely viscous component of
the Stokes flow around a translating sphere, the other component being the potential
source-dipole. The Stokeslet and potential-dipole tensors are singular at the centre
of the sphere, so that the flow is regular in the domain |x−y| > a, where a is the
sphere radius. The concept of representing flows around finite bodies by combinations
6 D. J. SMITH AND J. R. BLAKE
of singularities outside or on the boundary of the flow domain forms the basis for the
slender body theory and boundary integral method we discuss below.
4. The no-slip condition in viscous fluid mechanics and the method of
The appropriate velocity boundary condition in viscous flow is the no-slip, no-
penetration condition u(x = X) = U(X), where X is the position vector of a solid
surface and U(X) is its velocity. In this problem we are concerned with a stationary
boundary representing the glass surface of a microscope slide or a coverslip, and a
moving boundary representing the cell head and tail surfaces. The glass surface
is modelled as the plane x = 0, with flow taking place in the ‘half-space’ region
x >0. In the experiment, there is an additional bounding surface, but since we shall
only consider motion close to one surface, this is neglected in our model. Liron and
Mochon[20] showed howto model theeffect ofthe additionalsurface, butthisis more
computationally expensive, as discussed in Smith et al. [26].
Blake [3] addressed the problem of modelling a flow using Stokeslet distributions
while satisfying the no-slip condition u(x = 0), motivated by the propulsion of fluid
by cilia protruding from a cell surface. The technique is equally useful in modelling
the interaction of a glass surface and a sperm cell. We denote the solution here as B,
(cid:18)(cid:20) (cid:21) (cid:20) (cid:21)
1 δ r r δ R R
B (x;ξ) = ij + i j − ij + i j
ij 8π r r3 R R3
(cid:20) (cid:20) (cid:21)(cid:21)(cid:19)
∂ ξ R δ R R
3 jα αk j3 3k ∂R R3 R R3
with R = r , R = x +ξ and the index α taking values 1, 2 only. Equation (5)
consists of a Stokeslet in the fluid, an equal and opposite image Stokeslet, and further
imagesconsistingofaStokes-dipoleandpotentialdipole. Thetensor(δ δ −δ δ )
jα αk j3 3k
takes the value +1 for j = k = 1,2, value −1 for j = k = 3 and zero otherwise. An
equivalent solution had technically been found previously in the 1896 work of Lorentz
(see [21]); however it was not until solution (5) was discovered that the nature of the
image systems was clear. Furthermore this result showed how the far-field is modified
by the boundary effect: the O(r−1) decay of a force acting parallel to the boundary is
Surface accumulation of spermatozoa 7
modified to become a O(r−2) decay, the far-field being of ‘stresslet’ character, i.e. a
symmetricStokes-dipole. Thishasrecentlybeenusedtounderstandthefluiddynamics
of the movement of vesicles in the developing embryonic node, Smith et al. [25].
5. Slender body theory and the boundary integral method
Performingthefirstdetailedmathematicalanalysisofmicroorganismswimming,G.
J. Hancock [12], working with Sir James Lighthill, formulated a slender body theory
for Stokes flow, inspired by slender body theory for potential flow. This involved
representing the fluid flow around the flagellum using a line integral of Stokeslets
weighted by unknown force density. Considerable work on simplifications to slender
body theory (see [10], [18]), adaptations for cilia modelling (see [4], [9], [11], [19]),
refinements to incorporate a spherical cell body (see [13]), large-amplitude motions
(see [8], [13]), asymptotic analysis (see [1], [6]) and higher-order corrections (see [15])
have been presented, as reviewed in detail in by Smith et al. [27]. Essentially, all of
thesetheoriesinvolverepresentingtheflowfieldduetothemovingtailbyalineintegral
(cid:90) 1
where the kernel G is a force singularity Green’s function, coupled with a potential-
dipole PD to improve the accuracy of the slender body representation, and f(s) is the
force per unit length.
In order to model the effect of the sperm cell body or ‘head’, there are three fluid
dynamic effects that must be taken into account. In order of importance, they are:
1. The drag and torque on the translating and rotating head, balancing the force
and torque produced by the flagellum,
2. Thenearandfar-fieldsoftheflowgeneratedbytheheadasitmovesthroughthe
3. The fact that the no-slip condition must be satisfied on the head, taking into
account the flow produced by the flagellum. This modifies f(s) and usually
reduces the swimming speed.
8 D. J. SMITH AND J. R. BLAKE
The only fluid dynamic model to have taken all these effects into account while using
slenderbodytheoryexclusivelywasthatofHigdon[13],whichmodelledtheswimming
of a spherical-headed microorganism. Taking into account the non-spherical head of
mostspermcells,andadditionallytheeffectofanearbyno-slipsurface,requirestheuse
ofmorecomplexnumericalimplementations,suchastheboundaryintegralmethod,as
first applied to sperm by Phan-Thien et al. [22]. The boundary integral method uses
distributions of Stokeslets over the a surface ∂H, with force per unit area given by the
unknown traction φ(Xh,t) for Xh ∈∂H. Recently, we used a hybrid of the boundary
integral method for accurate modelling of the head, and slender body theory for the
flagellum(see[27]),inordertoprovideanefficientandaccuraterepresentationofboth
parts of the cell. In this method, the velocity field for points in the fluid x outside of,
or on, the surface of the sperm is given by
(cid:90)(cid:90) (cid:90) 1
Since the movement of the flagellum will be specified relative to the cell, not a sta-
tionary observer, a coordinate transformation is required. The position of the flagellar
centreline in the laboratory frame is given by
where X is the location of the head/flagellum junction, M is a rotation matrix from
the ‘body frame’, in which the head is stationary, to a fixed ‘lab frame’, and ξ(cid:48) is the
flagellumpositionvectorinthebodyframe. Theflagellarmovementisspecifiedasthe
function ξ(cid:48). The body frame will translate and rotate with a priori unknown velocity
V andangularvelocityΩ. Byrigidbodymechanics,withrespecttothelaboratory,the
kinematic velocities of points on the head U(Xh) and flagellum U(ξ) are respectively
In order to close the system so that φ, f, V and Ω can be determined simultaneously,
Surface accumulation of spermatozoa 9
we use the principles of force and torque balance in zero Reynolds number flow:
(cid:90) (cid:90) (cid:90) 1
0 = φ(Xh,t)dXh+ f(s,t)ds,
(cid:90) (cid:90) (cid:90) 1
At each instant in time, the initial position and orientation are known, and the
flagellum position ξ, and kinematics ξ˙, with respect to the head are given by a mathe-
matical formula chosen to represent the flagellum waveform. From this, equations (7)
and(10)formaclosedsystemfortheunknownsφ,f,V andΩ. Acollocationmethod
is used to discretise these equations spatially, and a matrix system with typically
3×(60+32)+3+3scalarunknownsisformulated,correspondingto60constant-force
segments for the flagellum, 32 constant-force elements for the head, the additional
terms being the 3 scalar components of V and Ω. The solution of this system allows
the updating of the cell position and orientation from V and Ω. From the new values
of f and φ, the equation (7) can be used to calculate the velocity of the fluid at any
point in space.
This method is very computationally efficient, allowing the accurate simulation of
8000 beat cycles of migration, discretised with 100 timesteps per beat, in approxi-
mately 20 hours of CPU time. Such efficient computation of a moving-boundary, 3D,
unbounded and time-dependent problem is not possible with standard computational
fluid dynamics methods that involve the determination of the fluid velocity at every
point in the domain at every timestep. The simplification arises from the linearity of
the Stokes flow equations, the corresponding ability to take integral sums of known
solutions, and our knowledge of Green’s functions such as B.
Simulations were performed with the University of Birmingham’s BlueBear cluster,
usingasinglecorepersimulation. Thisallowsparameterspacetobesearchedthrough
the simultaneous execution of many simulations; however a single simulation could be
performed in a similar time period on a desktop PC.
10 D. J. SMITH AND J. R. BLAKE
6. Prescribing the flagellar beat
The remaining step in the model is to specify the movement of the flagellum ξ(cid:48).
While some approaches have generated the flagellar beat from a complex interaction
of internal mechanical activity and external fluid forces, we have taken the simpler
approachofwritingξ(cid:48) asananalyticfunction. Theflagellarwaveformofhumansperm
is usually a three-dimensional shape, likely to resemble a nearly-planar flattened helix
(see [14]). In [27] we examined the effect of both a planar waveform and a flattened
helix, and found that the difference in surface accumulation in the two cases was
minimal. Hencein whatfollows weshall focus ontheplanar beat, whichsimplifiesthe
analysisoftheflowfieldaroundthecell. Thewaveformwechoosewasfirstsuggestedby
DresdnerandKatz[7],andisproportionaltoasine-wavesin(kx −ωt),modifiedtohave
linearly increasing amplitude along the flagellum. In [27], we found that the angular
wavenumber parameter k is the critical parameter governing surface accumulation, as
discussed in the next section. Figure 2 shows the waveform for k = 2π and k = 3π
respectively.
Figure 2: Planar sinusoidal waveforms used for the simulations, with (a) k = 2π and (b)
k=3π.
7. Recent findings
Our recent simulation study [27] mainly concerned the behaviour of a cell initially
atx =1innon-dimensionalunits, i.e.onebodylengthawayfromano-slipboundary
at x = 0, with initially parallel orientation, and its beat plane parallel to the no-slip
boundary, as shown in the simulation snapshot Figure 3(a). The behaviour predicted
by the simulations for wavenumbers k > 2.4π is shown schematically in Figure 3(b):
Surface accumulation of spermatozoa 11
the cell initially pitches towards the surface and swims towards it, then pitches away,
repeatingthisbehaviouruntilitapproachesan‘equilibriumheight’atwhichitremains.
eventual height
no−slip surface / microscope slide
Figure 3: (a) The initial configuration for all simulations, with the head/flagellum junction
initiallyatx=(0,0,1). (b)Schematicshowingthesurfaceaccumulationbehaviourpredicted
by simulations for wavenumbers k > 2.4π. The horizontal distance travelled is an order of
magnitude greater than shown in the schematic, as shown in Figure 4.
Figure 4(a) shows the definition of height, measured from the surface to the head/
flagellum junction, and pitch angle, measured so that a positive value corresponds to
pitching away from the surface. Simulation results for height and pitch angle with
wavenumbers k = 2π and k = 3π are shown in Figure 4. These results are based
on those presented in [27], which were the first long timescale simulations of sperm
behaviour near surfaces, although the results we present here are for a greater number
of timesteps.
These results show that accumulation can occur purely through fluid dynamic
effects: Figure 4(c) shows a relatively rapid convergence of a cell with wavenumber
k = 3π to a specific height above the surface—around x = 0.31. Figure 4(b) shows
12 D. J. SMITH AND J. R. BLAKE
the behaviour of a cell with wavenumber k = 2π. While it does not converge, it does
suggest that after an initial period of swimming away, the cell will eventually return,
swimmingtowardsthesurface. Itisunclearwhetherthiscouldeverresultinswimming
atastableheight,asfork =3π,andindeedwhethertheoscillationswillgrowordecay
in amplitude. A simulation period of 8000 timesteps corresponds to an experimental
timescale of 400–800 seconds, depending on the beat frequency.
Surface accumulation of spermatozoa 13
Pitch angle
no−slip surface / microscope slide
0 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 6000 7000 8000
Number of beat cycles
0 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 6000 7000 8000
Number of beat cycles
0 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 6000 7000 8000
Number of beat cycles
0 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 6000 7000 8000
Number of beat cycles
Figure4: (a)Schematicshowingthedefinitionsofheightabovethesurface,measuredtothe
head/flagellum junction, and pitch angle, measured from a plane parallel to the surface. (b)
Height and pitch angle trajectories, from a simulation with wavenumber k =2π. (c) Height
and pitch angle trajectories from a simulation with wavenumber k=3π.
No specialised ‘bias’ in the flagellar beat towards the surface is required to produce
theaccumulationbehaviour,providedthewavenumberissufficientlylarge. Asobserved
experimentally by Winet et al. [29], cells eventually swim at a finite constant distance
14 D. J. SMITH AND J. R. BLAKE
from the surface, as opposed to necessarily swimming against it. The surface does
not simply attract the cell; it causes alternate pitching towards and away from the
surface that steers the cell to this finite distance. Finally, perhaps counterintuitively,
the ‘equilibrium state’ of a cell swimming parallel to a surface involves a slight angle
of inclination away from the surface. In the following sections we investigate further
the fluid mechanics of this behaviour.
no−slip surface
swimming direction
‘attraction field’
resultant trajectory
Figure 5: (a) Schematic showing the planes parallel to the no-slip surface used for the
calculation of the mean flow field around the cell.(b) Density plot showing the vertical
component of the flow field u , averaged over one beat cycle, and averaged between the
planes Z −ε and Z +ε, where ε=0.02. (c) The equilibrium parallel-swimming behaviour
ofthecellinvolvesabalanceofinclinedswimmingawayfromthesurface, andtheattraction
flow field shown in (b).
8. The attraction field and pitching behaviour
In order to gain insight into this effect, we calculate the time-averaged flow field
aroundthecell,inparticulartheverticalcomponentu¯ thatmaypushthecelltowards
or away from the surface. The flow fields evaluated at any finite distance above and
below the cell show almost equal and opposite behaviour, so instead we calculate the
Surface accumulation of spermatozoa 15
average 1(u¯(X +εe )+u¯(X −εe )), as shown in Figure 5(a). In an infinite fluid,
thisaveragewouldbezero,howevertheimagesingularitiesofB(equation(5))generate
anon-zeroverticalcomponent,thedominantimagesingularitybeingtheStokes-dipole.
An example result for X = (0,0,1) and k = 3π is shown in Figure 5(b), showing
that the cell generates an ‘attraction field’, i.e. a vertical fluid velocity that pushes it
towards the surface. This occurs for wavenumbers k =2π and k =3π, and also occurs
very close to (x = 0.1) and further from (x = 1.0) the surface. In accumulating
cells, the eventual equilibrium trajectory occurs due to a balance of the attraction
field, drawing the cell towards the surface, and a progressive component away from
the surface, occurring because there is a small pitch angle away from the surface—see
for example Figure 4(c), where the eventual pitch angle converges to 0.42◦ while the
height converges to x =0.31. This mechanism is summarised in Figure 5(c).
9. The propulsive force distribution on the flagellum
Cisneros et al. [5], using the related method of regularised Stokeslets, modelled the
swimming of a bacterium near to a wall, representing the head as a sphere and the
flagellum as a propulsive stick, with constant propulsive force distributed along its
length. Surface accumulation behaviour was interpreted from the flow field generated
around the swimmer, and also the existence of a resultant force predicted to act on
a swimmer constrained to move parallel to a surface. In our simulations of sperm
swimming we take a different approach: the propulsive force is calculated directly
from the fluid/flagellum interaction, and cells are predicted to swim parallel to the
surface while remaining free from any resultant force.
While the attraction field appears to occur regardless of the wavenumber and dis-
tance from the surface, the pitching behaviour is very sensitive to both of these
parameters, and it is this pitching effect, rather than the attraction field, that is
responsible for the behaviour shown in Figure 4(b-c). Wavenumber affects the flow
field through changes to the force distribution on the flagellum. In order to quantify
how this changes with wavenumber, we calculate the time-averaged force distribution
resolved in the direction of propulsion. Graphs of this quantity for k =2π and k =3π
areshowninFigure6: bothofthetime-averagedforcedistributionsdiffersignificantly
16 D. J. SMITH AND J. R. BLAKE
from the constant function used in the bacterial model. The average propulsive force
along the flagellum, which balances the drag on the head and causes progression, is a
fraction of the peak magnitude of the force along the flagellum: for a swimming cell
such as a sperm with a relatively small cell body, the vast majority of drag occurs
along certain portions of the flagellum, rather than the head.
0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8
Dimensionless arclength
evisluporp
sselnoisnemiD
0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8
Dimensionless arclength
evisluporp
sselnoisnemiD
Figure 6: Flagellar force distribution, averaged over one beat cycle for (a) k = 2π and (b)
k = 3π. The dotted line denotes the mean force distribution along the flagellum, showing
thatmostofthepropulsiveeffectgeneratedbythemidregionoftheflagellumisbalancedby
nearly-equal and opposite drag occurring at the ends, as opposed to the head of the cell.
Afundamentaltheoryofsurfaceaccumulationmusttakeintoaccountthecomplexity
of the flagellar force distribution. Indeed, the relatively small change between k =2π
and k = 3π results in very significantly different behaviour (Figure 4). It should be
noted that the bacterial flagellum differs substantially in structure and waveform from
the sperm flagellum, and the force distribution for this cell type is likely to differ from
our results in Figure 6—and may more closely resemble a constant function.
Thesimplestmodelofthefluidflowproducedbyaforce-freeswimmerisastresslet,
i.e. a Stokes-dipole that approximates a propulsive force due to the flagellum and a
drag force due to the head acting very close together. This is based on the following
simplified model: the drag on the head pushes fluid in front of the cell in the direction
of swimming, while the propulsive effect of the flagellum pushes fluid rear of the
cell in the opposite direction. Analysis of the propulsive force distribution Figure 6
shows that the situation is more complex for sperm motility. Figure 6 leads us to
Surface accumulation of spermatozoa 17
examine the hypothesis that the flow may be modelled more accurately as a Stokes-
quadrupole (∂2/∂x2)S , at least for k = 3π, as shown in Figure 7. This singularity
has far-field decay O(r−3), compared with the O(r−2) behaviour of the Stokes-dipole.
From our simulations, the decay of the velocity field around a sperm in an infinite
fluid is approximately O(r−2.4), intermediate between the Stokes-dipole and Stokes-
quadrupole. When the no-slip surface is present, the decay of the velocity field is even
more rapid, being approximately O(r−3.8), as may be expected from presence of the
additional image systems.
propulsion
drag propulsion drag
stokes−dipole
stokes−dipole stokes−dipole
drag propulsion +
stokes−quadrupole
drag propulsion drag
Figure 7: Two simplified models for the force exerted on the fluid by a sperm: (a) Stokes-
dipole, (b) Stokes-quadrupole, the latter being inspired by the force distribution shown in
Figure 6(c).
10. The effect of the cell ‘head’
Figure 6 suggests that the drag on the head, which is equal and opposite to the
mean of the propulsive force on the flagellum, is very small in comparison with the
peakflagellarforce. Thisleadsustotestwhethertheheadhasanysignificanteffecton
theaccumulationbehaviour. Weperformsimulationsofacellwithhalftheusualhead
dimensions, resulting in 1/8th the volume, and also a ‘pinhead’ cell—as sometimes
observed experimentally—with volume 1/1000th that of the normal head. The results
areshowninFigure8—areductioninheaddimensionsresultsinmuchslowerdecayof
the oscillations, while a pinhead cell does not even approach an equilibrium trajectory
over 8000 beat cycles. Despite the fact that the head makes a relatively minor contri-
18 D. J. SMITH AND J. R. BLAKE
butiontothedragincomparisonwithregionsoftheflagellum,itisneverthelesscrucial
tothesurfaceaccumulationeffect. Thereasonsforthisareunclear, butemphasisethe
subtlety of the fluid dynamic interaction.
0 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 6000 7000 8000
Number of beat cycles
0 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 6000 7000 8000
Number of beat cycles
0 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 6000 7000 8000
Number of beat cycles
0 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 6000 7000 8000
Number of beat cycles
Figure 8: Simulation results showing the effect of the head proportions on accumulation
behaviour. (a) A cell with head dimensions half that of a normal cell, giving 1/8th the
volume. This cell is predicted to accumulate, but the oscillations decay much more slowly
thaninthenormalcase. (b)A‘pinhead’cellwithheaddimensionsonetenththatofanormal
cell, giving 1/1000th the volume. This cell is not predicted to accumulate over the timescale
simulatedof4000beatcycles,butneverthelessdoesexhibitaneventualpitchingtowardsthe
surface.
Surface accumulation of spermatozoa 19
11. Conclusions
Despitetheapparentsimplicityoftheproblem—modellingasinglecellswimmingin
zero Reynolds number flow—surface accumulation is a relatively subtle problem and
has evaded a simple explanation since the 1960s. Fluid dynamic simulations give a
number of insights into the mechanism for this behaviour, and the roles of the head
and flagellum force distributions. To summarise:
• For sufficiently large wavenumber, sperm have a ‘preferred’ trajectory, in which
they swim near and parallel to a surface, with zero total force.
• This occurs through a combination of pitching behaviour, which ‘steers’ the cell
to an equilibrium height and a relatively weak attraction field, that balances the
eventual slight inclination of the cell away from the surface.
• Any theory of sperm accumulation must take into account the shape of the
propulsive force distribution, and the fact that the sperm does not behave as
a simple Stokes-dipole drag/propulsion combination.
• The sperm head, while contributing a relatively small fraction of the drag, has
very signficant effects on accumulation, in particular causing more rapid conver-
gence of the cell trajectory.
• In the real physiological system, sperm undergo transient spontaneous changes
in swimming behaviour. This may be responsible for the fact that observations
(for example, Figure 1) rarely show every single cell swimming stably at a
fixed distance from the surface, as might be predicted from simulation studies.
Furthermore this is an important difference between sperm and other swimming
cells such as bacteria.
A ‘simple’ explanation of this long-standing problem is surprisingly elusive. Moreover,
similaritiesanddifferencesbetweenspermandbacterialbehaviournearsurfacesrequire
further investigation.
20 D. J. SMITH AND J. R. BLAKE
12. Acknowledgements
The authors thank Dr Jackson Kirkman-Brown of the Centre for Human Repro-
ductive Science, Birmingham Women’s NHS Foundation Trust for the unpublished
experimentaldatashowninFigure1,andforvaluablediscussionsandguidanceonthe
enigmaticworldofspermfunctionandfertility. Theauthorsalsothanktheircolleagues
Dr Eamonn Gaffney, Mr Henry Shum and Mr Hermes Gadˆelha of the Mathematical
Institute, University of Oxford for valuable discussions. The authors acknowledge
comments from Dr Martin Bees, Department of Mathematics, University of Glasgow
ontheflowfieldsproducedbybacteria,andProfessorTimPedley,DAMTP,University
of Cambridge, on the ‘fundamentals’ of surface accumulation of sperm, which led to
some of the investigations undertaken in this paper. David J. Smith was funded by a
MedicalResearchCouncilComputationalBiologyFellowship,grantnumberG0600178.
This is a preprint of a paper published in The Mathematical Scientist vol. 34 no.
2, pp. 74–87 (2009).