1v37980.9051:viXra
October 1,2015 Advanced Robotics SER-AR
To appear in Advanced Robotics
Vol. 00, No. 00, January 2015, 1–27
SURVEY PAPER
Symbol Emergence in Robotics: A Survey
Tadahiro Taniguchi , Takayuki Nagai , Tomoaki Nakamura ,
Naoto Iwahashi , Tetsuya Ogata , and Hideki Asoh
College of Information Science and Engineering,
Ritsumeikan University,
1-1-1 Noji Higashi, Kusatsu, Shiga 525-8577, Japan
Department of Mechanical Engineering and Intelligent Systems,
The University of Electro-Communications,
1-5-1 Chofugaoka, Chofu-shi, Tokyo 182-8585, Japan
Faculty of Computer Science and Systems Engineering,
Okayama Prefectural University,
111 Kubogi, Soja-shi, Okayama 719-1197, Japan
Department of Intermedia Art and Science,
School of Fundamental Science and Engineering, Waseda University,
3-4-1 Ohkubo, Shinjuku, Tokyo 169-8555, Japan
Artificial Intelligence Research Center,
National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST),
AIST Tsukuba Central 1, 1-1-1 Umezono, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8560, Japan
(v1.0 released ****)
Humanscan learn theuseoflanguage throughphysicalinteraction with theirenvironmentandsemi-
otic communication with otherpeople. Itis veryimportant toobtain acomputational understanding
ofhowhumanscanformasymbolsystemandobtainsemioticskillsthroughtheirautonomousmental
development. Recently, many studies have been conducted on the construction of robotic systems
and machine-learning methods that can learn the use of language through embodied multimodal in-
teraction with their environment and other systems. Understanding human social interactions and
developing a robot that can smoothly communicate with human users in the long term, requires an
understandingofthedynamicsofsymbolsystemsandiscruciallyimportant.Theembodiedcognition
and social interaction of participants gradually change a symbol system in a constructivemanner. In
this paper, we introducea field of research called symbol emergence in robotics (SER). SER is a con-
structiveapproach towardsan emergent symbolsystem.Theemergent symbolsystem issocially self-
organizedthroughbothsemioticcommunicationsandphysicalinteractionswithautonomouscognitive
developmentalagents, i.e.,humansanddevelopmentalrobots.Specifically,wedescribesomestate-of-
art research topics concerning SER, e.g., multimodal categorization, word discovery, and a double
articulation analysis, that enable a robot to obtain words and their embodied meanings from raw
sensory–motor information, including visual information, haptic information, auditory information,
andacousticspeechsignals, inatotally unsupervisedmanner.Finally,wesuggest futuredirectionsof
research in SER.
Keywords: Developmentalrobotics, language acquisition, semiotics, symbol emergence, symbol
October 1,2015 Advanced Robotics SER-AR
Symbol system
Micro-macro loop
Organization Constraints
Multimodal communication communication Learning Interaction strategy
Concept formation Bottle Robot
Emergence of
communication
This is Physical
Mummy! a pink animal interaction
Toy!!
Environment
Language acquisition Learning motor skills
and mental development and segmentation of
time-series information
Figure1. Emergentsymbolsystemandresearchtopicsinsymbolemergenceinrobotics.
1. Introduction
Thedevelopmentofanintelligentrobotwithwhichpeoplewouldembracealong-terminteraction
is one of the major challenges in the research field of robotics. Despite the rapid and remarkable
progressinrobotics,naturallanguage processing,human–robotinteraction, andrelated artificial
intelligence technologies, we have not been able to develop such an autonomous robot. Even if
an entertainment robot had sufficient capabilities for speech recognition, speech synthesis, and
natural language processing, a user would find it unexciting if the robot behaved determinis-
tically on the basis of finite hand-coded rules. To overcome this problem, a robot requires the
ability of open-ended development through its physical interactions and semiotic communica-
tions. Moreover, such a robot must use a language system to communicate and collaborate with
humans. To achieve actual long-term communication and collaboration between a human and a
robot, the robot has to understand the meanings of utterances, estimate a speaker’s intention,
learn new vocabularies, and promote a mutual understanding with people in the real world. To
construct a mutual understanding between a human and a robot, both of them must be able to
infer “what does he/she intend by the utterance?”, “what does the word he/she uttered repre-
sent?”, and “what should I say to make him/her understand what I want him/her to do?” by
referring to many objects, events, contexts, situations, habits, and history. When we consider
human–human communication and collaboration in the real world, it is easily understood that
utterances, e.g., words, phrases, and sentences do not have one-to-one relationships with real-
word phenomena. The modeling of such human semiotic communication for use in engineering
applications is clearly important for developing a robot that can communicate and collaborate
∗Correspondingauthor.Email:taniguchi@ci.ritsumei.ac.jp
October 1,2015 Advanced Robotics SER-AR
with others naturally like humans.
Generally, the language system is considered as a representative of the symbol systems in
semiotics . A symbol system is an important philosophical and technical keyword, not only
in semiotics, artificial intelligence, and cognitive science, but also in robotics. However, the
adaptability and emergent properties of symbol systems have been underestimated and even
ignored in the long history of research on robotic intelligence.
In contrast, studies that treat the adaptability of robots’ internal representations and au-
tonomous unsupervised learning processes for a language system have recently attracted atten-
tion [1–3]. On aspect of these studies is a constructive approach to human-embodied adaptive
intelligence and human symbol systems. However, the majority of current approaches to symbol
systems in artificial intelligence and robotics still cannot figure out the dynamics and emergent
properties of human symbol systems, i.e., the symbol systems retained in our human society. A
philosophical theory about the dynamics of human symbol systems should be established, and a
more sophisticated understanding about human symbol systems should be obtained, in order to
facilitate such studies and develop intelligent robots that enable long-term communication and
collaboration with humans.
Based on this notion, the research field called “symbol emergence in robotics” (SER) has
gradually emerged over the past decade, especially in Japan. We held the first organized session
concerning SER in a domestic conference in Japan in 2011. SER is based on the concept of
an “emergent symbol system,” which is introduced in Section 3. The emergent symbol system
presumes that a human symbol system has emergent properties, and is self-organized through
physical and semiotic interactions between cognitive agents, i.e., people and robots.
Figure 1 presents an abstract figure illustrating the emergent symbol system and research
topics in SER. We assume that robots should be developed that semantically communicate with
people and collaboratively interact with people in their environment, in order that they can be
assimilated into the emergent symbol system. At the center of Figure 1, the dynamics of an
emergent symbol system are schematically described.The background and concepts of emergent
symbol systems are detailed in Section 2 and Section 3.
SER incorporates many research topics, such as multimodal communication, concept forma-
tion, language acquisition and mental development, learning interaction strategy, emergence of
communication, and learning of motor skills and the segmentation of time-series information,
as illustrated in Figure 1. In SER, robots are required to learn almost everything from their
sensory-motor information flow, in a bottom-up manner. A top-down design of the intelligence
of the robots would deprivethem of theadaptability required for an emergent symbolsystem.In
particular, concept formation that is grounded on a robot’s multimodal sensory-motor informa-
tion and autonomous language acquisition from row speech signals are both fundamental topics
in SER. SER aims to build computational models that can describe the overall dynamics and
development of language acquisition and semiotic communication, on the basis of a robot’s and
a child’s self-enclosed sensory-motor experiences. This would enable the establishment of a new
theory of embodied semantics.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 briefly reviews the history of
“symbol systems” in artificial intelligence, cognitive science, and robotics. This forms the back-
ground of emergent symbol systems, which is a philosophical prerequisite of SER. Section 3
describes the concept of emergent symbol systems. In the subsequent sections, we provide a
survey of works related to SER. In particular, we review previous studies on multimodal cate-
gorization (Section 4), word discovery (Section 5), and double articulation analysis (Section 6),
which are important components of language acquisition, which is a fundamental challenge in
SER. In Section 7, we describe further topics related to SER. Section 8 concludes this paper.
October 1,2015 Advanced Robotics SER-AR
2. Background
2.1 Physical symbol systems and robotics
In the research field of robotics, the term “symbol” can be used in a variety of contexts, e.g.,
human–robot interaction, planning, reasoning, and communication. Historically, the physical
symbol system hypothesis was proposed by Newell and Simon [4, 5]. This formed the starting
pointforadiscussionaboutsymbolsystemsinartificialintelligenceandrelatedfields.But,itwas
a problematic starting point. The philosophy is clearly inspired by early successes in computer
science and programming languages. Many related works that followed the physical symbol
system hypothesis and/or its way of thinking have placed an emphasis on the manipulation
of symbols in research on artificial intelligence. This way of thinking was inherited from the
tradition of “symbolic logic.”
In predicate logic, which is a representative of symbolic logic, predicates and variables that
represent real-world phenomena are given as discrete representations in a top-down manner [6].
Thefundamentalassumptionisthatourworldcanbedistinguishedandsegmentedintoadiscrete
“symbol” system, and that the system is deterministic and static. In other words, predicate
logic can describe the world so far as such assumptions are satisfied. This represents a type of
“approximation.” Almost all symbolic logic essentially shares the same assumptions. Physical
symbol system hypothesis, proposed by Newel, is no exception [4, 5].
This convention has implicit effects on studies in robotics. In current robotics research, a
“symbol” tends to be regarded as a “discrete” entity, having a “one-to-one” relationship with
a word. A symbol is regarded as a manipulatable element in the mind, i.e., a robot’s memory
system. For example, in [7] the authors call a type of trajectory of a humanoid’s entire bodily
motion, modeled by a left-to-right hidden Markov model, a “proto-symbol.” Such notions as
“a symbol is a discrete component of a memory system in a robot,” “a symbol is an internal
representation in a robot,” and “a symbol system is a set or a network of such components,”
have spread widely through the artificial intelligence and robotics communities.
Figuratively speaking, symbolic logic adopts the assumptions of equilibrium and determinism
for modeling an actual human symbol system. It is assumed that the human symbol system is
the same for everyone, and does not change over time. This approximation has been valid for
solving many problems, in the same way that linear control theory has solved many problems,
eventhoughmostreal-worldsystemshavenonlinearandstochasticproperties,orthatthetheory
of thermodynamics of equilibriumsystems has provided fruitfulresults for engineering purposes.
However, these assumptions are crucially problematic, and have misled many researchers over
the past four decades. This has resulted in people misunderstanding the human symbol system.
Theblind acceptance of the approximation has meant that people did not consider the following
important characteristics of the human symbol system.
C1 Grounded: A symbol does not have any meaning without being grounded or interpreted.
C2 Dynamic: There does not exist an objectively true symbol system that can be determined
in top-down manner in our human society.
C3 Social: An individual representation system and the socially shared symbol system are not
same.
The characteristics of symbols have been widely accepted in semiotics and in a broader context
of humanities research [8].
2.2 Physical grounding hypothesis
There have been many criticisms of the physical symbol system hypothesis, and approaches to
intelligent systems based on this hypothesis, in the field of artificial intelligence. Brooks repre-
sentatively criticized andinsisted that sensory-motor coupling withtheenvironment is primarily
importantforrobotstoachieveeverydaytasksinourdailyenvironment[9,10].Hisfamouspaper
October 1,2015 Advanced Robotics SER-AR
“intelligence without representation” provided a clear objection to the physical symbol system
hypothesis. He proposed physical grounding hypothesis, of which the key observation is that
“the world is its own best model.” He developed many robots based on a subsumption archi-
tecture, which is a reactive and decentralized robotic architecture. This behavior-based robotics
places an emphasis on the primal sensory–motor interaction between a robot’s embodied system
and its environment, and the emergence of behavior through interactions. Breazeal et al. even
developed a “social” interactive robot using the subsumption architecture [11, 12]. However, the
subsumption architecture is still a framework for “designing” a robot that behaves naturally in
our daily environment. It is difficult for such an approach to build an autonomous system that
gradually reaches an intelligent state such that it can communicate with peopleusingalanguage
system, i.e., a human symbol system.
The field of embodied cognitive science is closely related to Brooks’s approach [13]. This
approachisalsorelatedtotheresearchfieldofartificiallifeandcomplexsystems.Metaphorically,
Brooks’s approach is to develop an insect-like artifact. In contrast, the traditional approach to
artificial intelligence can be thought of as an attempt to develop an obstinate mathematician
who cannot behave appropriately in a real-world environment.
2.3 Symbol grounding problem
The other famous criticism in relation to the symbol system, was expressed by Harnad. He
proposed the symbol grounding problem (SGP), which is one of the most famous problems
in artificial intelligence [14]. The SGP focused on the relationship between a designed symbol
system and real-world phenomena. The importance of the SGP has been widely recognized over
the past two and a half decades. The design of a “symbol system” and application of it to an
autonomous agent in a top-down manner inevitably leads to the SGP.
Advocates of physical symbol systems have insisted that the meaning of a symbol is syntac-
tically determined in relation with other symbols. However, such a “relationship” cannot reach
a conclusion on what anything means. A relationship between two signifiers can never provide
the relationship between a signifier and a signified object. Harnad compared this phenomenon
to a “merry-go-round”. To obtain any meaning, a word has to be grounded via sensory–motor
information, or borrow meanings from other words using syntactic rules. Cangelosi et al. called
these processes “sensorimotor toil” and “symbolic theft”, respectively [15].
In cognitive science, physical symbol systems have also been criticized. Barsalou proposed the
concept of “perceptual symbol systems”, to place an emphasis on perceptual experiences for
theories of knowledge [16]. He called the static symbolic system an “amodal symbol system,”
andpointed outits drawbacks.Although thenotion of aperceptualsymbolsystemwas notcom-
pletelynew,Barsaloumentionedthataperceptualtheoryofcognitionmayleadtoacompetitive,
and perhaps superior, theory. The physical symbol system clearly relates to the SGP.
Many interdisciplinary studies have aimed to solve the SGP [2, 17–19]. Recently, Tellex et al.
presentedanapproachtotheSPGusingprobabilisticgraphicalmodels[20].Fromaphilosophical
viewpoint, Taddeo et al. proposed the zero semantical commitment condition, which must be
satisfied by any hypothesis seeking to solve the SGP [21].
However, despite the long history of the SGP, a clear solution has not been found. One of the
reasonsforthisisthattheSGPitselfisnaively defined.TheSGPisbasedonthephysicalsymbol
system. Therefore, the SGP itself was misled by the physical symbol system hypothesis. That
is, the SGP is an ill-posed problem. The SGP mainly considers C1, almost completely ignoring
C2 and C3. Steels pointed out the problem in an ambitious and impressive paper titled “The
symbol grounding problem has been solved. So what’s next?” [22]. He described it as follows:
Iproposetomakeadistinctionbetweenc-symbols,thesymbolsofcomputerscience,andm-symbols,
the meaning-oriented symbols in the tradition of the arts, humanities, and social and cognitive
sciences.
October 1,2015 Advanced Robotics SER-AR
This distinction is crucially important for the construction of theories concerning long-term
human–robot interactions. The SGP starts with c-symbols, and attempts to make them
grounded. To develop an intelligent robot that people would embrace long-term interactions
with, we should clearly start from m-symbols, because from a human viewpoint, a human–robot
interactioniscomposedofm-symbols.Inourpaper,wecallasystemofc-symbolsandm-symbols
as an internal representation system and a human symbol system, respectively, according to the
conventions of robotics and semiotics. For example, Weng provided a critical survey on sym-
bolic models and emergent models in artificial intelligence [23]. Those symbol models are about
internal representation systems in our terminology.
Incontrast, theemergent symbolsystem we introducein thenext section considers bothtypes
of symbol, in an integrative manner.
2.4 Developmental robotics
Theepigenetic and/or developmental viewpoint is crucially important in creating artificial intel-
ligent systems that can adapt to a dynamic real–world environment. The field of developmental
robotics has emerged gradually over the past two decades [24]. Cangelosi et al. described devel-
opmental robotics as follows [24]:
Developmental robotics is an approachto the autonomous design of behavioraland cognitive capa-
bilities in artificial agents (robots) that takes direct inspiration from the developmental principles
and mechanisms observed in the natural cognitive systems of children.
The field is also referred to as “epigenetic robotics” [17]. Asada et al. used the term “cognitive
developmental robotics” [25]. Asada et al. stated that cognitive developmental robotics places
more emphasis on human/humanoid cognitive development than on related approaches. Our
research field, SER, philosophically inherits many concepts and fundamental assumptions from
the field of (cognitive) developmental robotics. In a manner of speaking, SER is a (crucially
important) branch of developmental robotics.
Developmental robotics places an emphasis on an autonomous agent’s embodied interaction
with the environment and the adaptive organization of the cognitive system, including cognitive
capabilities relating to language and other symbol systems [24]. However, the scope of develop-
mentalroboticsistremendouslylarge,becauseitinvolves almostallofhumanintelligence andits
diachronic changes. Moreover, developmental robotics attaches importance to interdisciplinary
communication between robotics and developmental psychology. Many efforts have been made
to construct a fruitful interdisciplinary academic field.
However, these characteristics of developmental robotics have distracted its attention from
a computational and constructive understanding of dynamic human symbol systems and the
developmentofrobotsthatachievetheoveralldynamicsanddevelopmentoflanguageacquisition
and semiotic communication. We believe that these are central topics in robotics research for
achieving long-term human–robot communication and collaboration. This is our motivation for
introducing the field of SER.
2.5 Symbol emergence in robotics
The approach in SER places more emphasis on the computational understanding of emergent
symbol systems. In addition to cognitive development, SER attempts to cover semiotic phenom-
ena. The field of SER is an interdisciplinary field, which is not only related to robotics, artificial
intelligence, development psychology, and cognitive science, but also to semiotics and linguistics
as well.
To describe the diachronic changes in internal representation systems and human symbol sys-
tems that are caused by embodied interaction and social communication, we require mathemati-
calmodels,suchasgenerativemodels,neuralnetworksandrelatedstatisticalmodels,androbotic
October 1,2015 Advanced Robotics SER-AR
models such as humanoids and mobile robots, for a productive discussion and development of
the integrative theory. In cognitive science, the generative probabilistic model has recently been
widely used to represent the human cognitive system [26]. In addition to such computational
models, SER places an emphasis on embodied cognition. Therefore, researchers in the field of
SER use robotic models to connect computational models to the real physical world. This in-
volves the use of state-of-art machine-learning technology, including Bayesian nonparametrics
and deep neural networks, to model the diachronic changes in the cognitive systems and symbol
systems of human/robots.
3. Emergent Symbol Systems
The center of Figure 1 shows the schematic figure of an emergent symbol system that was
originally introducedin[27].SERisdefinedasaconstructiveapproachtowardsemergentsymbol
systems [28]. In this section, we explain emergent symbol systems by referring to the figure.
3.1 Semiosis and umwelt
We will start from a human symbol system, i.e., the m-symbols described by Steels [22]. The
preexisting interdisciplinary research field that deals with human symbol systems is called semi-
otics. Semiotics is concerned with everything that can be interpreted as a sign, as explained by
Eco [29]. Initially, semiology was introduced by Saussure,while Peirce independently introduced
semiotics [30, 31]. Currently, the two fields have overlapped, and merged into the academic field
called semiotics. From the viewpoint of semiotics, language is a representative of general symbol
systems.
In Peircean semiotics, a symbol is defined as a process having three elements. The definition
has a high affinity for the bottom-up approach to cognitive systems. The first is the sign (rep-
resentamen), which describes the form that the sign takes, the second is the object, which is
something that the sign refers to, and the third is the interpretant, which, rather than an inter-
preter, is the sense made of the sign. The important point of the Peircean definition of a symbol
is that the sign, e.g., words, visual signs, or pointing, is not a symbol itself. The interpretant,
the third element of a symbol, mediates between the sign and the object. This degree of freedom
allows us to take a variety of interpretations and dynamics of a symbol system into consider-
ation. In the Peircean definition, a symbol is not a static material, but a dynamic process of
interpretation. Peirce calls this process “semiosis” [31].
The definition of a symbol is still abstract, but the definition clearly satisfies C1, C2, and
C3 from Section 2. The utterances of others are always interpreted on the basis of semiosis in
semiotic communication.
Peircean semiotics places a thorough emphasis on the subjective viewpoint. Uexku¨ll, who es-
tablishedbiosemiotics,proposedthefamousnotionofumwelt.Theumweltrepresentsananimal’s
subjective world, which emerges on the basis of the animal’s sensory–motor system [32]. Brooks
also cited Uexku¨ll, when he attacked the physical symbol system in his famous paper [9]. We
should start take the umwelts of robots and humans as a starting point. Their internal represen-
tation systems are initially formed through physical interactions with their environment,
using their sensory–motor systems.
In this sense, semiosis is the key that connects Brooks’ physical grounding hypothesis, which
eliminated internal representation systems, to semiotic communication, which is required for
long-term human–robot communication.
October 1,2015 Advanced Robotics SER-AR
3.2 Arbitrariness and perspective of structurists
In contrast to Peirce, Saussure emphasized the synchronic structure of language. The defining
notion of Saussurean semiotics is the arbitrariness of the sign (symbol). This embodies C2.
The relationships between signs, such as labels and words, and categories are arbitrary, and the
categories and segments of phenomena are also arbitrary. The arbitrarily determined categories,
segments, and lexicons are retained in a language system to which many people, who speak the
language, belong. Structuralists, the successors of Saussure, place an emphasis on arbitrariness.
Whenwebelongtoalanguagesystem,i.e.,ahumansymbolsystem,ourcognition,interpretation,
utterances, and even behaviors are affected by the symbol system. For example, we comprehend
objects so as to classify them into preexisting categories that our language system retains. The
symbol system provides constraints on our semiotic communication and physical interaction.
According to structuralists, “things” do not exist independently of the symbol system that
we use; reality is the creation of the media that seems to simply represent it. The structuralist
perspective tends to reverse the precedence of language and cognition. They stress that our
language, which incorporates arbitrariness, determines the order of the world [33]. This places
top-down constraints in an emergent symbol system.
3.3 Emergent symbol systems
Thisstructuristexaggeration ofunilateraldeterminationisnotaccurate.Humansymbolsystems
canbeorganizedinabottommanner.GeneticepistemologywasproposedbyPiaget[34],whois
often called the father of cognitive development research. In genetic epistemology, the subjective
world of humans is considered to be gradually “constructed” through interactions with their
environment. Piaget introduced a schema system, which is a self-organized cognitive system
that emerges through sensory–motor interaction, and is believed to be the basis of the language
system [35].
An internal representation system is not a static system, but rather a dynamic system that is
self-organized through physical interaction based on the sensory–motor system. Furthermore, a
humansymbolsystemisorganizedthroughsemioticcommunicationonthebasisofindividualin-
ternalrepresentationsystemsinabottom-upmanner(seeorganizationinFigure1).Insemiotics,
symbol systems are seldom treated as the static, closed, and stable systems that are inherited
from preceding generations, but instead are regarded as constantly changing [8]. The bottom-up
organization andthetop-down constraints ofthesymbolsystem introduceanemergent property
to the overall system.
Once a symbol system is generated in a society, people who use the symbol system must
obey the rules of this system to communicate and collaborate with others. The symbol system
includes phonetics, lexicons, syntax, and pragmatics as its constituents. If an agent belonging to
thesociety doesnotfollow therules,i.e., thesymbolsystem,thentheagentcannotcommunicate
its idea to others or collaborate with others. This means that the agent cannot make use of the
powerful symbolic system for their further survival.
Such a bilateral relationship between an emerged symbol system at the macro level and a
physical system consisting of communicating and collaborating agents at the micro level forms
a micro-macro loop. Micro-macro loops are found in many complex systems, especially in
living systems. This tells us that the entire system is an emergent system, i.e., a complex system
having emergent properties. Polanyi, who introduced the notion of emergence, described it as
follows [36]:
If each higher level is to control the boundary conditions left open by the operations of the next
lowerlevel,this impliesthatthese boundaryconditionsareinfactleftopenbythe operationsgoing
on at the lower level.
This stratification offered a framework for defining emergence as the action that produces the next
higher level,first fromthe inanimate to the living, and then fromeach biotic level to the one above
October 1,2015 Advanced Robotics SER-AR
7.3 Compositionality & semantics
7.1 Mutual
Sharing contexts belief system
5. Word discovery
6. Double articulation
Speech 4. Multimodal categorization
Audio Visual Haptic
Multimodal sensory-motor information
7.2 Active
perception & learning
Environment
Figure2. MutualrelationshipsofcomponentscorrespondingtoresearchtopicsintroducedbetweenSections4and7.Each
arrowindicatesthedependency ofeachcomponent andinformationflowamongthecomponents.
it.
The discussion above provides us with a novel concept, called an emergent symbol system
(Figure 1). This emergent symbol system is also closely related to an autopoietic system [37].
To develop a robot that naturally communicates and collaborate with humans in a long-term
manner,we have to create arobotic system that behaves as an adaptive element of theemergent
symbol system. To become an element of the emergent symbol system, a robot has to have a
capability to form an internal representation system, acquire a language system that humans
use, modulate its pragmatics, communicate with people in various contexts, and autonomously
collaboratewithpeopleinaphysicalenvironment.Thesearethesametasksthathumanchildren
arerequiredtocomplete duringtheir developmental period.Toachieve along-term development
and adaptation to an emergent symbol system, a robot should learn the symbol system in an
unsupervised manner and perform communication and collaboration autonomously.
In SER, which is a constructive approach to emergent symbol systems, our initial aim should
be to develop an autonomous robot that can automatically acquire language like a human child,
and gradually learn to communicate and collaborate with humans in our daily environment, in
a bottom-up manner.
4. Multimodal Categorization
From this section to Section 7, we present a brief survey of practical studies related to SER.
Figure 2 illustrates the relationships between the topics described in following sections. These
are thebasic components required to develop a robot that can learn language autonomously and
become an element of an emergent symbol system.
Embodiedautomaticlanguageacquisition isoneofthecentralissuesinSER.Thedevelopment
of an embodied cognitive system that can automatically acquire language is different from the
development of conventional natural language processing and automatic speech recognition sys-
tems. In language acquisition, a robot must learn language in a basically unsupervised manner
from its embodied sensory–motor information. Owing to the remarkable progress in machine-
learning and robotic technologies, the range of realized automatic language acquisition methods
is currently growing.
October 1,2015 Advanced Robotics SER-AR
4.1 Object category formation
Before obtaining language, human children are considered to obtain object categories grad-
ually through daily interactions with objects. Piaget insisted that the schema system self-
organizes through the sensory–motor period, and that the system becomes the prerequisite for
language [35]. An embodied multimodal sensory–motor experience must be a primal root for
human category formation.
A category formation problem is different from a pattern recognition problem. In a pattern
recognition problem,truthlabelsfortherecognition resultsareprovidedinasupervisedmanner.
Avastnumberofstudieshavebeencarriedoutregardingthedevelopmentofanaccuratepattern
recognizer. Recently, deep learning methods have yielded excellent results [38, 39]. In contrast,
category formation in a robot’s umwelt must be autonomously performed in an unsupervised
manner.Fromtheviewpointofmachine-learning,objectcategorizationisregardedasaclustering
problem, involving a type of unsupervised machine-learning tasks [40].
Historically,manystudieshaveemphasizedvisualinformationincategoryformationbycompu-
tational systems. However, the formation of object categories based solely on visual information
is insufficient, because our human symbol system is organized on the basis of our multimodal
sensory–motor experiences. The integration of multimodal information through category forma-
tion is important fora robottopredictfuturesensor information. By formingan objectcategory
on the basis of visual, auditory, and haptic information, a robot can infer auditory and haptic
informationfromtherecognizedcategory,e.g.,abottleandacymbal,fromitsvisualinformation.
4.2 Computational models for multimodal object categorization
Recently, various computational models for multimodal object categorization have been pro-
posed [3, 18, 19, 41–51]. For example, Sinapov et al. proposed a graph-based multimodal cat-
egorization method, which allows a robot to recognize new objects on the basis of similarities
to a set of familiar objects [42]. They also made a robot perform ten different behaviors; obtain
visual, auditory, and haptic information; and explore 100 different objects, classifying them into
20 object categories [19]. However, their multimodal categorization is performedin a supervised
manner. Celikkanat et al. modeled the context in terms of a set of concepts, allowing many-
to-many relationships between objects and contexts using latent Dirichlet allocation (LDA),
inspired by the notion of situated concepts introduced by Yeh and Barsalou [41, 52]. Mangin
used a nonnegative matrix factorization algorithm to learn a dictionary of components from
multimodal time series data [53]. Natale et al. have demonstrated that a robot can recognize
objects with the help of a self-organizing map (SOM), using proprioceptive data extracted from
the robot’s hand as it grasps an object [43]. Lallee et al. proposed multi-modal convergence
maps on the basis of SOMs. This method can integrate visual, motor, and language modali-
ties [54]. Invalid et al. proposed a cognitive architecture, and developed a child-like robot that
can automatically learn object categories through active exploration [55].
Nakamura et al. have presented a series of studies on multimodal categorization using mul-
timodal latent Dirichlet allocation (MLDA) and its extentions [3, 18, 44–48, 56]. They have
extended LDA, which was first proposed by Blei et al. for document-word clustering, to a model
that can treat multimodal information [3, 57, 58]. Concrete illustrations of the graphical mod-
els of LDA and MLDA and its extended models are presented in Figure 3. MLDA has several
emission distributions for an object, i.e., a document in LDA. Theobject categories of objects in
multimodal categorization in MLDA correspond to topics in document-word clustering in LDA.
Nakamura et al. developed a robotic system that can obtain visual, audio,and hapticinforma-
tionbyinteractingwithobjects.Anoverview oftherobotispresentedinFigure4.Therobotcan
grasp an object and observe it from various viewpoints. The robot has cameras, microphones,
arms, and hands with pressure sensors. The robot obtains visual information by taking pictures
of a target object from many directions, by rotating the object with its hand. The robot also
obtains hapticinformation by graspingthetarget object several times, andaudioinformation by
October 1,2015 Advanced Robotics SER-AR
(a) LDA (b) MLDA (c) MHDP (d) BoMHDPs (e) IMoMHDPs
Figure3. Graphicalmodelsforobjectcategorization.
shaking the target object. Feature vectors are extracted from the observed information of each
modality, andthefeaturevectors ofeach modality aretransformedintobag-of-features represen-
tations usingthe K-means method, i.e., vector quantization. Thebag-of-features representations
are passed to MLDA, and the clustering procedure is performed. Nakamura et al. demonstrated
that a robot can categorize a large number of objects in a home environment into categories
that are similar to human categorization results [3]. Araki et al. developed online MLDA, and
performed an experiment on multimodal category acquisition in a fully autonomous manner in
a home environment [59]. The result indicates that a human symbol system is not necessarily
required for a cognitive system to form human-like object categories. This suggests that the
human symbol system is not completely arbitrary, but has a certain rationality brought by the
latent structure embedded in sensory-motor information, as admitted by Saussure [30].
4.3 Estimating latent structure in multimodal categories
Although MLDA is able to form multimodal categories, it can not adaptively estimate the
number of object categories. It is unlikely that the number of categories that a cognitive system
has is determined in advance. The Bayesian nonparametric approach provides a reasonable
solution to the problem. Nakamura et al. extended the hierarchical Dirichlet process (HDP),
which was a nonparametric Bayesian clustering method proposed by Blei et al. for document-
word clustering, to multimodal HDP (MHDP), which can treat multimodal information and
automatically estimate the number of categories from the observed multimodal information [47,
60, 61].
Bayesian nonparametrics is a branch of the Bayesian approach. In general, the number of
hidden variables in the Bayesian nonparametric approach can be automatically estimated by
using the infinite dimensional prior distribution, for example using Dirichlet or Beta processes,
and a feasible inference procedure [60, 62]. The mathematical framework is very important
for constructing a computational model relating to emergent symbol systems. Nakamura et al.
demonstrated that a robot can also estimate the number of object categories to give similar
results to human categorization results [47].
MLDA and MHDP can easily be extended to treat “words.” LDA and HDP were originally
appliedtodocumentandwordclusteringmethods[57,60].Byaddinganobservation variablefor
words to MLDA’s graphical model, MLDA is able to cluster multimodal information and words
simultaneously. As a result, a robot can estimate the label of a category in an unsupervised
manner.
More complex latent structures of multimodal categories can be estimated. Ando et al. pro-
posed hierarchical MLDA (hMLDA), by extending hierarchical LDA (hLDA) for hierarchical
multimodal categorization [44, 63]. This method enabled a robot to form a hierarchical struc-
October 1,2015 Advanced Robotics SER-AR
Figure4. Therobotusedinmultimodalcategorization experiments.
ture of object concepts from multimodal sensory–motor information, e.g., “plastic bottle” is a
subcategory of “water container.”
Nakamura et al. proposed the Bag of MLDA (BoMLDA), Bag of the MHDP (BoMHDP),
and infinite mixture of MHDPs (IMoMHDPs) methods, which can perform various types of
categorization with different perspectives [46, 56, 64]. The methods emphasize some modalities,
and organize categories based on information of the modalities focused on. By adopting these
methods, their robot was able to form concepts about not only “objects”, but also “attributes,”
e.g., soft, hard, green, red, or yellow, from multimodal information.
Compared to related methods for multimodal categorization, the MHDP-based approach is
sophisticated from the viewpoint of Bayesian modeling. Its mathematical soundness and theo-
retical consistency helpusto buildnewmethodsthatarebasedonit, e.g., active perception[65].
4.4 Multimodal representation learning using neural networks
Another way to integrate multimodal information involves approaches that utilize neural net-
works. Ngiam et al. applied deep networks to learn features over multiple modalities. By in-
tegrating visual, i.e., lip motions, and auditory information, they developed a robust speach
classification system. They also demonstrated that the system shows McGurk effect that is an
audio-visual perception phenomenon in the similar way as human [66]. Noda et al. integrated
auditory, visual, and motor information using a deep neural network [67]. In their experiment,
a robot could recall upper bodily motion from visual and audio information, and retrieve image
information from sound and joint angle inputs. Heinrich et al. extended the multiple timescale
recurrent neural network (MTRNN), and obtained multi-modal MTRNN, to integrate visual,
auditory, and motor information. Recently, neural networks with a deep architecture have at-
tracted attention. Le et al. demonstrated that large-scale unsupervised learning using a deep
neural network could build high-level features automatically from image data [68]. Bridging
representation learning using neural networks and multimodal categorization using generative
models represents important work in this field [69].
5. Word Discovery
5.1 Word discovery by human children
In language acquisition, word discovery, i.e., word segmentation, is an important task for chil-
dren. A word is an elemental pattern of a linguistic sign. A phoneme is an element that is
October 1,2015 Advanced Robotics SER-AR
acoustically butnot semantically distinguishable. Discovering words from continuous speech sig-
nals is a fundamental task that children must solve to acquire language. Unlike an automatic
speech recognition system, children must learn a language model, i.e., a word inventory and
transitional information about the words, and in an acoustic model, i.e., an organized memory
about phonemes, this must be done from speech signals in an unsupervised manner.
What types of cue can be used by children to discover words from continuous speech sig-
nals? Three representative cues for word segmentation are listed by Saffran et al. [70]. These
are distributional, co-occurrence, and prosodic cues. Distributional cues concern the statistical
relationships between neighboring speech sounds. These can be modeled as n-gram statistics
to some extent, once each phoneme is recognized correctly. Co-occurrence cues concern entities
detected in the environment by children. For example, when a child hears two sentences while
he/she looks at an apple, the sentences are likely to contain overlapping words, such as “ap-
ple.” Prosodic cues relate more to superficial acoustic information, such as stressed syllables,
post-utterance pauses, and acoustically distinctive final syllables.
All of the above cues are believed to contribute to word discovery in an integrative manner.
Among these, Saffran emphasized distributional cues. She reported that word segmentation
from fluent speech could be accomplished by eight-month-old infants using only distributional
cues [71]. By the age of seven months, infants are reported to use distributional cues [72].
5.2 Word discovery by robotic systems
In SER, autonomous word discovery by robots is one of the first challenges that should be
solved. In the past two decades, many types of unsupervisedmachine-learning methods for word
discovery (segmentation) have been proposed [73–81]. Conventionally, Brent proposed model-
based dynamic programming to find word boundaries in a natural-language text whose word
boundaries are deleted [73]. Venkataraman proposed a statistical model to improve Brent’s
algorithm [74].
In contrast with such text-based approaches, Roy et al. developed a computational model and
a robotic system that autonomously discovers words from a raw multimodal sensory input [51].
The experimental results of Roy et al. demonstrated the development of a cognitive robot that
can acquire a lexicon from raw sensor data without human transcription or labeling. Although
imperfect, the results were encouraging. Their results showed that it is possible to develop
cognitive models that can process raw sensor data and acquire a lexicon, without the need for
human transcription or labeling.
Contemporaneously, Iwahashi et al. independently proposed a sophisticated probabilistic
method that enables a robot to acquire linguistic knowledge, including speech units, lexicons,
grammar, and interpretation through human–robot embodied communication, in an unsuper-
vised manner [82]. This integrated speech, visual, and behavioral information in a probabilistic
framework. This work was updated by Iwahashi et al. [83]. The learning process was carried
out online, incrementally, actively, and in an unsupervised manner. On the basis of this work,
Iwahashietal.developedanintegrated onlinemachine-learningsystemcalledLCore,whichcom-
bined speech, visual, and tactile information obtained through interactions, and enabled robots
to learn beliefs regarding speech units, words, the concepts of objects, motions, grammar, and
pragmatic and communicative capabilities [50]. These pioneering studies clearly demonstrated
the possibility of the SER approach.
5.3 Nonparametric Bayesian word segmentation
Inworddiscovery andsegmentation tasks,theefficient managementof awordinventory through
thelearning process is a fundamentalcomputational problem.Although a robotcan only memo-
rizeafinitenumberofwords,therearepotentially aninfinitenumberofwordsinoursociety, i.e.,
in the human symbol system. The selection of an appropriate set of words constitutes a type of
October 1,2015 Advanced Robotics SER-AR
modelselectionproblem,andusuallyrequiresaverylargecomputationalcost.Recently,Bayesian
nonparametrics have provided a sophisticated theoretical solution to this problem [26, 60, 62]. A
nonparametricBayesian language model,e.g.,ahierarchicalPitman-Yor processlanguage model
(HPYLM), can assign an adequate probability to an infinite number of possible words using a
fully Bayesian framework [84]. On the basis of this framework, word segmentation methods that
assume that there is an infinite number of possible words can be developed. Goldwater pro-
posed an HDP-based word segmentation method [75, 76]. Mochihashi et al. proposed a nested
Pitman-Yor language model (NPYLM), in which a letter n-gram model based on a hierarchical
Pitman-Yor language model is embedded in the word n-gram model [77]. An efficient blocked
Gibbs sampler, employing the forward filtering backward sampling procedure, was also intro-
duced in that study. These methods have made it possible to discover words from transcribed
phoneme sequences or text data without any recognition errors.
However, in practice phoneme recognition errors are inevitable, especially duringthe language
acquisition phase. In order to overcome this problem, several extensions have been proposed.
Neubig et al. extended the word segmentation methods of Mochihashi et al., making it possible
to analyze phonemelattices that are a type of expression of noisy speech recognition results [85].
Heymannetal.modifiedthealgorithmofNeubigetal.,andproposedasuboptimalalgorithm[86,
87]. Elsner et al. developed a learning method that jointly performs word segmentation and
learns an explicit model of phonetic variation [88]. Hinoshita et al. solved a similar problem
using MTRNN [89].
Recently, several advanced machine-learning methods have attempted to learn words from
acoustic data without a preexisting language model and acoustic model [90–93]. However, the
problem remains a challenging topic.
5.4 Integrative word discovery by robots
It is difficult to discover words from uttered sentences using only distributed cues. Researchers
have developed robotic systems and computational models in which co-occurrence cues help to
discover words using distributional cues. Taguchi et al. proposed a method for the unsupervised
learning of place-names, from information pairs that consist of spoken utterances and a mobile
robot’s estimated currentlocation, withoutany priorlinguistic knowledge other than aphoneme
acoustic model [94]. They optimized a word list using a model selection method based on a
description length criterion. Araki et al. proposed an integrative computational model that
involved MLDA and NPYLM [18]. Through MLDA, a robot can detect co-occurrence cues in
the environment, and use the information to increase word segmentation performance. It was
shown that the iterative learning process comprising MLDA and NPYLM increased the word
segmentation accuracy. However, they reported that the accuracy decreases as the phoneme
recognition error rate increases [18]. This implies that phoneme recognition errors and word
segmentationerrorsshouldbemitigatedsimultaneously.Nakamuraetal.developedanintegrated
statistical model for word segmentation, speech recognition, and multimodal categorization, in
order to overcome this problem. The robot in the experiment simultaneously formed object
categories and learned related words from continuous speech signals and continuous visual,
auditory, and haptic information, i.e., sensory–motor information, through an iterative learning
process [48].
Various word discovery methods which enable robots to obtain words and relationships be-
tween words and objects. However, situations in which robots can currently discover words are
still limited. To simulate the robust word discovery process by human children in real-world
environment, further studies will be required.
October 1,2015 Advanced Robotics SER-AR
6. Double Articulation Analysis
6.1 Double articulation structure
Double articulation is an important property of human language systems. Chandler described
double articulation as follows in a textbook on semiotics [8]:
One of the most powerful “design features” of language is called double articulation (or “duality of
patterning”). Double articulation enables a semiotic code to form an infinite number of meaningful
combinations using a small number of low-level units which by themselves are meaningless (eg.,
phonemes in speech or graphemes in writing). The infinite use of finite elements is a feature that
about media, in general, has been referred to as “semiotic economy.”
Our speech signals and some semiotic time-series data are considered to have a double ar-
ticulation structure. This means that a sentence can be decomposed into words, and a word
can be decomposed into letters or phonemes. Automatic speech recognition systems usually pre-
sume double articulation in speech signals. A continuous speech signal is first segmented into
phonemes, such as “a,” “e,” “i,” and “s.” Then, the phonemes are chunked into words, such as
“can,” “dog,” and “pen.” A phoneme cannot usually act as a sign for an object in the sense
of Peircean semiosis, but a word constitutes a sign, i.e., it has certain meaning. Usually, the
relationship between speech signals and phonemes is stored in a phonetic model and/or acous-
tic model, and the relationship between phonemes and words is stored in a language model.
Therefore,direct word discovery from speech signals can beregarded as the analyzing of a latent
double articulation structure embedded in speech signals in an unsupervised manner.
In addition to speech signals, other time-series data generated by humans may have a double
articulation structure. If such time-series data exists, then the analysis of such data would con-
tribute to our understanding of emergent symbol systems. For this purpose, several researchers
havedeveloped acomputational modelthatcan automatically analyzedoublearticulation struc-
tures [92, 93, 95–98].
6.2 Segmentation of human bodily motion
Human bodily motion is a candidate for doubly articulated time series data. Inamura et al.
proposed the use of a left-to-right hidden Markov model (HMM) to recognize and reconstruct
human bodily motion [7]. Essentially, left-to-right HMMs are often used to model words in
automatic speech recognition systems. These computational models implicitly bridge speech
recognition and human motion modeling.
There have been many previous studies on motion segmentation. However, the definition of
a unit of motion has been unclear in many studies for a long time. Roughly speaking, some
researchers have focused on physically elemental segments [99–103], and others on semantically
elemental segments [104–106]. For example, when we semantically segment a baseball player’s
motion, “pitching” definitely becomes a candidate for a unit motion. However, pitching consists
of several low-level segmental motions from the viewpoint of physical dynamics. If we segment
the pitching motion according to the criterion that an elemental motion has linear dynamics,
then the pitching motion will besegmented into several elemental motions, e.g., “raising a knee”
and “swinging an arm.” However, these elemental motions seem to be meaningless, and have no
special names. The two-layer hierarchical structure is similar to that existing in speech signals.
We call a short-term motion that corresponds to phoneme a segment, and a long-term motion
that corresponds to word a chunk. A chunk corresponds to a sequence of segments.
Takano et al. developed a large-scale database of human whole-body motion, and modeled the
motion data usinga large numberof HMMs [96,107]. They roughly clustered thegiven motions,
andconstructedmany left-to-right HMMs correspondingtomeaningfulmotions.Theyhierarchi-
cally clustered the HMMs again, and obtained a large motion database. An online incremental
learning method was also provided by Kuli´c [108]. They implicitly assumed double articulation
October 1,2015 Advanced Robotics SER-AR
Sequence of latent
Driving word A C B C E F A D H C E J H C E
Driving words
Driving letter A C B C E F A D H C E J H C E
Driving letters
Brake SSeeggmmeentnt Steering angle Acceleration
CChhuunnkk
Driving behavior
time-series data
behavior data
Images from
Driving svceehinclee video
“Avoiding a pedestrian” “Turning right” “Following a car slowly”
Figure5. Doublearticulationindrivingbehavior.
in human bodily motion. Based on the database, they developed a machine translation system
that can translate continuous human motion into a sentence, and vice versa [109, 110].
Taniguchi et al. proposed a double articulation analyzer (DAA) by combining a sticky hierar-
chical Dirichlet process-HMM (sticky HDP-HMM) and NPYLM [95, 111]. The DAA explicitly
assumes double articulation, and infers the latent letters, i.e., the segment or phoneme, and the
latent words, i.e., the words or segments, in an unsupervised manner. These two nonparametric
Bayesian models, sticky HDP-HMM and NPYLM, were sequentially applied to the target data,
and a two-layered hierarchical structure was inferred in the DAA. They applied the DAA to
human motion data, to extract unit motions from unsegmented human motion data.
6.3 Modeling driving behavior data
Dataondrivingbehaviorrepresentsanothercandidatefordoublyarticulated time-series data.A
meaningful chunk of driver behavior seems to consist of sequences of simple segments. Figure 5
presents an example. In this figure, when a driver “turns right at an intersection,” he/she “steps
on the brake,” “turns the steering wheel to the right,” “steps on the accelerator,” “turns the
steering wheel back to center,” and “steps on the accelerator” again as a sequence of physically
elemental driving behaviors.
The DAA has been utilized for various application, such as segmentation [97], prediction [112,
113], data mining [114], topic modeling [115, 116], and video summarization [117]. Through
experiments in a series of studies, it has become clear that driving behavior data has a double
articulation structure. For example, a prediction method based on the DAA has outperformed
conventionalmethodsinadivingbehaviorpredictiontask[118].Thisimpliesthattheassumption
of double articulation is appropriate. Taniguchi et al. called the latent states corresponding to
semantically elemental driving behaviors driving words, and those corresponding to physically
elemental drivingbehaviors driving letters. Recently, the DAA was applied to large-scale driving
behavior data, and its effectiveness for driving behavior analysis has been verified [119].
6.4 Predicting long-term sensory–motor information
A third candidate for doubly articulated time-series data is given by sensory–motor information
flow.Unlikespeechsignals,sensory–motorinformationflowdatacomprisessensorinformationas
wellasmotorinformation.Modelingsensory–motortime-seriesdataforarobotmeansestimating
the forward dynamics of the system that the robot confronts. Many modular learning architec-
tures, e.g., MOSAIC (modular selection and identification for control), HAMMER (hierarchical,
attentive, multiple models for execution and recognition), and the dual schemata model, have
been proposed to model switching forward dynamics [120–124]. Most of these involve forward-
October 1,2015 Advanced Robotics SER-AR
inverse models in the learning system. Methods for imitation learning, reinforcement learning,
and the emergence of communication have been proposed on the basis of such modular learning
architectures [125–128].
Indynamicenvironments,theforwarddynamicsofarobotchangeintermittently. Suchcontex-
tual information tends to have a certain structure. Tani et al. proposed a the use of hierarchical
mixture of RNNs [98]. In their experiment, a longer context was coded into the activations of
the context nodes of the RNNs at a higher level, and a shorter context was coded into those at a
lowerlevel.Inotherwords,theirmodelcapturedthedoublearticulation structureintheenviron-
mental dynamics. Hierarchical MOSAIC and HAMMER architectures have also been proposed
ascomputational modelsthatcouldcapturesuchhierarchicalstructures[121,129].MTRNNand
recurrent neural networks with parametric bias (RNNPB) are candidates to model contextually
changing forward dynamics [2, 130–132]
6.5 Direct word discovery from speech signals
As mentioned above, the double articulation analysis is deeply related to direct word discovery
from an acoustic speech signal. Several studies have recently been carried out in relation to this
difficult problem. The direct application of the DAA proposed by Taniguchi et al. [95] is one
possibleapproach;however,poorresultsareexpectedtobeobtained.Inthatapproach,theDAA
simply uses the two nonparametric Bayesian methods sequentially. These are notintegrated into
a single generative model. Therefore, if there are many recognition or categorization errors in
the result of the first segmentation process by sticky HDP-HMM, then the performance of the
subsequent unsupervised chunking by NPYLM deteriorates.
To overcome this problem, Taniguchi et al. proposed a nonparametric Bayesian double ar-
ticulation analyzer (NPB-DAA), which is a two-layered generative model [93]. The generative
modelrepresentsacompletedatageneration processthathasadoublearticulation structure.An
efficient blocked Gibbs sampler was also derived in the same study. They showed that the NPB-
DAA could automatically find a word list from vowel speech signals directly and completely, in
an unsupervised manner. Additional approaches have recently been proposed [90, 92].
It is interesting that superficially different time-series data generated from human behavior
can be analyzed using almost the same computational model. In addition, the characteristic of
double articulation is satisfied. That is, the elements in the first layer, i.e., the phonemes and
segments, are meaningless, and the elements in the second layer, i.e., words and chunks, are
meaningful. This suggests that different examples of such time-series data potentially share the
samecomputationalprocessesinourbrain.Inaddition,wehypothesizethattheseareprofoundly
related to the nature of our emergent symbol system.
7. Further Topics
In order to construct a computational model that describes an entire emergent symbol system,
and to develop a robot that can communicate and collaborate with humans in a long-term
manner, there are many other challenges in the field of SER to consider and overcome. In this
section, we describe some of them.
7.1 Mutual belief system
An utterance is not usually interpreted “as it is” by another person to whom it is told. A
mutual belief system always affects a person’s interpretation. Roy provides a coffee scenario as
an example in his survey paper [133]. Imagine a situation in which a cup of coffee is served
to a customer by a waitperson, and the customer says, “This coffee is cold.” In this case, the
referential meaning of the utterance is the fact that the temperature of the coffee is low in the
October 1,2015 Advanced Robotics SER-AR
sense of thermodynamics, but the functional meaning is “please get me a hotter coffee.” The
speech act conveys a meaning interpreted by referring to the physical situation shared by the
communication partners. This means that the mutual belief system is important in generating
natural sentences and interpreting uttered sentences. Roy emphasized this aspect of language
for solving the symbol grounding problem.
A pioneering study that develops a constructive model involving a mutual belief system was
presented by Iwahashi [82]. Iwahashi introduced a belief function that represents a mutual be-
lief of a robot. The belief function contains several belief modules, i.e., speech, object images,
motions, motion–object relationships, and behavioral contexts. The various external and inter-
nal contexts are taken into consideration to infer the speaker’s intention. The robotic system
is truthfully an embodied natural language processing system that can take various contexts
that an ordinal amodal natural processing system cannot access. Zuo et al. applied this model
for detecting robot-directed speech [134]. Sugiura et al. proposed a method for estimating the
ambiguity in commands by introducing an active learning scheme to the conversation system,
based on the mutual belief [135].
Amutualbeliefispartofanemergentsymbolsystem,andapplies“constraints”notonlytothe
interpretationofutterances,butalsotothegenerationofourspeech.Contextisacrucialelement
of our natural dialog but is rarely taken into consideration in natural language processing. The
SER approach is promising in this topic as well.
7.2 Active perception and learning
A robotthat has the potential to bean element of an emergent symbol system, i.e., a member of
our semiotic society, must be able to explore its environment, acquire knowledge, and communi-
catewithpeopleautonomously.Active perceptionandactive learningaretwoofthemostimpor-
tantcapabilitiesofhumansforachievinglife-longdevelopmentandcommunication[43,133,136–
147].
Denzler etal.proposedaninformationtheoretic action selection methodtogather information
that conveys the true state of a system through an active camera [136]. They used mutual
information (MI) as acriterion for action selection. Krainin etal. developed anactive perception
method that made a mobile robot manipulate objects to build three-dimensional surface models
of the objects [137]. Their method determines when and how a robot should grasp an object on
the basis of the information gain (IG) criterion.
Modeling and recognizing a target object, as well as modeling a scene and segmenting objects
from that scene, are important abilities for a robot in a realistic environment. An active percep-
tionplanningmethodforscenemodelinginarealisticenvironmentwasproposedbyEidenberger
et al. [138]. A partially observable Markov decision process (POMDP) formulation was used to
model the planning problem, and the differential entropy was introduced as part of the reward
function. Hoof et al. proposed an active scene exploration method. An autonomous robot is able
to segment a scene into its constituent objects by actively interacting with the objects using
this method [139]. They used IG as a criterion for action selection. InfoMax control for acoustic
exploration was proposed by Rebguns et al. [140]. In general, IG is mostly applied in active per-
ception and learning [136, 137]. Taniguchi et al. developed an optimal active perception scheme
for multimodal categorization using MLDA on the basis of the IG criterion. Localization, map-
ping, and navigation are also important targets of active perception [133, 141, 142]. In addition,
various other studies on active perception have been conducted [43, 143–147].
In the context of reinforcement learning (RL), intrinsic motivation has been studied [148].
In reinforcement learning, an agent autonomously learns its policy, i.e., controller, to maximize
the expected cumulative rewards. In related studies, internal reward systems are taken into
consideration as well as external reward systems. Schmidhuberpresented a survey on RL studies
considering intrinsic motivation, and proposed a formal theory of fun, intrinsic motivation, and
creativity [149].
October 1,2015 Advanced Robotics SER-AR
Whenwedevelop anautonomousrobot,thedesignoftheintrinsicmotivation andexplanatory
behavior, active perception, and in particular the IG criterion provide cues for the problem. The
effectiveness of the IG criterion tells us that “curiosity” is properly treated computationally, in
contrast with other emotions.
Sugiura et al. used active perception to determine the utterances of a robot [135]. When we
talk to each other, we anticipate a reply, i.e., some information, from the other person. There-
fore, we might generate a sentence so as to maximize the information gain or expected reward.
Communication always involves some kind of decision-making problems. Active perception and
learning will become more and more important in the wide range of decision-making problems
concerning robots.
7.3 Compositionality and semantics
The hierarchical structure placed on segmented words that are extracted on the basis of double
articulation analysis enables us to generate various meaningful sentences. A syntax is a rule that
produces a meaningful sequence of words. From the viewpoint of an emergent symbol system,
an important problem can be phrased as “how can combined words have adequate meanings for
an embodied and situated agent?” An important research topic concerns computational models
for grounding semantic composition [150]. Classically, the principle of compositionality, which
is also called Frege’s principle, has been widely recognized. This is a principle stating that the
meaning of a complex expression is determined by the meanings of its constituent expressions
and the syntactic rules used for combining them [151]. A bottom-up approach to the principle
of compositionality also represents an important topic in symbol emergence in robotics.
The notion of combinatoriality has been studied in a constructive manner. Sugita et al. and
Ogataetal.developedaroboticsystemandneuralnetworkarchitecture thatcan simultaneously
learn sentences and behaviors [130, 152, 153]. For this, they used an RNNPB. It was shown that
compositionality emerges on the network in a distributed manner. Tuci et al. also introduced
neurodynamic models that deal with compositionality problems in language and behavior as-
sociation learning, and the learning of goal-directed actions [154, 155]. Hinaut et al. applied
reservoir computing, which is a kind of RNN, to make a robot acquire and producegrammatical
constructions [156, 157]. Tani and Cangelosi et al. have presented a comprehensive survey of
related studies [1, 2].
Recently, distributional models of semantics, including word2vec, have been given atten-
tion [158–160]. For example, Mikolov showed that the relationship between a country and a
capital city can automatically extracted from an unlabeled text dataset only by a training pre-
dictor, on the basis of a skip-gram and recurrent neural net language model (RNNLM). Le et
al. proposed an unsupervised machine-learning method, called paragraph vector, that can esti-
mate fixed-length feature representations from variable-length sections of texts, e.g., sentences,
paragraphs, and documents [161]. Many preliminary studies exist concerning compositionality
and semantics. Incorporating both embodied cognition and formal language structure must be
important to construct a robot that can understand uttered sentences in the real word. @ The
connection of such learning methods to a series of studies in SER also represents an important
topic.
8. Conclusion
In this paper, we have provided an introduction to emergent symbol systems and surveyed the
research field of SER. Semioticians sometimes call humans “Homosignificans,” which means
meaning-makers [8]. Comprehending signs from natural or artificial environments and applying
semiosis in the mind are human characteristics. When developing an autonomous robot that
can engage in long-term communication and collaboration with people, the robot must adapt to
October 1,2015 Advanced Robotics SER-AR
the human symbol system. To provide a philosophical framework for the diversity and dynamics
of a symbol system, we introduce a concept—the emergent symbol system—that constitutes a
basic assumption in SER. People can acquire language through physical interactions with their
environment and semiotic communication with other people (see Figure 1). This phenomenon
is comprehended as a type of assimilation process, in which a personal symbol system that
is supported by an internal representation system becomes coupled with the emergent symbol
system.Toachievesuchassimilation,thepersonmusthavethecapabilitytolearnthelanguagein
an unsupervised manner. For robots, this must be same. To achieve long-term interaction with
people, a robot has to have the capability to learn the language in an unsupervised manner,
so that the robot’s symbol system becomes coupled with the emergent symbol system that
the target society has. Therefore, it is crucially important to computationally understand how
humans can learn a symbol system and obtain semiotic skills through their autonomous mental
development.
Many challenges have been investigated in relation to the construction of robotic systems
and machine-learning methods that can obtain some parts of language through the embodied
multimodal interaction with the environment. In order to understand human social interactions,
and develop a robot that can smoothly communicate with human users, it is fundamentally
important to understand symbol systems that change dynamically on the basis of the embodied
cognition of participants in a constructive manner.
In this paper, we introduced the research field called SER. This represents a constructive
approach towards an emergent symbol system. The emergent symbol system is socially self-
organized through both semiotic and physical interactions with autonomous cognitive develop-
mental agents, i.e., humans and developmental robots. Among the numerous fields connected
with SER, we have described some specific topics in this paper, such as multimodal categoriza-
tion, word discovery, and double articulation analysis. SER presents various future challenges
involving acquiring lexicons, learning syntax, obtaining skills using metaphors, learning prag-
matics, and being able to generate appropriate sentences given a particular context.
The majority of studies relating natural language processing and linguistics have only treated
documents. However, we have to communicate and collaborate with other agents, includingpeo-
ple and robots, in a real-world environment. The appropriateness of emergent symbol systems
and robotic systems must be evaluated in relation to embodied cognition, context, and collab-
oration. Real-world collaborative tasks should be considered in order to evaluate them. In this
context, some competitions including real-world human–robot interaction must be effective for
facilitating researchers to study embodied cognitive systems and emergent symbol systems, and
for evaluate appropriateness of the developed systems. RoboCup@Home is an obvious candi-
date [162–165].
However, the learning of all of the knowledge required for communication and collaboration
through situated and embodied interactions requires very large costs and time. For further re-
search,somepseudo-real-worldenvironmentwillberequiredtoincreasethespeedofourresearch.
For example, Inamura et al. have developed the SIGVerse, a SocioIntelliGenesis simulator that
enables human–robot interactions in a virtual world [166]. Cloud-based semiotic and physical
interactions will also be important components of further studies in SER.
SER is still an emerging research field, but one that shows promise. Further research on
SER will push long-term human–robot interaction forward, and provide a new understandingof
human intelligence.
Acknowledgements
This research was partially supported by a Grant-in-Aid for Young Scientists (B) 2012-2014
(24700233) and a Grant-in-Aid for Young Scientists (A) 2015-2019 (15H05319) funded by the
Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science, and Technology, Japan. This research was sup-
October 1,2015 Advanced Robotics SER-AR
ported by CREST, JST.