Synthetic Biology in Leishmaniasis: Design,
simulation and validation of constructed
Genetic circuit
Seat No.: 06
Dixita Limbachiya
G H Patel Post Graduate Department of
Computer Science and Technology (GDCST),
Sardar Patel University, V.V. Nagar
Submitted to
SARDAR PATEL UNIVERSITY
as a partial fulfillment of the degree of
Master of Science (Bioinformatics)
Synthetic Biology in Leishmaniasis: Design,
simulation and validation of constructed
Genetic circuit
Project Report
Submitted to the
G H Patel Post Graduate Department of
Computer Science and Technology (GDCST)
Sardar Patel University, V. V. Nagar
In Partial Fulfillment of the award for the
Degree of Master of Science
Dixita Limbachiya
Under the guidance of
Dr. Shailza Singh
Scientist „C‟
National Centre for Cell Science Pune
Synthetic Biology in Leishmaniasis: Design,
simulation and validation of constructed
Genetic circuit
Project Report
Submitted to the
National Centre for Cell Sciences
In Partial Fulfillment of the award for the
Degree of Master of Science
Dixita Limbachiya
Under the guidance of
Dr. Shailza Singh
Scientist „C‟
National Centre for Cell sciences Pune
G H PATEL POST GRADUATE DEPARTMENT OF
COMPUTER SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
SARDAR PATEL UNIVERSITY
VALLABH VIDYANAGAR
CERTIFICATE
This to certify that Ms. Dixita Limbachiya has worked on the project
entitled “Synthetic Biology in Leishmaniasis: Design Simulation and
Validation of constructed Genetic Circuit” towards the partial fulfillment
of the degree of M. Sc. (Bioinformatics) during the final semester at
National Centre for Cell Sciences Pune from 21-12-2011 to 39-5-2012.
.
Date of Submission:-2 JUNE 2012
Dr. Hetal J Panchal Dr. D. B. Choksi
Project Coordinator Head of Department
Lecturer Director and professor
GDCST GDCST
Date: - 02/06/2012
UNDERTAKING
I, Dixita Limbachiya, student of the G.H. Patel Post Graduate
Department of Computer Science and Technology, VallabhVidyanagar
hereby undertake that the work presented in the dissertation project report
entitled “Synthetic Biology In Leishmaniasis:Design,Simulation and
Validation Of Constructed Genetic Circuit” comprises the results of
independent and original work carried out by me under the supervision of
Dr.Shailza Singh for the partial fulfillment of the award of the degree of
M.Sc. Bioinformatics of the Sardar Patel University, VallabhVidyanagar.
I further declare that this work did not form a part of any other work
published or unpublished.
Dixita Limbachiya
G.H. Patel Post Graduate Department of
Computer Science and Technology,
VallabhVidyanagar, Gujarat.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The writing of this thesis has been one of the most significant academic challenges I have ever had to face.
Without the support, patience and guidance of following people, this study would not have been completed. It
is to them that I owe my deepest gratitude.
I would like to sincerely thank my guide Dr. Shailza Singh for her guidance, understanding, patience, and most
importantly, her friendly gesture during the dissertation period. Her mentorship was paramount in providing a
well rounded experience to pursue my long-term career goals. She encouraged me not only to grow as a
researcher but also as an independent thinker, not many post graduate students are given the opportunity to
develop their own individuality and self-sufficiency by being allowed to work with such independence. Words
are inadequate in the available lexicon to avouch the guidance given by her. Her dedication to research,
meticulous planning, consecutive counsel and unreserved help served as a beacon light throughout the course of
study, research work and completion of this manuscript. For everything you have done for me, madam I thank
you.
I am grateful to my Head of the Department Dr. Hetal Panchal of G.H. Patel Department of Computer
science and Technology for their cooperation throughout the study and for allowing me to pursue my
dissertation program at NCCS.
I would like to thank all the members of the Lab, especially Sonali Shinde, Vineetha Mandlik and Ashish
Chaudhary for supporting me and encouraging me. They also provided for some much needed humor and
entertainment in what could have otherwise been a somewhat stressful laboratory environment. I am thankful
to my colleagues Radhika and Jyoti with whom I worked closely and made my journey of dissertation most
memorable and enthusiastic. I am grateful to National Centre for Cell sciences for giving me opportunity to
carry out my dissertation successfully.
Finally, and most importantly, I thank All Mighty for his blessing. It was under his watchful eyes that I
gained so much drive and an ability to tackle challenges head on. I would like to thank my parents, brother and
family members for their support, encouragement, patience and unwavering love which was always with me. I
thank them for allowing me to be as ambitious as I wanted.
Dixita Limbachiya
1. LIST OF FIGURES I
2. LIST OF TABLES II
3. ABBREVIATIONS III
4. INTRODUCTION 1-3
5. REVIEW OF LITERATURE 4-30
6. METHODOLOGY 31-39
7. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 40-66
8. CONCLUSION and FUTURE ASPECTS 66-67
9. REFERENCES 67-75
10. ABSTRACT 75-76
11. SUPPLEMENTARY FILES 76-115
LIST OF FIGURES
Figure no Description Page no
5.1 Synergy between Systems and synthetic 5
5.2 Steps for construction of genetic circuit 9
5.3 Logic gates of Biochemical processes 11
5.4 Forms of Leishmania 13
5.5 Life cycle of Leishmania 14
5.6 Severity of lesions 16
5.7 Lipid rafts 17
5.8 Sphingolipid metabolism 18
5.9 Drugs for Cutaneous and visceral 19
leishmaniasis
5.10 Genetic toggle switch 20
5.11 Repressilator 21
5.12 Schematic presentation of the genetic toggle 28
switch made by Gardner et al.
5.13 The vector design of genetic toggle switch 28
5.14 Representation of the repressilator by 29
5.15 The vector design of Repressilator 29
6.1 Schematic representation of workflow 32-33
implemented in project
7.1 Orthology relation graph 41
7.2 Genetic circuit for IPCS 42
7.3.a Degradation Rate graphs of IPCS_1 44
7.3.b Degradation Rate graphs of IPCS_1 44
7.4.a Degradation Rate graphs of LacI 45
7.4.b Degradation Rate graphs of 45
7.5.a Simulation results for IPCS_1 by change in 46
the kc values of IPCS_1 (Kd=1)
7.5.b Simulation results for IPCS_1 by change in 46
the kc values of IPCS_1 (Kd=1.01)
7.6.a Simulations results for circuit by change in 47
the Kd values of IPCS_2 (Kd=1.01)
7.6.b Simulations results for circuit by change in 47
the Kd values of IPCS_2(Kd=1.02)
7.7.a Logic gates for the genetic toggle switch 48
7.7.b Logic gates for the repressilator 48
7.8 Conversion of a truth table into a digital 49
circuit via the Karnaugh map method
7.9 Heat map plot of network link probabilities 54
7.10 Network uncertainty plot 55
7.11 Circadian clock network generated for 56
IPCS_1 and IPCS_2
7.12.a Indicator variable of Gibbs variable 56
7.12.b Co-efficient of linear Regression 56
7.12.c Precision of each regression 56
7.12.d Intercept of each regression 56
7.13 Inferred network of the genetic circuit for 57
IPCS (10s)
7.14 Inferred network of the genetic circuit for 58
IPCS(100s)
7.15 Attractor plot for the initial attractor of the 62
network.
7.16 Attractor plot of the two steady states 63
7.17 sequences of path to attractor 64
7.18 Robustness plot of the genetic circuit. 65
7.19 State graph of the transition of states 66
LIST OF TABLES
Table no Description Page no
5.1 Logic gates in biological systems 11
5.2 Type of leishmaniasis 15
6.1 Commands and description of GRENITS 37
6.2 Commands and description in BoolNet 38
7.1 Homologs of IPCS 40
7.2 Model summary of the genetic circuit 43
7.3 Truth Table for the genetic circuit 48
7.4 Karnaugh map of the truth table 49
7.5 Posterior probabilities for each network 53
connection
7.6 Posterior probabilities for number of 53
regulators
7.7 Binarized Time series data 59
ABBREVIATIONS:
WHO World health Organization
AMA Amastigotes
PRO Promastigote
GSL Glycosphingolipids;
IPC Inositol phosphorylceramide
LPG Lipophosphoglycan
PL Phospholipids
GIPL Glycoinositolphospholipid.
SL Sphingolipids
IPCS Inositol Phosphoryl ceramide synthase
DAG Diacylglycerol
PC Phosphorylceramide
SM Sphingomyelin
PI Phosphoryl Inositol
MIPC Mannose inositol Phosphoryl ceramide
DNA Deoxyribonucleic acid
mRNA Messenger ribonucleic acis
GRN Gene Regulatory Network
ODE Ordinary Differential Equation
SBML Systems Biology Markup Language
COPASI Complex Pathway Simulator
LacI Lactose repressor
Tetr Tetracycline repressor
GRENITS Gene Regulatory Network using Time Series Data
BoolNet Boolean Network
MCMC Monte Carlo Markov Chain
URL Uniform Resource Locator
Introduction
In recent years, the disciplines of systems biology and synthetic biology have gained prominence
as the embodiments of the future of biological science. For biological circuits, we need to
produce quantitative predictions of cell behavior for a given genotype as consequence of the
different molecular interactions. There is a great synergy between the fields of systems and
synthetic biology such that methodologies from one can help make significant advances in the
other. Recent systems biology paradigms such as computational systems analysis, methods for
quantifying time-dependent gene expression and bioinformatics cataloging of cellular parts can
help enable synthetic biology. Greatest advances in biology and biotechnology are arising at the
intersection of the top-down systems approach and the bottom-up synthetic approach. Building
circuits and studying their behavior in cells is a major goal of synthetic biology in order to
evolve a deeper understanding of biological design principles from the bottom up. Collectively,
these developments enable the precise control of cellular state for systems studies and the
discovery of novel parts, control strategies, and interactions for the design of robust synthetic
function (Isaacs, Dwyer, and Collins 2006).
Synthetic biology aims to design novel biological circuits for desired applications implemented
through the assembly of biological parts including natural components of cells and artificial
molecules that emulate biological behavior. Because of its parts-to-whole approach, synthetic
biology has a significant engineering component(Heinemann and Panke 2006). It may appear
that it should be possible to apply strategies such as standardization which ensures that
components of a system are compatible and exchangeable toward constructing a synthetic
biological circuit in a manner similar to constructing an electric or electronic circuit
(Andrianantoandro et al., 2006). The attainment of this ideal goal is, however, impeded by the
overwhelming complexity of biological systems with their myriad biomolecules and
interconnections as well as sparse databases of gene function(Haseltine and Arnold 2007).
Consequently it is challenging to convert design concepts to predicted results for which
mathematical modeling serves as a bridge.
Mathematical modeling plays an important and often indispensable role in synthetic biology
because it serves as a crucial link between the concept and realization of a biological circuit.
Types of modeling frameworks such as deterministic and stochastic, the importance of parameter
estimation and optimization in modeling plays an important role. Additionally mathematical
Introduction
techniques used to analyze a model such as sensitivity analysis and bifurcation analysis is also
dealt with, which enable the identification of the conditions that cause a synthetic circuit to
behave in a desired manner. In the project, mathematical modeling is incorporated as a central
component of synthetic circuit design in Leishmania. Both deterministic approaches and
stochastic approaches are used.
Stochastic models are used to deduce the effects of noise within a synthetic network, potentially
leading to the manipulation of the network itself in order to improve the signal-to-noise ratio
within these networks. A stochastic approach regards changes over time as random- walk
processes, with no set of differential equations defined, and takes into account inherent
fluctuations that are not considered in the deterministic kinetic approach. Stochastic effects may
be particularly significant in some biological systems with small molecular populations involved.
Although this stochastic basis is more accurate in modeling, it is more difficult to solve
mathematically. However, numerical simulations are possible using Monte Carlo principles.
Simulations using stochastic considerations have been reported for biological systems involving
genetic and enzymatic reactions between molecular populations that was relatively small,
including synthetic oscillatory networks, transcriptional regulation and circadian rhythms. For
large populations of molecular species, the predictions obtained from stochastic approaches
match with deterministic ones. However, at smaller population sizes, stochastic effects become
more dominant, in which case, deterministic approaches become insufficient. Unfortunately, for
many biological networks, stochastic simulations are still computationally expensive due to the
huge differences in timescales of biological interactions and population sizes. Various
improvements, approximations, and hybrid approaches have been presented. In one such study,
stochastic simulations were done on multi-scaled systems to study reactions occurring in three
different regimes (slow, medium and fast) as well as coupled reactions.
The presented approach in this project showed substantial improvement over using the basic
stochastic simulation approach when applied to the study of expression and activity of IPCS in
L.major. The constructed genetic circuit was modeled and simulated using diverse set of
algorithms. This assumption was shown to greatly simplify the stochastic model and to
significantly reduce the computational complexity. Despite providing a more complete
representation of biological networks, stochastic approaches still face the challenge of dealing
Introduction
with several orders of magnitude in terms of scale and properties including binding affinities,
specificities, and kinetic rates. Therefore, even statistics based theories have limitations.
Although they provide insights into macroscopic properties of a network, they may have
inaccurate predictions about specific interactions. These limitations can be addressed with new
developments in integrative modeling.
Once the circuit is constructed, validation is performed in two stages. Observation of the
qualitative behavior of the circuit can be very informative in models having multiple steady
states and showing switch-like or oscillatory behaviors’. The qualitative behavior can be studied
either over small parts of the parameter space by simply scanning over defined ranges of
parameters and initial conditions or by doing global bifurcation analyses.Qualitative analysis
gives hints as to which parameters offer the best success in achieving a desired behavior or
whether a certain design can exhibit the wanted function at all. Identifying the most promising
parameters to change, of course, depends not only on the mathematical analysis but also on the
biological feasibility. While some characteristics such as promoter strength, transcript and
protein stability are quite variable, enzymatic activities, for example, might be harder to tweak.
Also as changes in the characteristics of biological components can at best be qualitative, it is
important to find parameter ranges that show behavior robust to variations. In the repressilator
for example, the qualitative analysis may lead to the identification of a few key properties
important for obtaining stable oscillations—strong promoters with tight cooperative repression.
Apart from helping to choose the right biological components, these criteria may help
researchers to introduce tags into the repressor sequences. Model validity can also be checked by
comparison of the results of simulation runs with quantitative experimental data such as time
courses or steady-state concentrations and fluxes. These can sometimes be derived from the
literature or retrieved from databases.
Based on the current approaches dealt, herein, we describe how different approaches of
bioinformatics could enable novel synthetic biology applications in Leishmania.
Aims and Objectives
To characterize dynamical properties of small gene networks displaying oscillations or
bistability.
Introduction
To construct artificial genetic systems displaying oscillations and bistability through
repressilator and the Toggle switch models.
To investigate the various properties of built in genetic switch including the robustness to
noise, signal amplifications and tuneable frequency which ultimately deals the
synchronization ability of the constructed genetic switch/circuit.
Review of Literature
Systems and Synthetic Biology
Cellular complexity stems from the interactions among thousands of different molecular species.
Thanks to the emerging fields of systems and synthetic biology (Hasty et al., 2002; Hayete et al.,
2007; Kaern et al., 2003; Sprinzak and Elowitz, 2005), scientists are beginning to unravel these
regulatory, signaling, and metabolic interactions and to understand their coordinated action. A
system is a network of mutually dependent and thus interconnected components comprising a
unified whole. Every system exhibits emergent behavior, a unique property possessed only by
the whole system and not shared to any great degree by the individual components on its own.
Fields of systems and synthetic biology are important for accelerating both our understanding of
biological systems and our ability to quantitatively engineer cells. Synthetic biology is the
engineering of biology: the synthesis of complex, biologically based (or inspired) systems which
display functions that do not exist in nature .At the nexus of these two fields is a unique synergy
that can help attain these goals. Thus, the next greatest advances in biology and biotechnology
are arising at the intersection of the top-down systems approach and the bottom-up synthetic
approaches. Collectively, these developments enable the precise control of cellular state for
systems studies and the discovery of novel parts, control strategies, and interactions for the
design of robust synthetic function. Combining these efforts can provide novel insights into
cellular function and lead to robust, novel synthetic design (Lanza M et al., 2012). Likewise, we
can design orthogonal synthetic systems that have predictable behavior in a complex and noisy
environment. However, our methods are inverted: the most sophisticated methods for
understanding cellular complexity at the gene level utilize top-down systems approaches whereas
the most promising avenue for creating novel macroscopic function relies on bottom-up synthetic
design principles. These disciplines aims to develop Predictive, Preventive, Personalized,
Participative (P4) medicine that has potential to transform medicine by decreasing morbidity and
mortality.
Top-down systems biology
The advent of high-throughput biology has led to a rapid acceleration in obtaining systems-level
information about living organisms including genomes, transcriptomes, proteomes,
Review of Literature
metabolomes, epigenetic states, and transcription factor binding profiles. This global
information, integrated with computational approaches for analysis and model-based prediction,
has led to an enormous understanding of bio molecular networks in a field termed ‗systems
biology‘. Combining these global measurements lead to robust, high resolution information
about the cellular responses and metabolism.
Bottom-up synthetic biology
Synthetic biology attempts the reverse bottom up approach in which the discrete bimolecular
processes are organized into larger construct to generate complex behavior at cellular level. This
engineering perspective may be applied at all levels of the hierarchy of biological structures –
from individual molecules to whole cells, tissues and organisms. In essence, synthetic biology
will enable the design of 'biological systems' in a rational and systematic way (Lunes, 2007).
These constructs can be simple, such a promoter driving the expression of a single gene, or much
more complex modules such as different promoters combination producing different behavior.
Systems biology aims to model and understand an entire organism by characterizing dynamic
environment-dependent functional interrelationships between its constituent parts (for example,
genes, RNAs, proteins and metabolites). Synthetic biology, however, uses well characterized
parts that are shaped by natural
evolution to construct artificial
systems that perform new tasks.
These fields are on trajectories that
are bound to cross paths and even
merge as they begin to inform one
another. We envision that systems
biology will provide both the parts
and wiring diagrams for entire cells
to guide complex circuit design for
synthetic biology approaches.
Fig (5.1) Synergy between System and synthetic biology
Review of Literature
Bioinformatics for Synthetic and Systems biology
In the era of post-genomic research two new disciplines, Systems and Synthetic biology, act in a
complementary way to shed light on the ever-increasing amount of data produced by tools and
databases of bioinformatics .Bioinformatics cataloging of cellular parts can help in construction
of synthetic modules. The ease of collecting genome-scale measurements available at
Bioinformatics database and data repository has created a deluge of information that must be
parsed in order to provide systems insight as well as utility for synthetic biology applications.
Optimal design certainly requires these bioinformatics approaches to parse the rapid growth in
available genome sequences. These fast, accurate, and efficient methods for predicting desired
behavior from easily collected expression or genomic data is a major systems biology
advancement that has direct implications for synthetic biology applications. In this regard, these
approaches have been used to enable automated synthetic circuit design. It is clear that there is a
great synergy between global cellular modeling efforts and synthetic circuit design. A final area
of synergy between systems and synthetic biology lies in the efforts to expand and automate the
process of parts identification. The rapid capacity to sequence new genomes has sparked interest
in equally rapid annotation capacities. As a result, databases of prokaryotic (S. Gama-Castro et
al, 2008) and eukaryotic (R. Gupta., 2011) motifs have been curated, enabling automatic
annotation of promoters (Y.Y. Yamamoto, 2008.,R. Gupta., 2011) transcription factor binding
sites (J. Zhu, M.Q. Zhang, 1999) and terminators for these organisms. In addition to providing a
repository of natural biological parts for synthetic biology applications, these tools allow
synthetic biologists to design novel regulatory elements by combining motifs in interesting ways
(A. Mitra, A.K. Kesarwani, 2011) In turn, the increased understanding afforded by manipulating
regulatory motifs in this fashion can serve to illuminate the complex systems biology underlying
regulatory element performance. There are many software packages of bioinformatics for the
analysis of the models generated by approaches of systems and synthetic biology. Bioconductor
package uses the R statistical programming language, and is open source and open development,
provides tools for the analysis and comprehension of high-throughput genomic data. It includes
sequence analysis package, network analyses package using different reverse engineering
methods like Bayesian and Boolean methods.
Review of Literature
Synthetic Circuit
An important aim of synthetic biology is to uncover the design principles of natural biological
systems through the rational design of gene and protein circuits (M Shankar et al., 2009). The
synthetic gene circuits discipline can be described succinctly as novel regulation of pre-existing
or engineered cellular functions. Synthetic circuits generally consist of components optimized to
function in their natural context, not in the context of the synthetic circuit. The emergence of
synthetic gene circuits as an engineering goal has re-emphasized the importance of considering
the continuous nature of gene regulation. “Synthetic circuit” describes a system that is designed
to execute a useful function (a bistable state, oscillation, pulse etc) in a predictable and reliable
manner. This highlights the process of engineering biological systems from genetic circuits to the
control of cell–cell interactions, has contributed to our understanding of how endogenous
systems are put together and function. Synthetic biological devices allow us to grasp intuitively
the ranges of behavior generated by simple biological circuits, such as linear cascades and
interlocking feedback loops, as well as to exert control over natural processes, such as gene
expression and population dynamics (M Shankar et al., 2009)
Design principles
Design principles helps in deciphering the quantitative laws that governs the behavior of
biological systems. These principles will be able to design biological systems having desired
properties by reconstructing and thus facilitates the better understanding of naturally occurring
functions. Different laws are used for specific reactions e.g. Hill-Hinze equation is applied for
the reactions for the formation of gene products.
Modules of Gene Components
 Its behavior must be predictable when it is integrated in the system.
 It must function more or less independently of the host organism.
 It must utilize few resources from host cell as much as possible to minimize the
perturbations in the host.
 It should be portable and should function predictable in variety of host systems.
Review of Literature
Hill-Hinze equation
Hill equation as kinetic law for gene product is:
re2 max_re2.
Since we had taken the transition from gene to protein as a ―known transition omitted‖, and
ignored the RNA, the Hill equation is modified as per the reaction‘s convenience and the
equation was given as:
Where, Vmax is maximum velocity attained.
According to Quassi steady state rule, d/dt[mRNA] = 0, i.e. for the intermediate compound
.Moreover the concentration of the mRNA reaches steady state very quickly compared to
protein concentration, thus we considered that [mRNA] concentration is always considered at
steady state.
Construction of genetic circuit
The first step in assembling a biological circuit is to gather the component parts. Equations and
computer simulations that model relationships between biological processes (e.g., gene
activation, protein production, cell division, etc.) guide the design of synthetic systems by
determining the vital parameters and parameter spaces in which the system will function as
intended.
Steps for construction of genetic circuit are as follows:
Review of Literature
Use computational models of biological
pathway in order to study insilico
behavior of biological pathway
Synthetic model s allow verification of
biological hypothesis and to predict new
possible dynamical behavior
Use tools of linear analysis to understand how to
change dynamics of genes composing a novel
synthetic networks
Iterative cycles of modeling, building, and testing
lead to useful synthetic systems and new insights
into living mechanisms.
Systematic framework for exploringhow given
regulatory network generate a particular
phenotypic
Fig 5.2 Steps for construction of genetic circuit
Synthetic biology approaches to the design of circuits
Parts are the individual components that make up gene expression machinery which are specific
DNA sequences that code for gene promoters and upstream regulatory sites, ribosome binding
sites, gene or protein coding regions, and mRNA translation termination sites. Sequences for
RNA-only machinery, such as small interfering RNA and ribozyme coding sequences, are also
used.
Assemblage of parts (promoters and genes) that carry out specific functions. There are several
basic devices, including reporters, inverters and devices that carry out signaling and protein
generation. Each device includes one or two promoter–ribosome binding site–gene terminator
Review of Literature
constructs. Subsequently, these basic devices can be combined into ‗composite devices‘ to
achieve more complex behavior.
Systems are collections of specific devices that enable individual parts to be quantified.
Generally, a subset of the composite devices is used to characterize the strength and efficiency of
promoters under non-repressive conditions.
The host cell in which the systems and devices described above are assembled and used. To date,
these cells have been primarily from Escherichia coli strains, although a few devices and
systems have been tested in yeast and mammalian cells. A more exotic chassis includes cell-free
systems that use DNA transcription and mRNA translation chemistry derived from whole-cell
extracts and encapsulated in artificial membranes.
Logic Circuits or Regulatory Modules
Electrical circuits are based upon mathematical models and so are genetic circuits, and many of
the techniques in predicting outcomes of genetic circuits are directly derived from electric
circuits. Electric circuits often contain modular parts such as switches and oscillators, which
have strong resemblance to the two genetic circuits, a genetic toggle switch and the repressilator
respectively. Logic gates are the basic building blocks in electronic circuits that perform logical
operations (G Agarwal., 2007). These have input and output signals in the form of 0‘s and 1‘s;
‗0‘ signifies the absence of signal while ‗1‘ signifies its presence (Fig-2.12). Similar to the
electronic logic gates, cellular components can serve as logic gates. A typical biological circuit
consists of i) a coding region, ii) its promoter, iii) RNA polymerase and the iv) regulatory
proteins with their v) DNA binding elements, and vi) small signaling molecules that interact with
the regulatory proteins. Messenger RNA or their translation products can serve as input and
output signals to the logic gates formed by genes with which these gene products interact. The
concentration of the gene product determines the strength of the signal. High concentration
indicates the presence of signal (=1) whereas low concentration indicates its absence (=0).
Review of Literature
a.) NOT gate b.) AND gate
Fig (5.3) Logic gates of Biochemical processes
Logic No of No of Logic Application
circuit Input Output
NOT 1 0 Inverts the input signal Determine intracellular state of the cell
NAND 2 1 If both input signal is Presence or absence of polymerase and
present only then gives repressor present gene is not
no output transcribed
AND 2 1 If both input signal is The activator and inducer together
result in turning on a gene .It is used in
present only then gives
cell to cell communication
Implies 2 1 If both input signal are When repressor and inducer are require
present output signal is for gene expression
present, If one input
signal present it behaves
like NOT gate
Table 5.1 Logic gates in biological systems
Review of Literature
Synthetic circuit in protozoan parasite
There are reports and evidences for the synthetic circuit in prokaryotes and eukaryotes like E.coli
and yeast systems but to the best of my knowledge there are no reports in the literature
suggesting the synthetic circuit construction for protozoan parasites. The project serves to the
first attempt made to use synthetic biology approach for the construction of genetic circuit for the
protozoan parasite Leishmania.
Leishmaniasis
Among all the emergent diseases, the ones caused by protozoan have great importance.
Leishmaniasis is a disease caused by a parasite member of the Leishmania genus and presents
high morbidity and mortality levels. The annual incidence of approximately two million new
cases and around 350 million people that are living in endemic areas reveals the importance of
this neglected disease (Campos et al., 2004). Leishmaniasis, widespread parasitic disease caused
by a heterogeneous group of protozoan parasite belonging to the genus Leishmania, spread by
the bite of female sand fly of the genera: Phlebotomus (Old world) and Lutzomyia (New
world).20 species of Leishmania was found to be pathogenic for humans [WHO].
LEISHMANIA
This parasite was first time reported by W.B. Leishman and C. Donovan in 1903. Species of
Leishmania are in Old World they are L. tropica, L. aethiopica, L. major, L. infantum and L.
donovani and in new world New World are L. mexicana, L. amazonensis, L. venezuelensis, L.
pifanoi.
MORPHOLOGY
Leishmania is a dimorphic protozoan parasite that resides as an extracellular flagellate-
Promastigotes in the sand fly vector and as an obligate intracellular aflagellate-amastigotes
within macrophages of vertebrate hosts (Liew and O‘Donnell, 1993). The various species of
Leishmania are not distinguishable from one another.
Amastigotes appear as round or oval bodies ranging from 2 - 3µm in diameter with a well-
defined nucleus and kinetoplast, a rod shaped specialized mitochondrial structure that contains
extra nuclear DNA. Promastigote form is spindle shaped, longer than amastigotes, measuring 10
Review of Literature
- 20 µm in length with a central nucleus and anterior kinetoplast and a well-developed flagellum,
diseases/leishmaniosis/pathogens)
Fig 5.4: A) Amastigotes B) Promastigotes
Picture Credit: Science photo library (Leishmaniasis)
Mapping and sequencing of the L. major genome allowed the definition of 36 discrete
chromosomes composing the genome of this protozoan parasite. Different Leishmania species
have 34 to 36 chromosomes, varying in size from 268 to 2,680 kb. The arrangement of genes in
trypanosomes and Leishmania (and in other related parasites from the same order,
Kinetoplastida) is reminiscent of that in bacterial operons, especially as protein coding regions
are almost never interrupted by introns; the single exception so far is the gene encoding poly(A)
polymerase (Mair et al., 2000). So far nothing is known about the sequences involved in
transcription initiation of protein-coding genes in the parasite Leishmania. Most genes in these
organisms are transcribed polycistronically, and the mature mRNAs are generated from primary
transcripts by trans-splicing (M Santiago et al., 2003). Promoters for rRNA, VSG, and PARP
genes, which are transcribed by RNA polymerase I (Pol I), have been characterized in
trypanosomatids (Zomerdijk et al. 1991) and (Chung et al. 1993), as has the SL gene promoter,
which is transcribed by Pol II. The nature of the polymerase II complex is still one of the major
mysteries of kinetoplast molecular biology.
Review of Literature
Leishmania Life cycle:
Leishmania procyclic promastigote differentiate in sandflies into infective, non-dividing
metacyclic Promastigotes, which are located ready for transmission at the stomodeal valve (an
invagination of the foregut into the midgut). During blood feeding, the sand fly regurgitates
metacyclic promastigote, together with immunomodulatory parasite-derived
proteophosphoglycans and various salivary components. The metacyclic promastigote are then
phagocytized by one of several possible cell types that are found in the local environment. After
establishing an intracellular residence, metacyclic promastigote transform into aflagellate
amastigotes. Amastigotes undergo replication within host cells, which rupture when too many
amastigotes are present, allowing reinfection of local phagocytes. The transmission cycle is
complete when infected
phagocytes are taken
up by another sand fly
with the blood meal,
and amastigotes then
convert into
Promastigotes in the
sand fly midgut.
Fig (5.5) Life cycle of Leishmania
Picture credit: Kaye P, Scott P (2011).Leishmaniasis: complexity at the host–pathogen interface
Review of Literature
TYPES OF LEISHMANIASIS
There are 3 forms of Leishmaniasis:
Types Cutaneous Mucocutaneous Visceral
Pathogen L.major L.braziliensis L.donovani,
L.tropicana and L.infantum
L.aethiopica
Location India, Bolivia, Brazil, Peru Bangladesh, Brazil, India, Nepal and
Afghanistan,
Brazil, Iran, Semi deserts in Middle East, North India,
Pakistan, North, Africa Central Asia
Peru, Saudi
Arabia and Syria
Symptom  Skin sores,  Perforation of the  Weight loss, which may be
which may nasal septum, and severe.
become a enlargement of the  Low blood counts (pancytopenia).
skin ulcer nose or lips  Enlargement of the liver and
wearing  They erode spleen (hepatosplenomegaly).
away underlying tissue  Fever, which is usually
intermittent.
(erosion) in and cartilage
 High levels of immune globulin in
the mouth, separating two the blood
(hypergammaglobulinemia).
tongue, nostrils.
 The skin may turn dark, causing
gums, lips,  Prevent speech.
VL to be called "kala-zar," which
nose, and  If the larynx is
means "black sickness." Some
inner nose involved, the voice
people who recover will have a
that heals changes as well.
persistent rash or pigment changes
very slowly Ulcerated lesions
in the skin. The kidney is also
 The skin may lead to
affected, which may lead to renal
lesions take scarring and tissue
failure. Other organs, including
on a variety destruction that can
the bowel and the lung, may be
plaques be disfiguring
affected.
Table 5.2 Type of leishmaniasis
Review of Literature
Cutaneous Mucocutaneous Visceral
Fig (5.6) Severity of lesions
Picture credit CGM Research Project Telemedicine Picture credit: Human Leishmaniasis
Fig (5.6) Visceral Leishmaniasis
Picture credit Jorge et al, WHO (2012)
Lipid Metabolism
In Leishmania, lipid play important role in formation of micro domains which are major
virulence factors for the parasite. Lipid metabolism includes sphingolipid metabolism,
Lipopolysaccharide metabolism, Glycan metabolism etc. The plasma membranes of the
divergent eukaryotic parasites, Leishmania and Trypanosoma, are highly specialized, with a
thick coat of glycoconjugates and glycoproteins playing a central role in virulence. Unusually,
the majority of these surface macro-molecules are attached to the plasma membrane via a
glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) anchor. In mammalian cells and yeast, many GPI-anchored
molecules associate with sphingolipid and cholesterol-rich detergent-resistant membranes,
known as lipid rafts (Figure 2.6). Lipid micro domains, including rafts and caveolae, have an
important role in the organization of membrane proteins, in cell–cell contact and in numerous
signaling processes. Lipid rafts in Leishmania major as being enriched in sphingolipid (inositol
phosphosphingolipid) and sterol is very essential for the survival of the parasite.
Schematic representation of membrane rafts components in L.major .It shows association
between sphingolipid and sterols in the outer and inner leaflets of the membrane bilayer results
Review of Literature
in the formation of a liquid-ordered raft phase (red and blue
regions) that is structurally distinct from the surrounding
liquid-disordered phase (orange region). Lipid rafts from
amastigotes are mainly constituted by GSLs and sterols. In
procyclic promastigote forms, IPC and sterols are the major
lipid components of the rafts.
Fig (5.7) Lipid rafts Picture credit: Erika Suzuki, Ameria K.
et al., 2008)
Sphingolipid Metabolism
Sphingolipids (SLs) are ubiquitous membrane components in pathogenic protozoan. The surface
of most protozoan parasites relies heavily upon lipid-anchored molecules, to form protective
barriers and play critical functions required for infectivity. Sphingolipids (SLs) play important
roles through their abundance and involvement in membrane micro domain formation, as well as
serving as the lipid anchor for many of these molecules. Interactions of parasite sphingolipid
metabolism with that of the host may potentially contribute to parasite survival and/or host
defense (W Paul Denny., 2001). The basic structure of a sphingolipid consists of a long-chain
sphingoid base backbone (distinguishing it from glycerolipids which have a glycerol backbone)
linked to a fatty acid via an amide bond with the 2-amino group and to a polar head group at the
C-1 position via an ester bond. Trypanosomatids such as Trypanosoma and Leishmania spp.
synthesize large amounts of unglycosylated inositol phosphorylceramide (IPC), a lipid found
widely among fungi and plants but absent in mammals (Figure 2.7 Image Credit: Lena J. Heung
(2006). After the synthesis of dihydroceramide, the pathway can be generally divided into
mammalian- and fungal/plant-specific branches. Synthesis of IPC occurs by the transfer of
inositol phosphate from PI to the C-1 hydroxyl group of ceramide or phytoceramide. This
reaction is catalyzed by IPC synthase, which is localized to the Golgi of yeasts.
Ceramide + L-1-phosphatidyl-inositol IPC Sinositol phosphorylceramide + a 1, 2-
diacylglycerol
Review of Literature
IPC is present together with other SLs and sterols in organized lipid rafts but it is never found
attached to any GPI-anchored protein or GIPL. As IPCS is parasite specific and has no functional
equivalent in mammals, it can serve as putative drug target for leishmaniasis
Fig 5.8 Sphingolipid metabolism
Existing Drugs:
Medicines called antimony-containing compounds are the main drugs used to treat leishmaniasis
.There are several drugs available for the treatment of leishmaniasis, but many of the newer
Review of Literature
medications are not yet available in all endemic areas. Drug resistance is a concern in regions
using monotherapies for treatment (. Lucio H., et al, 2012)
Glucantime
stibogluconate
antimonaite
Paromomycin
Amphotericin B
formulation with
methyl AmBisome
benzethonium
Pentamidine Amphotericin B
isethionate Fungizone
Fig (5.9) Drugs for Cutaneous and visceral leishmaniasis
Limitations of available Drugs:
Due to side effects such as high cardiotoxicity pancreatitis and and nephrotoxicity
patients should be hospitalized and monitored, as treatment may need to be suspended.
Lack of efficacy
Requirement for hospitalization and/or cost.
Due to drug resistance
Improper and inaccurate dosage of the drugs
Several changes in the physiological parameters in the parasites.
Nevertheless, the lack of adequacy for administration in the field, toxicity and resistance
issues of the current therapies highlights the need of new drugs for Leishmaniasis. To
overcome the limitations of conventional drug discovery and delivery systems, new
approaches must be followed using fascinating science like system and synthetic biology.
Genetic toggle switch
Switch is important part of DNA that makes how and when to use the gene. E.g. Fruit fly sparks
in the wings can be switched in and off. Switching of gene is controlled by gene regulatory
Review of Literature
network proteins. Genetic toggle switch—a synthetic, bistable gene-regulatory network (S.
Gardner et al., 2000) is composed of two repressors and two constitutive repressible promoters
(figure 2.8). Each promoter is inhibited by the repressor that is transcribed by the opposing
promoter. When each gene encodes a transcriptional repressor of the other and each repressor is
blocked by a chemical input, the system can be switched between two stable states (i.e., ―gene 1
on, gene 2 off‖ vs. ―gene 1 off, gene 2 on‖.
Fig (5.10): Schematic representation of Genetic toggle switch
Bistability
Bistability is a dynamic feature of a particular gene to preferentially toggle between two steady-
states. Bistability arises within range of biological systems from lamda phage bacterial switch to
signal transduction pathways. The state of gene switches plays pivotal roles in cell fate decision.
The expression level of a gene switch does not change gradually but rather has two distinct
steady-states: HIGH or LOW, ON or OFF, ALL or NONE. The ability of switches to convert a
graded signal into a binary response ensures that a cell responds in a decisive manner or
unambiguously commit to a specific program. There are generally two means of achieving
bistability in a network: a positive feedback loop or mutual repression (i.e., double negative
feedback). Bistable behavior of gene switches have been reported to play pivotal roles in many
important aspects of cell physiology, including cell fate decisions cell cycle control cellular
Review of Literature
responses to environmental stimulation. Changes in regulatory mechanism may results in genetic
switching in the bistable system.
Steady states
Attractors or steady states are cycles of states and are assumed to be associated with the stable
states of cell function (F. Li, T. Long et al, 2003). The states in which the network resides most
of the time, attractors in models of gene-regulatory networks are expected to be linked to
phenotypes (S. A. Kauman et al., 1993). Hence attractors represent long term behavior of genes
or protein in regulatory network.
Bifurcations
The number and stability of the steady states may change as the value of some control parameter
changes value. The critical value at which the qualitative change of the steady states occurs is
called a bifurcation point. The saddle-node bifurcations are the bifurcations where by changing
the control parameter two steady states, one stable and one unstable, will coalesce and disappear.
Different bifurcation methods give different steady states but saddle point is most appropriate for
the bistable genetic switches as it gives two states.
Repressilator
Three transcriptional repressor systems can be used to build an oscillating network. The
repressilator consists of three genes connected in a feedback loop, such that each gene represses
the next gene in the loop and is repressed by the previous gene (Fig 5.11). In addition, green
fluorescent protein is used as a reporter so that the behavior of the network can be observed
using fluorescence microscopy (M Elowitz et al., 2009).
Fig (5.11) Gene 1 represses Gene2, Gene 2 represses Gene 3 and Gene 3
represses Gene 1 in cyclic manner
Review of Literature
.
Toggle switch coupled with Repressilator
Coupling is obtained by common variable between two circuits. There are two types of coupling
where in former type the expression of one gene of toggle switch is under control of one protein
of the repressilator. In later type expression of one gene of repressilator is controlled by toggle
switch, these are present at multi stages of Gene regulatory network supposedly at hierarchial
one. Former type is present at Bistable stages of Gene Regulatory Network (GRN). In nutshell
model should be able to connect toggle switch and oscillator in such way that transition from one
steady state to another steady state of toggle switch via the coupling induce oscillation in
repressilator. The design of the repressilator was guided by two simple mathematical models, one
continuous and deterministic and the other discrete and stochastic.
Stochastic Simulation
Modeling approach for genetic circuit includes common approaches like Logical, continuous and
stochastic modeling (G Karlebach., 2008) .Stochastic models are also called single-molecule
level models as they take the fluctuating concentrations of single molecules into account when
describing a circuit. The stochastic models are built up much like the ODEs but instead of a
reaction rate they make use of a reaction probability. The system can then be run with a
stochastic simulator, like Dizzy (S Ramsey., 2005), using algorithms made for stochastic
simulation of coupled chemical reactions like the Gillespie Direct (Gillespie D., 1997) or
Gibson-Bruck algorithms (M Gibson et al., 2000).Deterministic approach can used for analyzing
bistability in terms of kinetic parameters but it can describe only average behavior of system
based on large fluctuations of system behavior in different cells. Moreover it cannot realize
experimental results with different genetic switching in different cells under same condition. For
the biological systems when detailed information of biochemical reaction is not available,
stochastic approach is boon for the system to study which is in our case. The circuits may be
highly affected by stochastic mechanisms and the determinism produced by the continuous
models may not be sufficiently descriptive. Stochastic analysis gives narrower bistable area than
deterministic approach. Stochastic fluctuations push the system towards the other stable steady
state (S Hagen Johansen 2011).
Review of Literature
There are three types of stochastic simulations:
 Stochastic exact (Master Equation) where reactions are represented by variables like
protein concentration or gene product.
 Stochastic (tau-leap): Solves master equation based on controllable dimensionless error
parameters. (Poison distribution per unit time)
 Hybrid: Combines stochastic simulation algorithm of Gibson –Bruck with different
algorithm for numerical integration of ODEs
From the above mentioned methods tau-leap type of stochastic simulation is most applicable for
genetic circuit because it links to biochemical reaction system to Euler method which is useful to
describe the reconstruct DNA sequence from its fragments .It gives more quantative description
of stochastic dynamics of biological system.
Stochasticity in genetic switches
Gene expression is exposed to stochasticity caused by fluctuations in transcription and
translation, despite constant environmental conditions giving rise to diversity and differentiation
of cell types (M Kærn et al., 2005). Stochasticity in gene expression of genetic circuits can
potentially predict transition among two states of genetic circuits. Gene expression is vulnerable
to fluctuations that are caused by noise in the system. The total noise in a cellular environment
can be divided in the noise arising from the gene expression itself, intrinsic noise, and that of the
fluctuations in all the other components of a cell, extrinsic noise, like transcription factors and
RNA polymerase abundance. In stochastic model intrinsic noise can switch the system from
intermediate to steady state. Extrinsic noise can affect key regulatory processes. Also one can
investigate switching behavior by the measurement of noise. The cellular processes have to be
robust in order to cope up with the noise .Moreover this approach gives an appropriate technique
for introducing noise into models to study robustness of genetic circuits.
Robustness of synthetic circuit
Robustness is a property that allows a system to maintain its functions despite external and
internal perturbations. Robustness is a feature often observed when studying biological systems.
Review of Literature
Observable phenomena that characterize such robustness are adaptability, insensitivity to
parameter changes and resistance to structural damages. Adaptive biological systems have the
ability to change mode in a changing environment but still maintain the same phenotype. When
designing and studying biological systems these properties will be able to ensure or explain the
robustness of the system (H Kitano., 2004). In genetic regulatory network robustness of steady
state can be defined as probability of a steady state reverting back to itself when the expression
of one or more nodes is perturbed from its original expression value. It is imperative that
robustness of cellular steady state is reflected by robustness of attractors under stochastic
simulation of gene regulatory network .Hence biologically motivated stochastic models for
quantifying the robustness properties of genetic circuits is essential to compare multiple network
configuration for same biological synthetic model.
Statistical Inference of genetic Circuit
Mathematical and computational modeling of genetic regulatory networks promises to uncover
the fundamental principles governing biological systems in an integrative and holistic manner. It
also paves the way toward the development of systematic approaches for effective therapeutic
intervention in disease. The difference between inference and design of synthetic circuits is that
in design we try to reconstruct the system from data that we observe; we seek to construct the
system that produces the data we would like to observe i.e. desired behavior. Hence after
construction of circuit and its simulation, it is mandatory to check for the circuit performance. If
it performs well, it is applicable but if not then check for sensitivity and robustness analysis.
When desired robust solution is obtained after perturbations and optimization, we can implement
the design in wetlab. Need for the inference of gene regulatory network due to protein expression
when needed in spite of infrequent and stochastic gene expression may be due to following
reasons:
 It may be due to population transcriptional co operation; means every protein population
does not mean to form gene product.
 Check points to assure that cascaded events are adequately synchronized.
Review of Literature
 Widespread redundancy in the genes and in regulatory pathways even in normal
condition (normal fluctuations) in protein production can be large which is related to
regulatory threshold which controls the expression of downstream genes.
 Consequences in wide variation from cell to cell in switching time for controlling protein
to activate gene it controls.
 Without a coordinative mechanism, time variation will cause errors synchronization of
cellular functions.
 The mechanism to provide coordination can be provided by regulatory check points with
conditions provided.
 Regulatory circuits design and molecular details that determine the kinetic parameters
must be under selection pressure.
 Redundancy in the circuit efforts the resilience in gene circuit performs with respect to
gene mutation and regulation failure caused by erratic protein production.
 Mutation in one or more of gene in regulatory network can increase probability of failure
of networks that accounts for robustness of circuit.
. There are various approaches for the inference of gene regulatory networks. Bayesian method,
Boolean method and ODE (ordinary differential Equation) method. To perform the network
inference, network can be created by using Natural language rules or one can import the
constructed model in SBML (Systems Biology Markup Language). Network inference can be
made by time series data generated after the simulation of circuit. For Qualitative inference
Boolean method is used and Quantitative inference Bayesain method is used.
Quantative and Qualitative synthetic network
Successful completion of the various genome projects has led to the realization that effective
models for predicting cellular behavior must take into account the network interactions that
dynamically mediate gene regulation. Since behavior arising from these complex interactions is
difficult to predict without quantitative models and qualitative models, there is a need for
Review of Literature
experimentally validated computational modeling approaches that can be used to understand the
complexities of gene regulation
Bayesain method
In the formalism of Bayesian Networks, the structure of a genetic circuit system is modeled by a
directed acyclic graph G= 〈V, E〉. The vertices I ∈ V, I = (1….. n), represent genes regulation
levels and Correspond to random variables Xi. In network node are genes and edges are
condition dependency regulators in circuit. In Bayesain method relationship between genes in
biological system can be studied. Probabilistic framework captures the stochastic nature of
biological system. It provides insight into uncertainty in circuit. Posterior probability distribution
is quantity derived from Monte Carlo simulation in Bayesian method. Posterior probability
distribution over possible design parameter values that can be analyzed for parameter sensitivity
and robustness provide credible limits as design parameters. It encodes ability of each design to
achieve desired behavior. This method includes network probability matrix, network uncertainty
and no of regulators in the circuit. Synthetic gene regulatory network is constructed in
Arabidopsis Thaliana (Locke, J.C et al.,2006) Bayesian network method was used to construct
transcription regulatory network by selecting five regulatory genes and their time series data
from ODE model. Significant regulators in the network were identified. Regulatory genes
identified from Bayesian network on basis of conditional probability distribution were
experimentally validated against stress and external perturbation of environment. Network
analyses were performed by GRENITS package of R.
GRENTIS is Gene Regulatory Network Inference using Time series .The package offers four
network inference statistical models using Dynamic Bayesian Networks and Gibbs Variable
Selection: a linear interaction model, two linear interaction models.
Boolean method
A Boolean network G (V, F) is defined by a set of nodes (genes) and a list of Boolean functions
where V= {x …x } are set of genes and F= (f .......f ). Each represents the state (expression) of
gene, where represents the fact that gene is expressed (active) and means it is not expressed
(inactive).The list of Boolean functions represents the rules of regulatory interactions between
Review of Literature
genes(S Ilya et al.,2002). This method includes conversion of the model of circuit to Boolean
network (BN), network analyses and perturbation experiments by generating random networks.
It includes Synchronous network where the assumption is that all genes are updated at same time
and asynchronous network where genes are updated at different point of time. Methods to
analyze the Boolean network includes find the attractors and the transition between the attractor.
Also check the robustness of gene regulatory network to noise and mismeasurements. Several
genetic networks have been successfully modeled and analyzed using BNs, such as the
mammalian cell cycle (Faure et al., 2006), or the yeast cell cycle (Li et al., 2004).
Existing software tools in this field often specialize on certain aspects of BN research, or do not
support all three types of networks (e.g. Albert et al., 2008; Klamt et al., 2007; Wuensche, 2009).
The R package BoolNet provides methods for all major uses of synchronous, asynchronous and
probabilistic BNs and includes novel functions for attractor search, robustness analysis and
binarisation. Boolean network for the yeast cell cycle and mammalian system was done using
BoolNet.
International and national status
The first synthetic gene circuits were engineered in bacteria, and more recently have been
established in yeast and mammalian systems (Travis S Bayer., 2005; Hasty et al. 2002; Kaern et
al. 2003; Sprinzak and Elowitz 2005). The first toggle switch and repressilator are explained
below.
Genetic toggle switch:
Construction of a genetic toggle switches—a synthetic, bistable gene-regulatory network—in
Escherichia coli and provide a simple theory that predicts the conditions necessary for
bistability. The toggle is constructed from any two repressible promoters arranged in a mutually
inhibitory network. It is flipped between stable states using transient chemical or thermal
induction and exhibits a nearly ideal switching threshold. In the experiment the LacI-repressor
was used as Repressor 2, repressing the promoter Ptrc-2 being inducible by IPTG working as
Inducer 2. Promoter 2 encodes either a heat inducible cI repressor or anhydortetracycline (aTc)
inducible tetR repressor that will repress Promoter 1.If there is expression from Promoter 2 (the
Ptrc-2 promoter) there will be expression of a reporter protein, in this case in the form of the
GFPmut3 gene. The vector design used by Gardner et al. is shown in Figure 2.16. By using the
Review of Literature
construct design in E. coli strain JM2.300, they created a genetic circuit with two separate stable
expression states (bistable) in which could be switched between by adding an inducer (chemical
or physical) to the medium.
Fig (5.12) a.) Schematic presentation of
the genetic toggle switch made by
Gardner et al. Promoter 1 is repressed by
the Inducer 1 inducible Repressor 1.
Promoter 2 is repressed by the Inducer 2
inducible Repressor
The vector design applied for demonstration of a
genetic toggle switch
Image Courtesy: Timothy S. Gardner., 1999
Repressilator
The repressilator was constructed by Elowitz and Leibler as a synthetic oscillatory network of
transcriptional regulators, a biological oscillator. Here it was used three repressors acting in
sequence on each other. If it is being transcribed from the PLtet01 promoter in the beginning
there will be produced _ cI repressor and reporter protein. The cI repressor will repress the _ PR
promoter, and therefore there will be no lacI repressor produced and the RNA polymerase will
transcribe from the PLlac01 promoter, and the tetR repressor will be produced. This repressor
will repress both PLtet01 promoters stopping the production of the reporter protein and the _ cI
repressor. This will leave open the _ PR promoter and there will be produced lacI repressors.
This will stop the production of the tetR repressor, and thereby rend the transcription from the
Review of Literature
PLtet01 promoters again producing the reporter protein. . This cyclic fashion of repression gives
the circuit an oscillating behavior. The two plasmids illustrated in Figure 2.17 were contained
by a culture of E. coli strain MC4100 to produce the oscillating behavior.
a.) Representation of the repressilator.
One of the two PLtet01 promoters encodes the _
cI-lite gene. The _ cI-lite repressor can repress the
_ PR promoter which encodes the lacI-lite gene.
The lacI-lite repressor can repress the PLlac01
promoter which encodes the tetR-lite gene. The
tetR-lite repressor can repress both the PLtet01
promoters and thereby the expression of the reporter gene gfp-aav.
Figure 5.13
Picture credit: Elowitz M.B. and Leibler S.,
2000.
b.) The vector design applied for the
creation of the oscillating repressilator and
reporter construct
In Eukaryotes, yeast a bistable positive feedback loop expressed in yeast in which a tetracycline-
dependent activator turns on its own expression (Becskei et al. 2001) .In this system, cells
initially in an ―off‖ state could be flipped onto an ―on‖ state in the presence of tetracycline. In
response to a graded increase in tetracycline, a bimodal distribution of cells is created that are
either in the on or off state.
Using the same general design concepts as described in the bacterial toggle switch, Kramer and
colleagues (Kramer et al. 2004; Kramer and Fussenegger 2005) designed a mammalian (CHO
Review of Literature
cell)-based hysteretic toggle switch using streptogramin and macrolide-dependent transcription
factors, each fused to a KRAB repression domain. The system switches between two steady
states in response to the specific inducers.
To the best of my knowledge and literature survey so far done there is no evidence for the
construction of toggle switch or repressilator for the protozoan parasite.
Methodology
Construct circuit design
by assembling different
modules to be used for
the circuit
Insert the sequences in
the circuit
Retrieve the
Circuit sequences from
database like
Design using If all the Yes
Tinker cell sequence are
GeneDB etc or
biological parts
repository
Use the promoter prediction
tool for promoter prediction
Set the Kinetics for the reaction
involved in circuit using Hill-
Hinze equation
Parameters scan for steady state
Simulate the circuit to explore the dynamic
properties like Bistability and oscillatory behavior.
Methodology
simulation
using Tinker
Tau-leap stochastic simulation is
Decipher the logic
Steady state
gates for the
and Bistability
genetic circuits
Karnaugh Map
representation
Model validation through
of digital circuit
Qualitative and
ODE model generation and
Quantitative approaches
Time series data using
COPASI (Gibson-Bruck
algorithm)
Qualitative network
modeling by Boolean
Quantitative network modeling
method (non-parametric
by Bayesian method (parameter
method) using Time Series
estimation) using Time Series
data by BoolNet.
data by GRENITS
Statistical
network Inference
using R package
Methodology
Linear network construction for To find the Attractors in the network
the asymptotically stable system circuit and number of states using
attractor plot function
Markov simulation of network to
Network perturbation to check the
decipher the probability of each gene
robustness of the circuit
in the circuit
Transition states network visualization
MCMC chains give the analysis plot by Pajek
that suggest the number of regulators
and network uncertainty.
Fig 6.1 Schematic Representation of the workflow implemented in project
Implementation of the circuit design using Tinker cell
Tinker Cell is a visual modeling tool that supports a hierarchy of biological parts. Each part
in this hierarchy consists of a set of attributes that define the part, such as sequence or rate
constants (Chandran D et al., 2009). Using a computer aided design (CAD) application, it is
possible to construct models using available biological "parts" and directly generate the DNA
sequence that represents the model, thus increasing the efficiency of design and construction
of synthetic networks. Each part in the model can store a large amount of information
associated with the part, such as database IDs, annotation, ontology, parameters, equations,
Methodology
sequence, and information required by experimentalists, such as plasmid information or
restriction sites found within the part. Parts can be loaded along with all their known
information from databases, although this feature depends on the growth of the databases
themselves Tinker Cell has extensive support for constructing gene regulatory networks by
connecting parts such as promoters, ribosomal binding sites (RBS), and other genetic
components listed in the parts catalog. When parts are connected together, Tinker Cell will
automatically derive rate equations for transcription and translation by looking at the
transcription factors bound to operator sites. Tinker cell consist of three windows: Tools
window, main menu bar and parts and connection window. It includes workspace where
circuit is designed.
Circuit design: From the parts and connection window, select parts that are to be inserted in
circuit. Select repressible promoter part, coding region for each genes. On basis of the
connection of the modules, reactions are set. For genetic circuit transcription repression
reaction is assigned for the mutual repression between the two genes included in the toggle
switch. Similarly design the repressilator with three genes connected in cyclic manner and
assigns the transcription repression reaction. Coupling between toggle switch and
repressilator is done by insertion of the transcription repression reaction between the first
gene of the toggle switch and first gene of the repressilator in such a way that gene of the
repressilator controls the gene of the toggle switch.
Insertion the sequence: To construct the switch for IPCS (Inositol phosphoryl ceramide
synthase), sequences homologous to the L.major was retrieved by BLAST search.
BLAST: Basic Local Alignment search tool, BLAST finds regions of similarity between
biological sequences. BLASTP programs search protein databases using a protein query.
similarity sequences against the target databases or a sequence database containing multiple
such sequences. Input sequences are in FASTA format or Genbank format.
Sources of the sequences are:
eukaryotic pathogens and closely related organisms. The resource provides a portal to
genome sequence and annotation data, which is primarily generated by the Pathogen
Genomics group at the Welcome Trust Sanger Institute. It combines data from completed and
Methodology
ongoing genome projects with curated annotation, which is readily accessible from a web
based resource. GeneDB now holds the genome sequences of 9 apicomplexans, 3 of them
human pathogens; 12 kinetoplastid protozoans, 7 of them human pathogens; 3 parasitic
helminths, all human pathogens; and 16 bacterial species, 13 of them either human pathogens
or opportunistic human pathogens
UniProt: UniProt is a comprehensive, high quality and freely accessible database of protein
sequence and functional information, many of which are derived from the genome
sequencing projects. It contains a large amount of information about the biological functions
Registry of standard Biological parts: The Registry is a continuously growing collection of
genetic parts that can be mixed and matched to build synthetic biology devices and systems
developed in 2003 at MIT; the Registry is part of the Synthetic Biology community's efforts
OrthoMCL: OrthoMCL is a genome-scale algorithm for grouping orthologous protein
sequences. It provides not only groups shared by two or more species/genomes, but also
groups representing species-specific gene expansion families. So it serves as an important
utility for automated eukaryotic genome annotation. OrthoMCL starts with reciprocal best
hits within each genome as potential in-paralog/recent paralog pairs and reciprocal best hits
across any two genomes as potential orthologous pairs. Related proteins are interlinked in a
similarity graph.
Selected sequences are inserted in the modules using Text Attributes. DNA sequence viewer
used to see the sequences inserted in the modules. Set the target promoter regions for the
transcription repression by text attributes.
Set Parameters: Set the parameters for all the modules and reaction rates like protein
degradation, promoter strength, transcription rate, dissociation constants and hill’s coefficient
by using parameter attributes or model summary window.
Steady state: For parameter scan, use steady state analysis by steady state program.
Simulation: Stochastic simulation for the genetic circuit is done by tau-leap stochastic
simulation using stochastic program.
Methodology
Logic Circuit design
Decipher the logic gates to be implemented for the circuit. Conversion of the truth table into
circuit scheme via Karnaugh map, which is better representation of truth table, was done.
In ODE model the concentration of gene products variables like protein and gene regulation
system are represented by Differential Equation.
The name COPASI stands for Complex Pathway Simulator. COPASI is an open-source
software application for creating and solving mathematical models of biological processes
such as metabolic networks, cell-signaling pathways, regulatory networks, infectious
diseases, and many others. It includes methods for simulation and analysis of biochemical
reaction. It includes methods like ODE solver that converts the reaction into ordinary
differential equations. It includes methods like simulation of reaction networks, the
computation of steady states and their stability, stoichiometric network analysis, e.g.
computing elementary modes (Schuster et al., 1999), sensitivity analysis ,metabolic control
analysis; Fell (1996); Heinrich and Shuster, 1997), optimization and parameter estimation.
Input for the COPASI was the input file exported from the Tinker cell circuit model in SBML
format.
SBML format: Systems Biology Markup Language is a machine-readable format for
describing qualitative and quantitative models of biological systems (The SBML web page:
representation and it promotes inter-operability between tools. SBML is based on XML,
Extensible Markup Language, which is a standard language for describing markups
languages.
It is a free and open standard with widespread software support and a community of users and
developers. SBML can represent many different classes of biological phenomena, including
metabolic networks, cell signaling pathways, regulatory networks, infectious diseases, and
many others. Time series data for the circuit was developed by using time course method for
the stochastic simulation.
Methodology
Model validation
R software
R is a free software environment for statistical computing and graphics. R provides a wide
variety of statistical (linear and nonlinear modeling, classical statistical tests, time-series
analysis, classification, clustering.) and graphical techniques, and is highly extensible. R is
available as Free Software under the terms of the Free Software Foundation's GNU General
Public License in source code form. R can be extended (easily) via packages.
Bioconductor package
Bioconductor is a free, open source and open development software project for the analysis
and comprehension of genomic data. Bioconductor is based primarily on the statistical R
programming language. It includes packages for the sequence analysis, microarray data
analysis, sequence annotation, SNP (single nucleotide polymorphism) analysis, high
throughput Assays. GRENITS and BoolNet are packages of Bioconductor.
GRENITS:
GRENITS is Gene regulatory network inference using time series data. Network inference
using ODE time series data was done using GRENITS. It gives the probability of the genes
included in the circuit. Probability suggests the regulators of the circuit. It also gives the
network uncertainty.
Steps followed in GRENITS are:
Commands Description
• InputTime sereis data
• Construt Linear network of the circuit and generates the
Markov chains that gives the posterior probability
analyse • Analyse the output of network,produces analyses plot
and convergence plot.
prob.mat • Generate the network probability matrix
inferred.net • generate infered network form the regulatory ciruit
Methodology
BoolNet is an R package that provides tools for assembling, analyzing and visualizing
synchronous and asynchronous Boolean networks as well as probabilistic Boolean networks.
In a biological context, genes can be modeled as Boolean variables (active/expressed or
inactive/not expressed), and the transition functions model the dependencies among these
genes. In the synchronous model, the assumption is that all genes are updated at the same
time. This simplication facilitates the analysis of the networks. For synchronous and
asynchronous Boolean networks, the most important tool is the identification of attractors.
Attractors are cycles of states and are assumed to be associated with the stable states of cell
function. Another possibility of identifying relevant states is the included Markov chain
simulation. This method is particularly suited for probabilistic networks and calculates the
probability that a state is reached after a certain number of iterations. To test the robustness of
structural properties of the networks to noise and mismeasurements, the software also
includes extensive support for perturbing networks. Time series data of the circuit is input
for the BoolNet. Network constructed in BoolNet can be exported to Latex document and
Pajek which is analysis and visualization tool for network.
Steps followed in BoolNet:
Commands Description
•Input Time series data
•Converts the real values data sets to binary data as
binarizeTimeSeries
required by the network reconstruction algorithm.
•Generates probability boolean netwrok and transition
reconstructNetwork
•Gives the attractors in the ciruit.It includes both type
getAttractors
of attractors ;aynchronous and asynchronous.
tt •Gives the transition table
•plots the attractor plot that gives no of states to reach
plotAttractors
steady state.
sim •generate markov simulation to predict the steady state
•The generation of perturbed copies of a network is a
perturbedNet way to test the robustnessof structural properties of
the networks to noise and mismeasurements.
testNetworkProperties •plot the robustness plot
toPajek •export network to Pajek
Methodology
Pajek is a program for analyzing large networks. Pajek is freeware software and can be
word for Spider) is a program, for Windows (32 bit), for analysis of large networks.
Results and Discussion
Genetic Circuit
Genetic circuit for IPCS was constructed using the software Tinker cell. Genetic circuit consists
of genetic toggle switch coupled with repressilator. Toggle switch has two mutually repressing
genes that encode the repressor for the opposite gene. Repressilator includes three genes that
code the repressor of next gene in cyclic manner. For the construction of genetic circuit of IPCS,
bidirectional reaction has to be considered. For this reason, homologs of IPCS were identified
using blastp analysis.
Homologous for IPCS are:
UniProt ID GeneDB Gene symbol Gene name Identity e-value
Q38E53 Tb09.211.1030 SLS1 IPC synthase 43 1e-08
Q38E56 Tb09.211.1000 SLS4 EPC synthase/ 44 4e-80
SM synthase
Q38E54 Tb09.211.1020 SLS2 EPC synthase 43 2e-67
Q38E55 Tb09.211.1010 SLS3 SM synthase 45 3e-82
Table 7.1 Homologs of IPCS
TbSLS1 and TbSLS4 which code for IPC synthase and SM synthase respectively in T.brucei
were considered for the construction of the genetic toggle switch based on the homology
obtained.
Functional relationship between L.major IPCS and T.brucei IPCS (SLS1) is shown by the
Ortholog relationship between them. Orthologs were searched by OrthoMCL database.
Fig 7.1 Functional relationship between L.major and other species was reflected by the graph of
ortholog relationship given below.
Results and Discussion
Arrow highlighted shows the 94 % orthology relationship between IPCS of T.brucei and
L.major.
Design of the genetic circuit constructed for IPCS was referred from the genetic toggle switch of
E.coli and repressilator of E.coli designed by Gardner and Elowitz respectively. Genetic modules
used in construction of genetic circuit are
Results and Discussion
TbSLS1 and TbSLS4 were considered as IPCS_1 and IPCS_2 in circuit.
Genetic circuit model for IPCS:
Fig 7.2 Genetic circuit for IPCS
Model Summary
Genetic toggle switch consists of IPCS_1 and IPCS_2. Repressilator consist of Lactose repressor
(LacI, Tetracycline repressor (Tetr), Lamda repressor (Phage lamda). In circuit, IPCS_1 encodes
for the repressor for the opposite gene IPCS_2 and IPCS_2 represses IPCS_1. In the circuit, it is
considered that IPCS_1 and IPCS_2 mutually repress each other that reflect the bistable behavior
of the genetic switch for the IPCS. Repressilator genes acts in cyclic manner where LacI
represses Tetr, Tetr represses LamdaR and LamdaR in turn represses LacI, repressilator tends to
Results and Discussion
produces oscillatory behavior. Coupling between genetic toggle switch and repressilator is
developed by LacI and IPCS_1 where LacI regulates the IPCS_1 and represses it.
Parameters considered for the construction of circuit are summarized in table below. Default
parameters are initially assigned to the genetic modules on basis of connectivity of the genetic
circuit. Initially the Kd values for the genes were set to 1 and hill’s coefficient value was set to 2.
Parameter scan was done for the steady state analysis and the parameters values considered for
the model are summarized in the table below.
Module no Promoter Kd H(Hill/coeffecient) Degradation rate
IPCS_1 5.054 2.99 4.89 0.1835
IPCS_2 5 1.9 3.116 0.087
LacI 11.73 1.9 1.126 0.1867
Tetr 5 1.38 1.387 0.124
LamdaR 5 2.029 1.54 0.125
Table 7.2 Model summary of the genetic circuit
Kd =Dissociation constant
Translation rates and transcription rates are set to 1 for all the genetic modules as the steady state
analysis is reflected by degradation rates of the proteins. Kinetics applied to the genetic circuit
was by Hill-Hinze‘s equation for gene product. Kinetics generated for the genetic modules are:
IPCS_1 = rp1.strength * (rs1 * rp1)
IPCS_2 = rp2.strength * rp2
LacI = rp3.strength * rp3
Tetr = rp4.strength * rp4
LamdaR = rp5.strength * rp5
rp1 = 1.0/ ((1+ ((IPCS2protein/tr2.Kd)^tr2.h)))
rp2 = 1.0/ ((1+ ((IPCS1protein/tr1.Kd)^tr1.h)))
rp3 = 1.0/ ((1+ ((LamdaRepressor/tr5.Kd)^tr5.h)))
Results and Discussion
rp4 = 1.0/ ((1+ ((lactoserepressor/tr3.Kd)^tr3.h)))
rp5 = 1.0/ ((1+ ((TetrRepressor/tr4.Kd)^tr4.h)))
Steady state Analysis
Steady state scan analysis for the degradation rates of all the proteins was carried out.
Fig 7.3 Degradation Rates graphs
a.)IPCS_1 degradation graph b.)IPCS_2 degradation graph
Legends of the graphs
IPCS_1: x= time points (in seconds)
IPCS_2: y= values of degradation rate
LacI :
Tetr :
LamdaR:
Above are degradation graphs for IPCS_1 and IPCS_2 proteins.In figure 3.3 (a) ,it shows the
bistability behavior of the genetic circuit. When the degradation of IPCS_1 protein decreases
there is rise in the expression of the opposite toggle gene IPCS_2. There are two points of time
where there is peak fall in the IPCS_2 ,where there is switching of the states.This desired graph
was obtained at 0.18 degradation rate of IPCS_1. Fig 3.3(b) shows degradation rate of
IPCS_2.When there is increase in the level of IPCS_2 at particular interval of time ,there is
Results and Discussion
decrease in the level of IPCS_1.Two points of time in graph shows there is peak fall in the
degradation of the IPCS_1 which shows that IPCS_2 represses the IPCS_1 where the flipping of
the switch occurs. The desired behavior was obtained at 0.08 degradation rate of IPCS_2.
Fig 7.4 Degradation Rate graphs
a.)LacI degradation graph b.)Tetr degradation graph
LacI: IPCS_1 Tetr LamdaR
In figure 3.4 degradation graphs for the LacI ,which shows the coupling behavior between
IPCS_1 and LacI. Intially there is no increase in the level of the LacI because of there is no
coupling between LacI and IPCS_1 which results in the increase in the level of IPCS_1.At time
interval of 4 ,there in increase in the level of LacI and drop in the level of the IPCS_1.This
change in the regulation of IPCS_1 with respective to LacI shows the coupling between genetic
toggle switch and repressilator. Fig 3.4 (b) is degradation graph for the Tetr ,there is less
oscillation between LamdaR and Tetr but it shows the repression of LamdaR.Remaining results
for the change in degradation of proteins are attached in supplementary file.
Results and Discussion
Simulation results
Simulation of the genetic circuit was performed using tau-leap stochastic simulation.Simulation
was performed for 100 time points.Simulation of genetic circuit was done at differernt
concentration.Results of fluctuations in the protein level with respect to change in dissociation
constant(Kd) were obtained as follows :
case 1 :change in the Kd values of IPCS_1
Legends IPCS_1 : IPCS_2 LacI Tetr LamdaR
a.) Kd=1 b.) Kd=1.01
Fig 7.5 Simulation results for IPCS_1 by change in the kc values of IPCS_1
In Fig 3.5 ,there is change in the proteins level with respect to change in the Kd values,when
Kd=1 ,level of IPCS_1 is increased but when the value of Kd is rose to 1.01,there is switch in the
level of IPCS_2 because of the dissociation between IPCS_1 and regulatory binding site is
increased, this leads the circuit to toggle and level of IPCS_2 is raised. Similar fluctuations in
protein level is observed when Kd values at regular intervals are changed .The remaining results
for the change in Kd values are attached in supplementary file.
Results and Discussion
Case 2: Simulation for the change in kd values of IPCS_2 were also performed that results in to
the fluctuation of levels of IPCS_1
Fig 7.6 Simulations results for circuit by change in the Kd values of IPCS_2
a.) Kd=1.01 b.) Kd=1.02
In Fig 3.6 , when Kd=1.01 ,level of IPCS_2 is increased but when the value of Kd is rose to
1.01,there switch in the level of IPCS_1 because of the dissociation between IPCS_2 and
repressor is increase this leads the circuit to flip and level of IPCS_1 is raised. Similar
perturbations in levels of IPCS_1 and IPCS_2 is observed when changes in the Kd at regular
intervals are done.The remaining results for the change in Kd values are attached in supporting
file. Above results shows the bistable behavior between IPCS_1 and IPCS_2 of the genetic ciruit
and coupling between IPCS_1 of toggle switch snd LacI of the repressilator is also shown.
Digital circuit representation of the Synthetic Genetic circuit
Digital circuits gives insight into the logic gates implemented in the circuit design for the
functioning of the circuit. The circuit consists of two genes coding for two repressors. The two
repressors mutually repress each other such that a high concentration of one protein inhibits the
transcription of the other gene. Any signal that causes the breakdown of the existing repressor
protein molecules or increases the transcription of the other repressor protein would cause the
flip. A Toggle Switch has two IMPLIES gates connected in such a way that the output of one
Results and Discussion
represses the other. Two IMPLIES gates mutually connected with each other where the ouptut
signal of one IMPLIES gate is input signal for the opposite IMPLIES gate.
The repressilator is constructed by integrating an odd number of NOT gates in a circular fashion
such that the output of the last gate is the input of the first one. Three NOT gates connected in
cyclic manner in which the output signal of first gate is the input signal for the second
gate,output signal for the second gate is input signal for the third gate. Output signal for the last
gate is input signal for the first gate.It is mandatory to consider the odd numbers of NOT gate in
the repressilator because if there are even number of gates then the output generated from the last
gate will be high. However, if the number is odd, the output from the last inverter gate will be
low and when fed to the first gate generates a high output from the last inverter. Hence the last
output signal oscillates between low and high alternately.
Fig 7.3 a.) Logic gates for the genetic toggle switch b.) Logic gates for the repressilator
Logic of the genetic circuit is represented by the truth table. Truth table of logic gates for the
genetic circuit of IPCS is represented below.
Input(A) Input (B) Input (C) output
Results and Discussion
Table 7.3 Truth Table for the genetic circuit. Input A and B are the input signal of genetic toggle
switch and C is the input signal of the repressilator.
Karnaugh map is simplified representation of truth table. It gives more insight to study the logic
of digital circuit. Coordinates used in the Karnaugh map should map the values in the truth table.
00 01 11 10
Table 7.4 Karnaugh map of the truth table of the genetic circuit constructed
The values of C are written on the rows of the Karnaugh map, whereas the values of A and B lie
on its columns. The Karnaugh map method permits to derive both the Sum of product (SOP) and
POS (Product of sum) form of the Boolean expression associated with any truth table.
Karnaugh map help to construct digital circuit. Circuit scheme gives the logic design for how the
input signals affect the output of the circuit.
Repressilator
Fig 7.8 Conversion of a truth table into a digital circuit via the Karnaugh map method.
Digital circuit implements the logic gates deciphered for the genetic circuit. Digital circuit shows
the logic gate for the toggle switch and repressilator.
Results and Discussion
Genetic circuit model validation
Model validation was done by using Qualitative and Quantitative approaches. For this ODE
model was generated for the genetic circuit.ODE model is mathematical representation of the
circuit in form of differential equations.ODE model gives more insight into regulatory
mechanism for the genetic circuit. ODE model derived for the genetic circuit constructed are as
follows:
For IPCS_1
For IPCS_2
Results and Discussion
For LamdaR
Equation 3.1 for protein concentration
[IPCS_1]=rp1_strength. [rp1]
[IPCS_2]=rp2_strength. [rp2]
[Tetr] =rp4_strength. [rp4]
[LacI] =rp3_strength. [rp3]
[LamdaR]=rp5_strength. [rp5]
Equation 3.2
Results and Discussion
Equation 3.3 Transcription rate
ODE model has the expression for the concentration of the protein in form of variables.
Reactions in which proteins are synthesized is represented by positive sign (+) and reactions in
which proteins are degraded are represented by negative sign (-) i.e. Translation rate reaction is
indicated by + sign in which the proteins are synthesized and degradation reactions is represented
by – sign in which proteins are degraded. Promoter strength is also represented by equation for
the coding regions that includes the promoter strength associated with each coding region. The
transcription rates reaction which includes Kd values and hills coefficient.
Network Inference
Gene regulatory network was constructed for the genetic circuit using Bioconductor packages.
Model was simulated using COPASI.Time series data was generated and used for qualitative and
quantitative network modeling. Circuit model is asymptotically stable hence Linear network
construction was followed. Quantitative network modeling performed by GRENITS gave the
probability of each regulator in the regulatory network circuit. Posterior probability was derived
by using Monte Carlo Markov Simulation (MCMC). MCMC simulation was run by using default
parameters. Simulation generated two markov chains that resulted into link probability of the
network generated. Results includes probability matrix for each gene in the regulatory network.
Analysis plot and convergence plot was generated for the network circuit. The Convergence
plots contain plots associated to the adequate convergence of the Markov chains. This is crucial
for further analysis as, if convergence has not been reached, the results are not trustworthy.
Analysis plot contains the link probability of each regulator with other in the circuit. Network
inference was made for 10 and 100 time series .Inferred network showed the regulatory
mechanism in the circuit.
Results and Discussion
From To Probability
IPCS_1 IPCS_1 0
IPCS_1 IPCS_2 1
IPCS_1 Tetr 0
IPCS_1 lacI 0
IPCS_1 LamdaR 0
lacI IPCS_1 1
lacI Tetr 0
lacI lacI 0
lacI LamdaR 1
LamdaR IPCS_1 1
LamdaR IPCS_2 0
Table 7.5 Posterior probabilities for each network connection
Above probability matrix has the probability 1 for IPCS_1 and IPCS_2 gives the regulatory
mechanism between them. Matrix where probability is 1 shows the regulation between the
respective regulators. Probability 0 indicates that there is no regulation between those regulators
of genetic circuit.
1 2 3Regulators 5
Regulators Regulators 4Regulators Regulators
IPCS_1 0 1 1 0 0
IPCS_2 1 0 0 0 0
Tetr 1 0 0 0 0
LacI 1 0 0 0 0
LamdaR 0 1 0 0 0
Table 7.6 Posterior probabilities for number of regulators for each gene.1 shows the regulation
between the regulators and 0 indicates no regulation
Results and Discussion
Analysis plot of the genetic circuit shows the link probability which gives insight in to switching
behavior between toggle switch and coupling between the LacI repressilator and IPCS_1 of
genetic toggle switch as designed in the circuit model.
Fig 7.9 Heat map plot of network link probabilities
Analysis plot showed the probability of 1 (blue color) between IPCS_1 and IPCS_2.Coupling
between LacI and IPCS_1 is deciphered by the link probability 1 between them.
Results and Discussion
Network uncertainty was given by marginal network uncertainty plot. Network uncertainty gave
the idea about top regulators in the network. Plot (figure 3.10) reveals that IPCS_1, IPCS_2 and
LacI to be top regulators of the genetic circuit constructed for IPCS
Fig 7.10 Network uncertainty plot
Results and Discussion
Fig7.11 Circadian clock network generated for IPCS_1 and IPCS_2 suggest the ON and OFF
state of both genes. Top right arrow is ON state and bottom left arrow indicates OFF state.
Convergence plots
Basic convergence plots are constructed. The posterior means of each variable are compared.
a.) Indicator variable of Gibbs variable selection b.) Co-efficient of linear Regression
Results and Discussion
c.) Precision of each regression d.) Intercept of each regression
Gamma, B, Lamda, Mu are the variables of the Markov chains generated.
Inferred Network
Network inferred for the genetic circuit constructed for IPCS displays the regulation between
each genetic modules used for the construction of the genetic circuit.
Fig 7.13 Inferred network of the genetic circuit for IPCS
Results and Discussion
In Fig 3.12, inferred network display the regulation between IPCS_1 and IPCS_2 which suggest
the switching behavior of the toggle switch. Network inference was made at 10 seconds .As there
is no regulation between LacI and IPCS_1 it shows no coupling between genetic toggle switch
and repressilator which results into repression of IPCS_2 by IPCS_1 (regulation indicated by
edge in the network) Lack of coupling, IPCS_1 is ON and IPCS_2 is OFF.
In Fig 3.13 As there is regulation between LacI and IPCS_1 it shows coupling between genetic
toggle switch and repressilator which results into repression of IPCS_1 by LacI. Network
inference was made at 100 seconds. Coupling between IPCS_1 and LacI leads to IPCS_1 in OFF
state and IPCS_2 in ON state.
Probability derived justifies the design of the circuit that has achieved the design objective in
addition to associated parameters that has accounted for the designability of the genetic circuit
designed.
Fig 7.14 Inferred network of the genetic circuit for IPCS
Qualitative network modeling
To test the robustness of the circuit and identification of the number of attractors that circuit
exhibit, qualitative Boolean network modeling for genetic circuit is done. After obtaining the
Results and Discussion
steady state of the network, network was perturbed to check the robustness of the circuit.
Boolean network for the circuit was constructed using time series. For the construction of
Boolean network, binarisation of the time series data was performed.
x1 x2 x3 x4 x5 x6 x7 x8 x9 x10 x11
Ipcs_1 1 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Ipcs_2 1 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Tetr 1 1 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
LacI 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
LamdaR 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Table 7.5 Binarized Time series data
Boolean Network
Boolean network was constructed from the time series data by Best fit algorithm for the
construction of the network. Boolean network consist of number of genes involved in network
circuit and number of states. Number of states present in Boolean network is given by the
where n=no of genes in the network circuit.
Genetic circuit constructed for IPCS has 5 genes, so number states in the network was 32.
Boolean network also includes the transition of one state to other.
Results and Discussion
Boolean network with 5 genes
Involved genes:
Gene 1 Gene 2 Gene 3 Gene 4 Gene 5
Transition functions:
Gene 1 = <f (Gene 3, Gene 2, Gene 4, Gene 1, Gene 5){11101101101111011111001111110000}>
Gene 2 = <f (Gene 3, Gene 4, Gene 5, Gene 2, Gene 1){00100001000010110100101000101011}>
Gene 3 = <f (Gene 5, Gene 3, Gene 1, Gene 2, Gene 4){10101110001010011000001111000110}>
Gene 4 = <f (Gene 4, Gene 2, Gene 3, Gene 5, Gene 1){11101010011101110011100010000111}>
Gene 5 = <f (Gene 3, Gene 1, Gene 5, Gene 2, Gene 4){00010011000101111110000001111011}>
Above is the Boolean network of the genetic circuit for IPCS. It has transition function which
shows the transition of the genes of the circuit. There are 32 states presented by 1 and 0 that
specifies the active and inactive respectively that gives the state of each gene during the
transition from one state to another. After transitions of states network circuit attains steady
states (attractors).Genetic circuit has two attractors that specifies the bistability of the circuit
constructed. The two steady state obtained represent the ON and OFF state for each gene in the
circuit. 0 specify the OFF state and 1 specify the ON state.
Attractor 2 is a simple attractor consisting of 2 state(s) and has a basin of 30 state(s):
Results and Discussion
Genes are encoded in the following order: Gene 1 Gene 2 Gene 3 Gene 4 Gene 5
Transition of different states to obtain the steady state is represented by the transition table of the
states. It also includes the probability for each transition of the state.
State Next state Probability
00000 => 01010 1
00001 => 10011 1
00010 => 00111 1
00011 => 11111 1
00100 => 11010 1
00101 => 00011 1
00110 => 10111 1
00111 => 01111 1
10101 => 00011 1
10110 => 00010 1
10111 => 01010 1
11000 => 10111 1
11001 => 11011 1
11010 => 11000 1
11011 => 10000 1
11100 => 00111 1
11101 => 01011 1
11110 => 01010 1
Transition table for the genetic circuit .In the last state the 0 represent the OFF state for IPCS_1
and ON state for IPCS_2 and ON and OFF state for the other genes respectively. This reveals the
switching of genetic toggle switch of circuit where IPCS_1 was repressed by IPCS_2 that
Results and Discussion
exhibits OFF and ON state respectively. Attractors of the circuit are represented by the attractor
plot which includes ON and OFF state for each gene in the network.
Fig 7.15 Attractor plot for the initial attractor of the network.
Gene1 - IPCS_1
Gene2 - IPCS_2
Gene3 – LacI
Gene4 – Tetr
Gene5 - LamdaR
In initial state, IPCS_1 is ON i.e. active state and IPCS_2 is OFF i.e. inactive state. LacI is OFF
so there is no coupling and that results in the repression of IPCs_2 by IPCS_1. After the
transition of the state’s two steady states were obtained represented by the attractor plot that
justifies the dynamic behavior of the circuit to act as bistable genetic switch.
Results and Discussion
Fig 7.16 Attractor plot of the two steady states
Attractor plot displays the two steady states of the genetic circuit. The percentage to attain the
steady states of the circuit is 93.75 % which reflects the robustness of the attractors. Attractor
plot represent the OFF state of IPCS_1 and ON state of IPCS_2 which depicts the switching
behavior of the circuit as IPCS_2 represses IPCS_1 which was not in the initial state as
mentioned in above figure 3.14.Both the attractor plot represents how the circuit toggles between
two states where the one represses the other mutually. This is in line with the hypothesis laid
with the constructed genetic circuit for IPCS. Visualization of a sequence of states can be
represented by the path of attractors plot. The columns of the table represent consecutive states
of the time series. The last state is the steady-state attractor of the network. This gives the
inactive and active state of each gene at different time series points. Figure 3.16 represent the
active and inactive state of each gene that leads to attractor.
Results and Discussion
Fig 7.17 sequences of path to attractor
Robustness
Perturbation experiments of the network circuit were performed to test the robustness of
structural properties of the networks to noise and mismeasurements The percentage of robustness
the biological network was higher than most of the percentages of the random network, this
suggests that the biological network circuit constructed exhibits a higher robustness. Figure 3.17
represent the robustness plot for the genetic circuit. The percentage obtained were greater than
50 % which confirms the robustness of the genetic circuit constructed. Network for the genetic
circuit was exported to Pajek for the visualization of the transition states in the network. Figure
3.18 represents the transition of different states. Different layout for the network visualization is
available at Pajek. Network state graph was visualized using by Kamada-Kawai layout.
Results and Discussion
Fig 7.18: Robustness plot of the genetic circuit.
Fig 7.19 State graph of the transition of states
Results and Discussion
Robustness of the circuit and the attractors obtained for the genetic circuit justify the design of
the circuit for the IPCS of L.major. Genetic circuit designed for the IPCS was subjected to
simulation and validated by both qualitative and quantative approaches. Results revealed the
bistability of the genetic circuit and also the hypothesis laid down while designing the genetic
circuit was validated.
Conclusion
The recent dramatic increase in the number of studies bridging synthetic and systems biology is
driven by the desire to quantitatively engineer and understand biological systems. The precision
resulting from this synergy eliminates much of the uncertainty and failure associated with
biological design. This allows for more meaningful conclusions to be drawn from experimental
studies. The development of models that capture ever-increasing biological complexity will
continue to inspire and guide predictive design of living systems at all scales. Moreover, the
ability to precisely perturb these systems will further enable high-resolution insight into
biological networks. Such advances hold great promise for deciphering the mechanisms
underlying development and disease which facilitates the development of versatile, robust, and
useful organisms for industrial biotechnology. Systems approaches may aid in the creation of
synthetic circuits which was the underlying aim of the current thesis and synthetic constructs
may help uncover novel underlying biological control strategies. This may help the design and
implementation of new parts such as synthetic probes and parts that can allow for controlled
gene expression. The approaches also facilitate how these synthetic devices can create precise
perturbations that can be effectively used to probe the cellular function. Collectively, these
prospective advances help mitigate the great complexity and uncertainty currently impeding the
study and design of synthetic circuits. Collectively, these prospective advances help mitigate the
great complexity and uncertainty currently impeding the study and design of synthetic circuits
embedded in cellular systems.