]CN.oib-q[
1v7105.0131:viXra
Synthetic biocomputation design using supervised gene regulatory networks
Lu´ıs F. Seoane∗1,2 and Ricard V. Sol´e†1,2,3
1ICREA-Complex Systems Lab,Universitat Pompeu Fabra,Dr Aiguader 88, 08003 Barcelona, Spain
2Institut deBiologia Evolutiva, UPF-CSIC,Psg Barceloneta 37, 08003 Barcelona, Spain
3SantaFe Institute,1399 Hyde Park Road, SantaFe NM 87501, USA
Thepotential ofsyntheticbiologytechniques fordesigningcomplexcellularcircuitsabletosolve
complicatedcomputations opensawholedomainofexploration,beyondexperimentsandtheory.
Suchcellularcircuitscouldbeusedtocarryouthardtasksinvolvingdecision-making,storageof
information, or signal processing. Since Gene Regulatory Networks (GRNs) are the best known
technicalapproachtosyntheticdesigns,itwouldbedesirabletoknowinadvancethepotentialof
suchcircuits inperformingtasks andhow classicalapproximations dealingwithneural networks
can be translated into GRNs. In this paper such a potential is analyzed. Here we show that
feed-forward GRNs are capable of performing classic machine intelligence tasks. Therefore, two
importantmilestonesinthesuccessofArtificialNeuralNetworksarereachedformodelsofGRNs
based on Hill equations, namely the back-propagation algorithm and the proof that GRNs can
approximate arbitrary positive functions. Potential extensions and implications for synthetic
designsareoutlined.
Keywords: Biologicalcomputation, neuralnetworks, synthetic biology,generegulation
I. INTRODUCTION sion. At the endof the 20thcentury, neuron-basedmod-
els were highly accurate and essentially well established
(Dayan and Abbott 2005). Moreover, several standard
Cells are entangled living machines capable of very
approximationsemergedtowardsthedistributedsolution
complex computational tasks. They rival parallel com-
of a plethora of computation problems (Bishop 2006):
puters and arein chargeof the fine tuned responsesthat
leaving aside elemental classification and interpolation
allow them, along with tissues and organs, to properly
tasks based on sample data; Artificial Neural Networks
adapt to external and internal challenges (Bray 1990;
(ANNs) were successfully applied on signal processing,
Bray 1995). The idea that complex patterns of cel-
pattern recognition, complex inference, nonlinear con-
lular behavior can be an emergent property of gene-
trol,etc. Bycontrast,genenetworksreceivedlessconsid-
gene interactions was early proposed by Stuart Kauff-
eration since molecular biology started to dominate the
man, who used a Boolean approximation to gene reg-
scenefromthe1950s. Moreandmoreattentionwasbeing
ulation as a minimal model of the true (and complex)
paidtohowsinglegenesworkedandalargelyreductionis-
molecular events (Kauffman 1993). This view was orig-
ticagendawasdeveloped. Withthediscoveryofgenereg-
inated shortly after the classical work by Warren Mc-
ulation by Jacob and Monod (Jacob and Monod 1961),
Culloch and Walter Pitts, which showed that any par-
the picture started to (very) slowly move towards a
ticular computational task (as defined by a logic gate)
circuit-basedfunctionalviewofcellularcontrol. Thegene
can be mapped into a threshold-like neural network
network view has been ever since gradually adopted by
(McCulloch and Pitts 1943). It is interesting to notice
most biologists, who became aware of the dominant role
that,sincethoseearlyyears,bothneuralandgeneticnet-
played by gene-gene interactions.
works have received an always increasing attention both
atthelevelofthedetailsoftheirinteractingconstituents Gene Regulatory Networks (GRNs) are a holistic con-
as well as in terms of theoretical models. In both cases, ceptualization of large assemblies of interacting genes
itisoftenpossibletoconsiderthateachelement(eithera andtheir regulatoryinterplay(Kitano 2001; Alon 2006).
formalneuronorasimplifiedgene,whichweshallcallin- They are the result of a non-designed process of evolu-
distinctlyunit throughoutthetext)respondstoexternal tionary tinkering (Rodriguez-Caso et al. 2005) and thus
stimuli in nonlinear ways. The associatedresponse func- they display some non-standard patterns of network
tionsthatcharacterizebothtypesofunitsarecommonly organization. Specific mathematical modeling can be
stepwise, ideally Boolean-like. made thanks to the tools already developed for single
The theory of neural networks rapidly advanced, pri- gene and other molecular dynamics characterization: we
marilythankstothedevelopmentofcomputersandsimu- will be working with the quite standard and successful
lationtechniques. Inparallel,neuroscienceactivelystud- Hill differential equation (Hill 1910). Reconstruction of
ied the behavior of nerve cells with outstanding preci- smallmotifsfromrealgeneticnetworks(Alon 2007),and
also of each time larger interwoven collections of genes
(Saez-Rodriguez et al. 2009) has become possible using
experimental data. Small feed-forward motifs like those
∗correspondingauthor representedinfigure1areoverlyabundantinlargeGRNs
†correspondingauthor (Mac´ıa et al. 2009a; Widder et al. 2012), and they re-
semble us enough of the synthetic networks that we cuits need to be designed and to what extent can they
will be designing. The connection that we intend to perform computational tasks similar to those performed
make between GRNs and machine learning is already by ANNs? Are these tasks easy to implement by GRN?
hinted at by AI methods for gene-webs reconstruction Whatarethedesignrulesrequiredtoobtaintheoptimal
(Sˆırbu et al. 2011 and references therein), where ANNs designs?
reveal themselves as a very appropriate model of GRNs. We close this introduction outlining that GRNs are
just one of the many biological structures that seem an
TheunderstandingofhowGRNsworkhelpsusbuilda
appropriate substrate to implement AI means. We can
much better picture of how computations occur in living
think of others, such as transduction networks, that can
cells (Bray 1990; Bray 1995; Nurse 2008; Brenner 2012)
alsobemodeleduptoagreatdetailusingHillequations.
and invites us to think of GRNs from an engineering
Hillfunctions willbe our maintoolinthe currentpaper,
standpoint. In recent years ambitious calls and claims
thus our developments should apply not only to GRNs,
havebeenmadethatpursuetheimplementationofactual
but to many more systems.
biological computing devices (Amos 2004; Amos 2008;
Benenson 2012). These would use interconnected genes,
The article is structured as follows: In section II it is
assemblies of cells, and alike to reckon and execute con-
shownin a constructivewayhowa feed-forwardnetwork
trolled responses to external conditions. One final goal
ofHill equationscanapproximateanyarbitrarycontinu-
wouldbe toelaboratecomputingresourcesthatcouldbe
ouspositivefunction. InsectionIIItheback-propagation
easily integrated into living organisms, although up to
rules are explicitly derived for our mathematical model
date most of these contributions have been developed
of GRNs and in section IV we show how our idea was
in vitro. Even in an artificial environment free from
applied (of course, in silico) to one fitting problem and
the unpredictability of complex organisms, the compo-
three classification tasks. Discussion and future lines of
nents that nature provides us with present a series of
work follow in section V.
important drawbacks: our theoretical understanding of
cellular processes is largely incomplete; we usually han-
dle leaky, diffusing systems where a precise spatial ar-
II. FUNCTION APPROXIMATIONBY SYNTHETIC GRN
chitecture becomes difficult, if not impossible; chemical
reactions are essentially stochastic; etc. Thus, seemingly
Inthissectionweaddressthedemonstrationthatfinite
simple designs have required very rigorous experimental
feed-forwardnetworksofHill equationscanapproximate
controls (Rothemund et al. 2004; Bratsun et al. 2005;
any positive, bounded, continuous function defined over
Tabor et al. 2009; Mondrago´n et al. 2011). Major pro-
a bounded subset of the real numbers: such systems al-
gresses might require non-standard approximations
ready incorporate the needed non-linearities that linear
(Regot et al. 2010; Mac´ıa et al. 2012) that liberate us
perceptrons were missing. For the demonstrationwe use
from any of the existing constrains, or to novel
only Hill equations at their steady state, which already
technical advances, such as multiples genome engi-
encompass enough complexity for our purposes. This
neering (Wang et al. 2009). The exhaustive exper-
workshall just be a glance into the actual capabilities of
imental (Hoffman-Sommer et al. 2012) or theoretical
GRNs if we would use them as computing devices. In-
(Hasty et al. 2001) characterization of specific existing
corporating feedback or analyzing the evolution in time
circuits (both in vitro and in silico) is also necessary.
would reveal GRNs as appropriate substrates to biologi-
In this paper we tackle theoretical issues regarding cally implement more powerful devices such as recurrent
the most basic designable computational capabilities of or echo state networks (Maass et al. 2002).
GRNs. We restrict ourselves to feed-forward networks,
which lack feedback loops and thus will not exhibit dy-
namicalbehaviorsotherthansteadystateattractors. We A. Mathematical characterization of Hill functions
present an error back-propagation algorithm to design
actual GRNs that would solve specific problems. Ex- Hill differential equations model the temporal dynam-
perimentally hard wiring a set of parameters into a syn- icsoftheconcentrationy(t)ofaproteinY regulatedbya
thetic biological system seems a little ahead of sched- set of N promoter proteins X whose concentrations are
ule, but the development of genetic engineering tech- x (t). Inthe literaturewe canfind differentimplementa-
niques that allow a combinatorial design of complex cir- tionsofthesedynamicsdependingonwhetherornotdif-
cuitsisbecomingareality(Mattiussi and Floreano 2007; ferentpromoterscanassociatewitheachothertoexpress
Wang et al. 2009) and we shall soon have the potential Y (Hasty et al. 2001; Goutelle 2008; Santilla´n 2008).
of creatingany requestedsynthetic GRN. Similarly, syn- We choose a formalism in which such cooperation is
thetic customizable signaling networks are becoming a banned:
reality (Bashor et al. 2010; Lim 2010). Although com- dy α +α xn1 +...+α xnN
binatorial design with biological components is still in = 0 1 1 N N −κy. (1)
dt β +β xn1 +...+β xnN
itsinfancy,thepotentialforcomplexcomputationalsyn- 0 1 1 N N
thetic networks is growing fast (Sol´e and Mac´ıa 2013). Here κ representsthe degradationrate of Y, n with i=
Thequestionsweposeare: Howdothesegene-basedcir- 1,...,N are Hill coefficients that estimate the number of
W 21 W 11 1 W 13 W 11 W 13 θ
a InSpenusto r s I n f oIrnmfoatrimona tpiroonc epsrsoincgessing A c t io n Output
Inputs Outputs
Gene expression
EnEvxirtoernnmal e ntal
stismigunlails
Cytoskeletal
Cell growth
Receptors Signalling networks Cellular machinery
membrane Cellular networks Cell responses
FIG.1 Information processing inlivingcellsCellsarecomplexlivingcomputationaldevices. Theupperdiagram(picture
adapted from Lim 2010) is a simplified drawing including some basic components of the computational logic of cells. In this
simplified description, cells gather signals of different nature from the external world (while sensing their internal state) and
respond to these signals by means of information-processing networks, eventually triggering biochemical and physical changes
as output. a Gene networks are one type of such molecular machinery. Here we represent their expression and response
to DNA-binding proteins (so called transcription factors) using arrows to indicate who influences whom and weights Wij to
represent the strength of the regulatory interaction. A formal approach to the same network is shown in b where genes are
formallyrepresentedasstatevariablesinanonlineardynamicalsystem(seetext). Theresponsesareoftensharp,remindingus
theonesobservedinneuralsystems. Incanexampleof thetypeofnonlinearityconsidered hereisshown. Heretheactivation
response of a given element (S3) requires a total input reaching a value higher than a critical threshold θ3. Idealized models
consider a all-or-none response (red line) but real systems follow a smooth profile (dashed line) that can be characterized by
means of Hill functions.
X moleculesrequiredforafunctionaleffectonY,α and capabilities of networks of GRNs. We begin our study
β indicate the affinity ofY to eachone ofthe regulating by a thorough characterization of the steady state of
proteins, and α and β encode for the basal activity of this equation, part of which might already be found in
Y (i.e. the concentration of that protein when none of the literature.
the regulating agents is present).
Otherformulationsofthesoughtdynamicsarequalita- For a fixed concentrationx of protein X, equation (2)
tivelysimilarregardingthetaskthatwehaveahead. IfY decays towards:
is regulated by just one promoter X with concentration
x, equation 1 reduces to: y˜(x)= 0 1 , (3)
κ[β +β xn]
dy α +α xn
= 0 1 −κy. (2) y˜(x) representing the concentration of Y at the steady
dt β +β xn
0 1 state as a function of the concentration of its promoter.
The slope of this function with respect to x reads:
Letusnotethatamodelingallowingacooperativeaction
ofdifferentX i uponY alsoreducestothisexpressionfor dy˜(x) n(α 1 β 0 −β 1 α 0 )xn−1
justoneregulatingprotein,thusthe followingresultsare dx κ[β +β xn]2 y˜
general. 0 1
We will see now how a clever use of such a simple Let us note that (α β −β α ) determines the sign of
motif is enough to show the very rich computational this slope and that this sign remains unchanged for the
wholedomainofy˜(x),meaningthatthisfunctioniseither remain n to control the steepness given by equation 9.
monotonously increasing or decreasing. Indeed:
If we calculate the second derivative of y˜(x):
lim kD (x )k = 0,
κ[β +β xn]3 while [y˜(∞)−y˜(0)] still controls the sign of the bare
0 1 derivative. This indicates that varying n we can design
Hillequationsthataremoreorlessflat. This alsomakes
and calculate the extrema of D (x), dDy˜(x) =0; we find
y˜ dx manifestthe roleofalargento introducenon-linearities
three different solutions:
in protein regulationprocesses,as well as its importance
for sharply triggered dynamics.
Let us note that we went from a parameterization us-
• 1 →0 ⇐⇒ x→+∞≡x . ingκ, n,α 0 , α 1 , β 0 ,andβ 1 toonethatonlyusesn,y˜(0),
y˜(∞), andx . Thisispossiblebecauseκplaysanormal-
izing roleandcanbe absorbedinto someother constant.
0 1 Also, we saw that β and β only affect the shape of the
⇐⇒ x= (n−1)β0 ≡x . Hill equations through their ratio.
Now, by choosing y˜(0) and y˜(∞) we can build a Hill
ThelastextremumofD (x)isthemostinterestingone function with any wished upper and lower bounds, and
as it indicates an inflexion point of the original function choosing x θ and n we can set up any desired threshold
y˜(x). Forconvenienceandsimilarityto sigmoids,wewill andsteepness. Fromthesechoiceswecouldworkoutthe
call x=x the threshold of the Hill equation – thus the valuesoftheoriginalsetofparametersandwewouldstill
notation. We evaluate the slope at the threshold: have freedom to choose κ and either β 0 or β 1 .
A key ingredient in our demonstration will be that we
(n+1)2(α β −β α ) (n−1)β n n −1 can approximate a step function with any desired accu-
D y˜ (x θ ) = 4nκβ2 (n+1)β (6) racy. This can be done taking n → ∞, and this would
0 (cid:20) 1(cid:21) be completely fair from a mathematical point of view.
However,our endeavor is to show the computational ca-
pacityofrealisticbiologicalsystems. Regulatorysystems
By now we have got our Hill equation characterized such as those described by equation 2 usually present
by parameters that are rather abstractfrom a geometric low values of n. A typical value is n ≃ 2, which is
point of view, although their biologicalmeaning is clear. consistent with molecular processes based on dimeriza-
Let us write α 0 , α 1 , β 0 , and β 1 in terms of y˜(0), y˜(∞), tion (Alon 2006; Mac´ıa et al. 2009b). Luckily enough,
and x θ ; which have got a more intuitive geometric in- there is a very interesting way around to approximate
terpretation. For the upper and lower limits of y˜(x) we a step function by combining Hill equations; and one
get: that the nature itself seems to have used prominently
for threshold-dynamics regulation. This is explored in
lim y˜(x) = 0 ≡y˜(0)⇒α =κβ y˜(0). the following subsection.
x→+∞ κβ 1 B. Cascades of Hill equations
Fromtheequationforx wecanworkouttheratioβ /β :
Aninterestingfeatureofsigmoidfunctionsisthatthey
mapaninterval(letussayx∈(0,+∞))intoanother(say
0 = xn, (8) y ∈ (0,+1)) in an exponential fashion, meaning that a
1 linear increase in x corresponds to a somehow exponen-
tialmodificationofy. Thiscanbeseenintheexponential
and substituting in equation (6) we can write the slope
decay of y towards 0 or 1 when x → 0 or x → +∞ and
of y˜(x) at the threshold as a function of the desired pa-
in the exponential increase of y(x) when x approaches
rameters:
the thresholdof the sigmoid. If this characteristicis also
(n−1)(n+1) true for Hill functions we can use the output of one such
y˜ θ 4n θ equation as the input of another with the hope of tran-
siting exponentially faster through the threshold of the
It is clear that y˜(0), y˜(∞), and x should be given if secondequation when varying the originalvariable,thus
we wanted to build up a Hill function with customized providing a steepest overall dependency. This turns out
upper and lower bounds and threshold. It would only tobe the caseasitisdemonstratedinfigures2aand2b.
FIG.2 ApproximatingarectangularfunctionwithsuperpositionsofHillequations. aAsuperpositionofexcitatory
Hill equations y˜
E(x), with m = 1,...,7 builds up an excitatory cascade C7 E(x) that approaches an excitatory step function.
b An inhibitory Hill equation y˜1 I(x) is combined with a superposition of excitatory Hill equations y˜
E(x), with m = 2,...,7
to build up an inhibitory cascade C7 E(x) that approaches an inhibitory step function. y˜1 E(x) in a and y˜1 I(x) in b are plotted
with a continuousblack line, and in both a and by˜7 E(x)is plotted with acontinuousred line. Intermediateequations(y˜
m=2,...,6)are alwaysplotted withdashed lines. Steepnessgrows with m. Theupperlimit of theHillequationshasbeenset
suchthatallexcitatoryunitstakevaluesapproximatelybetween0and1. Therefore,theinhibitoryunitinbhadtobedesigned
with a y˜1 I(0) > 1, 0 < y˜1 I(∞) < y˜1 I(0); so it is not an strictly excitatory unit as they were defined on the text. c Excitatory
CE1(x)(black)andinhibitoryCI1(x)(red)cascadesfulfillingthenecessaryrelationshipstobuildarectangularfunction. Back
to the biological interpretation of our model, we must assume that both cascades are different metabolic pathways promoted
byasameproteinX thatpresentsaconcentration xworkingastheinputofthewholesystem. Both pathwayswouldproduce
a same protein XE2, whose joint yield as a function of x is shown in panel d. A third cascade must be added, CE2 (x):
an excitatory one, and its threshold (horizontal red line in panel d) must be appropriately chosen to approach a rectangular
functionR(x). eTuningCE2 (∞)wecanapproximatethedesiredR(x): ArectangularfunctionwithR(x)=1ifx∈[0.5,1.5)
and 0 elsewhere is faithfully approximated byI(x)≡CE2 (x) (black).
UsingcombinationsofHillequations,inthissubsection We define a M-Cascade function – and note it C (x)
we aim directly at building a step function and a piece- – as the system of M Hill equations coupled such that:
wise defined function that is constant and different from
0for arangeofx, and0 outofthis range– i.e. arectan- M M M−1
gular function R(x). In doing so we will disregard other . . . . . .
. . .
interesting functions that combinations of Hill equations
might be producing. In this line, we begin by calling C 1 (x) = y˜ 1 (x), (11)
strictlyexcitatory (y˜E(x))andstrictlyinhibitory (y˜I(x))
This system can have very rich dynamics depending on
Hill equations to those with y˜E(0) = 0, y˜E(∞) > 0 and
the set {y˜ (x);m = 1,...,M} of Hill equations used,
y˜I(0)>0, y˜I(∞)=0 respectively. m
which might be inhibitory or excitatory; but for our im-
mediate purpose (approaching a step function) we are scribed by equation 2 because its input is a sum of
just interestedina setofequationssuchthat allofthem terms, i.e. it would not be regulated by just one pro-
transit through their threshold at the same time, thus moter. However, using the idea of distributed computa-
makingsurethatC (x) hasgotawelldefinedthreshold tion (Regot et al. 2010) we could easily envision a case
xCM itself. Todothis,wemustbuildthey˜ (x)suchthat whoseinputisthesumoftwoindependenttermswhileit
x =y˜ (x )forallmexceptx ≡xCM,which canstillbemodeledbytheequationthatwehavesothor-
θ,m m−1 θ,m−1 θ,1 θ oughly described: CI1(x) and CE1(x) must constitute
stillremainsfreeforustochoose. Thisisalwayspossible M M′
for any xCM >0, as we saw in the previous subsection. two alternative pathways for the production of a same
We can θ construct an excitatory cascade CE(x): a protein XE2, such that the concentration of this protein
d ca o s n c e ad b e y w p it il h ing C M E up (0) a = set 0 o a f nd exc C it M E at ( o ∞ ry ) > Hill 0. e M qu T a h t i i s on i s s w A o ss u u ld m b in e g t t h h e at to C ta M I l 1 y a i n e d ld, C a M E s 1 ′ r a e r q e ui e r x e a d c : tl x y E t 2 h = is k C i M I n 1 d + of C c M E a 1 s ′ - .
{y˜E(x); m = 1,...,M}, as shown in figure 2a. We can cades,the totalyieldofproteinXE2 asafunction ofxis
also build an inhibitory cascade CI (x): a cascade with showninfigure2dtogetherwitharedlinethatindicates
CI (0) > 0 and CI (∞) = 0 in the M same way as the ex- the threshold xE2 of the third cascade.
citatory one, but now an odd number of inhibitory Hill Let us note that the threshold of the third cascade
functions must be used together with an arbitrary num- C M E2 ′′ (xE2) is reached only when the two former are ac-
ber of excitatory units. For simplicity we have built our tivated at the same time, thus serving as an AND logic
inhibitorycascadeswiththefirstHillequationofthecas- gate. ButtheinterestofthisobjectgoesbeyondtheAND
cadebeing inhibitoryandthe remainingonesbeing exci- gate. Let us call I(x) ≡ C M E2 ′′ (x) to the exact function
tatory{y˜I(x),y˜E(x); m=2,...,M}. Onesuchacascade implemented by such an assembly of Hill equations as a
is shown in figure 2b. functionofx(figure2e). I(x)canapproacharectangular
In both excitatory and inhibitory cascades a problem function R(x) with any desired accuracy. We just need
comes up regarding their upper or lower limits. The to adjust CE2 (∞) to the height of R(x) and the corre-
first function in the cascade (we shall be using just sponding thresholds x− ≡ xE1 and x+ ≡ xI1 to match
excitatory units in this paragraph without loss of those of R(x). A steepen enough transition through the
generality) is defined for x 1 ∈ [0,+∞) and takes values threshold is achieved, as we already know, by cascading
over y˜E ∈[0,y˜E(∞)<+∞). When feeding y˜E(x) as an a sufficient number M, M′, and M′′ of Hill equations.
input for the following unit, this second equation will
have an input x = y˜E ∈ [0,y˜E(∞) < +∞), meaning
that it will take values y˜E ∈ [0,y˜E(y˜E(∞)) < y˜E(∞)). C. Feed-forward GRN as Function Approximators
We can see that the last equation of the cascade will
never reach its upper limit because its input does not Withtheelementsbuiltsofarweareripetoshowthat
span the whole domain of positive real numbers, so we can approximate any bounded, positive, continuous
if we wanted to build our cascade such that it would function of N real, positive variables with a finite feed
have the C (∞) we desire, we would have to set the forward network of Hill equations.
upper bound of the last equation of the cascade to be For simplicity we proceed for N = 1, without loss
y˜ (∞)=γC (∞), where γ is a positive constant. This of generality. Let there be f(x) a continuous function
is always possible since y˜ (∞) is allowed to take any taking bounded real, positive values and defined over a
positive value we desire. The same reasoning applies for finitely bounded subset of real, positive numbers. We
inhibitory cascades. In figures 2a and 2b, the y˜ (∞) of can always find a finite partition X ={x ;i=1,...,n˜}
all equations were corrected such that the cascades have such that for all i = 1,...,n˜ − 1 it does not exist any
a maximum of roughly 1. We note that we have got a x+ ∈ [x ,x ) such that f(x+) > f(x )+ǫ and it
ǫ,i ǫ,i ǫ,i+1 ǫ,i ǫ,i
relative freedom to choose most of y˜ m (0) and y˜ m (∞). does not exits any x− ǫ,i ∈[x ǫ,i ,x ǫ,i+1 ) suchthat f(x− ǫ,i )<
f(x )−ǫ for any ǫ>0.
Using an inhibitory cascade C
I1(xI1 =x) and two ex-
can find a finite collection of Hill equations with
citatory ones C M E1 ′ (xE1 = x), C M E2 ′′ (xE2 = C M I1 +C M E1 ′ ), which it is possible to build a set I ǫ = {I ǫ,i (x); i =
we can build up aninteresting mathematicaldevice. Let 1,...,n˜ − 1} of functions such that I (x) ≃ f(x ), if
these units be such that: x ∈ [x ,x ) and I (x) ≃ 0 otherwise. Then the
xE1 < xI1, function:
The behavior of a couple of cascades CI1(x) and approximates f(x) with an error approximately lower
CE1(x) fulfilling these relationships is plotted in figure than ǫ.
2c. Tointegratethe differentoutcomesofthe collectionI
(xE2) is slightly different from all the functions into one single output function F
it might seem neces-
used so far. It would not, in principle, be exactly de- sary a modeling with several promoters. We would be
Input: x Input: x
FIG.3 A GRN model is trained to fit the function t(x)=sin(2πνx)+2. Athree-layeredarchitecturewith4-4-1units
at input, hidden and output layers respectively was chosen. Units at the input layer are regulated by one external promoter
whose concentration acts as input to thewhole system and to thetarget function. Results are shown for different values of ν:
a continuous black curve indicates the actual target function while red crosses indicate the outcome of the trained GRN at a
given input concentration x. a ν =1: the easiest task possible. b ν =2: a slightly more complicated case, but the GRN still
performs quite adequately. c ν =3: as the difficulty increases, the network can not respond as faithfully as desired anymore.
dν =4: forverycomplicatedinstances,twoaspectscontributetodistorttheoutput: ontheonehand,alargernetworkmight
be needed to reproduce very intricate functions; on the other hand, GRNs are trained using a finite sampling of t(x), which
can only give a hint of thereal complexity of the target function.
facing a case similar to C
(xE2). But once again we network.
solve this by using the concept of distributed computa-
tion: WemustassumethattheI (x)representdifferent
pathwaysthatsynthesizeoneandthesameprotein. Each III. BACK-PROPAGATION ALGORITHM FOR GRN
ofthe I (x) isresponsibleofproducingtherightoutput
in a narrow domain of x, while all the others remain Lacking an algorithm to train multilayered artificial
silent. When looking at our readout, we do not really neural networks in solving specific tasks was an impor-
care which one of the available pathways is producing tantdrawbackthatpreventednotableadvancesinAI for
the end-product protein, as long as the right concentra- aroundtwodecades(Olazaran 1989). Training anetwork
tion – i.e. a value close enough to f(x) – is produced. means finding a set of parameters for its constituents
such that the network as a whole behaves in a desired
If we allow f(x) to be defined over an unbound set way. Training – or learning – methods are classified as
of real, positive numbers then an infinite number of Hill supervised when examples of the expected behavior are
equations might be needed; but any desired approxima- providedorunsupervised ifanetworkisexpectedtowork
tionis stillanalyticallyplausible. Also,wecaneasilyex- out the structure of a problem on its own.
tend the analysis to functions of more variables N v > 1 The most successful method of supervised learning is
by implementing I(x 1 ,...,x Nv ): the N v -dimensional ver- the back-propagation algorithm (Rumelhart et al. 1986)
sions of I(x), which should be straightforward having – a generalization to complex structures of error min-
distributed computation in mind. And, of course, a vec- imization by hill climbing that is possible thanks to a
tor function f (x) might be approximated as well by al- nimblehandlingofpartialderivativesandthechainrule.
lowing several output Hill equations in the feed-forward Notwithstanding this, our networks of Hill equations
present several redundancies and particularities and work reaches a steady state is:
some choices had to be made to implement a working
algorithm. We did so, and the proof that our choices N U j α˜jj′ (xj′ )n
take on the traininig can be found in section IV, where xj = i=0 ii′ i′ . (16)
we apply our methods to four basic machine learning
i=0 ii′ i′
problems. However, discussion remains open about how
correct some of our decisions are. Several alternatives ThesetofequationsfPorthewholenetworksuccessively
might be equally right, and further research should be determines the concentration of proteins at each layer
made to tell the most efficient learning strategies for oncetheconcentrationofthepromotersoftheinputlayer
synthetic GRNs. isgiven. Wereadouttheconcentrationofproteinsinthe
output layer as a sort of result of the computation that
Wewillbeworkingwithanarbitraryfeed-forwardnet- the GRN implements. We see that the network com-
work of Hill equations. The network consists of a series putes in a feed-forward manner. At the training phase,
of units, of Hill equations arranged in N layers. Each this outcome is compared to some target function that
layer is labeled with the superindex j and has got Nj encompassesthe behaviorthat is expected from the net-
units in it. The first layer will be called the imput layer work. This will be clearer in section IV when examples
and the last one will be called the output layer. Such a are shown. By now it is enough to assume that an er-
network is a model for a GRN of promoter proteins that ror can be derived by comparing the target function to
regulate each other in a feed-forward manner such that the result yielded by the network. This error will be
proteins regulated at layer j act as promoters of those propagated backwards throughout the network, and the
regulated at layer j+1. The concentration of each unit parameters (α˜jj′ and βjj′ ) will be modified according to
is governed by a formula similar to equation 1. We will how muchof the erroreachof them is responsible of. To
rewrite this equation right ahead and therefore we shall implement this back-propagation concept, the following
adoptanewnotationthatexhaustivelyusessub-andsu- derivatives will be necessary:
perindexes. The notation may seem baroque but it is a
very appropriate one to derive back-propagationrules. ∂xj (xj′ )n
xj i W to e c it a s ll c X on i j ce t n o tr t a h t e io i n -t . h W pr e ot w ei r n it i e n t t h h e e d j i - ff th ere la n y t e ia r l , a H n il d l ∂α˜j ik i j ′ ′ = N i= U j 0 ′ β k i j i ′ j ′ ′ (xj i′ ′ )n .
equation for the time evolution of this concentration: ∂xj
i = − P xj ·
.
d d x t j i = α β i j i j , , 0 0 + + PN i N i ′ ′ = = U U j j ′ ′ 1 1 β α i j j i i i j j ′ ′ ′ ′ ( ( x x j i j i ′ ′ ′ ′ ) ) n n −κj i xj i . (14) ∂ ∂ ∂ β x x i j k j j i j i ′ ′ ′ ′ = x n j k ′ ′ i " α˜ Pj ik j ′ N i ′ = · U j 0 ′ ∂ ∂ β α˜ i x j i j i j ′ k j i j ′ ′ ′ (x + j i′ ′ β )n i j k j ′ ′ · ∂ ∂ β x i j k j i j ′ ′ # . (17)
Here we have just added a collection of sub- and su-
The next step is to make use of the error function
perindexes to equation 1 and collapsed the sums within
ǫ(xNL;t ) whose existence we just assumed. This de-
the corresponding symbols, but both equations are es- i i
sentially the same. The only actual difference is that we pends onthe concentrationsxout ≡{xN i L} at the output
assumed just one and the same Hill coefficient n for all layer and on a target function T ≡ {t i } that has got as
the proteins in the network. Regarding the notation, we many components as units there are in the output layer.
use j′ to name the layer whose output works as input Let us note that both xout and T are a function of the
for layer j. This usually means j′ = j −1, but for the concentration of the promoters of the input layer. We
input layer we must assume that there is an extra layer define the partial error:
j′ = 0 consisting of the promoters that act as input for
∂ǫ(xout;T)
the whole system. δj = − (18)
We make this notation even more compact with a
classic trick in machine learning: assuming that there
exist several external units with constant concentration ofthei-thunitinlayerj. Fortheoutputlayerthepartial
xj′ = 1. Then: αj → αjj′ and βj → βjj′ . Also, errorcanbeobtainedstraightawaybytakingderivatives
0 i,0 i0 i,0 i0
κj can be integrated into other constants by doing: in the error function. For other layers it is necessary to
α i jj′ →α˜jj′ =αjj′ /κj. Equation 14 is rewritten as: use the chain rule as it follows:
ii′ ii′ ii′ i
κ 1 j i d d x t j i = P N i N i = = U U j j 0 0 ′ ′ α β ˜ i j j i i i j j ′ ′ ′ ′ ( ( x x j i j i ′ ′ ′ ′ ) ) n n −xj i , (15) δ i j ′ ′ = − N U j ∂ǫ(x ∂ o x u ∂ j i t ′ ′ ; x T j ) = X i N = U j 1 − ∂ ∂ x e j i · ∂ ∂ x x i j j i ′ ′ ! =
such that the concentra P tion of protein Xj when the net- i ∂xj′
This allows us to compute the error of units at layer j′
once the errors in j are known, thus back-propagation.
Knowing these partial errors at each unit it is easy to
calculate the gradient of the error with respect to the
different parameters of the network
apply a hill climbing rule on them:
∂ǫ(xout;T)
∂ǫ(xout;T)
where η represents a learning rate whose value has to
be chosen externally for each training task, and
aretheupdaterules
ik′ ik′ ik′ ik′ ik′
for each parameter at each training step.
We note straightaway that such an update rule can
lead to negative values of
, which we would ik′ ik′
like to avoid because these constants are always positive
in biological systems. This issue is solved using the fol-
lowing change of variables:
ik′ ik′ ik′ ik′ ik′
ik′ ik′ ik′ ik′ ik′
and implementing update rules on
instead.
Thiswasmadeinalltheexamplesshown. Usingasimilar
strategy we can further impose that
within a realistic range of values, but in this paper we
did notgo thatfar andwe did notcare thatmuchabout
the numerical values obtained after training as long as
they were positive.
With this we are ready to go ahead with some easy
machine learning examples. The back-propagation rules
derived here are just a straightforward implementation
of the standard algorithm applied to ANNs, with the
only difference that each pair of units is linked by two
weights. Apartfromthis,moremodernimplementations
could be done that incorporate dynamic tuning of η or
memory effects from the training history, or that exploit
somestochasticitytoavoidconvergingtowardslocalmin-
imums. Such improvements would speed up the training
or guarantee that the desired behavior would be better
reproduced. Wearenotconcernedwiththeseissuesnow:
FIG. 4 Classification problems. Two inputs x and y
represent the concentrations of the regulating input proteins
X and Y. They can also be plotted as two-dimensional co-
ordinates. Given a point (x,y), it was considered that the
GRN classified the coordinate as class 1 if xo 1 ut > xo 2 ut and
as class 2 otherwise. Class 1 points are plotted in red and
class 2 are plotted in green. The GNRs were tested with
the coordinates of a regular grid after their training. Along
with the GRN’s outcome for the grid, it is plotted the set
of training points: class 1 samples as blue crosses and class
2 samples as black squares. The training set was generated
withsomenoise,suchthattheclasseswerenotseparablewith
simple geometrical shapes. a The circle turnedout to bethe
one requiring a less complex network to be solved, a 4-4-2
architecture. b The XOR needed 5-10-2 units in each layer.
Thisseemsexaggerated forsuchaseeminglysimpleproblem.
Presumably a smaller network could bereached if additional
wiring- optimization algorithms were used. c The spiral pat-
ternis adifficult one andit required 10-10-2 unitstoachieve
theshown results.
thisworkintendstodemonstratethe conceptofmachine
learning implemented on models of GRNs. Because of a
this, it will be found that examples from the following
sectionrequireanexaggeratedtrainingperiod(fornowa-
days machine learning standards), or that convergence
could be better than shown. It should be kept in mind
that there is still plenty of room for improving the pre-
sented methods.
IV. FOUR EASY MACHINE LEARNING TASKS
As a proof of concept, we used feed-forward networks
ofHillequationsandthe proposedtrainingrulestosolve
four easy machine learning problems: one fitting and
three classification tasks.
During the learning phase we appreciated that our al-
gorithmisquitesensitivetoinitialconditions. Theinitial
valuesofα˜jj′ andβjj′
arechosenrandomlybeforelearn-
ing, and an unlucky initialization can harm convergence
towards the desired network, probably because the algo-
rithmgetsstuckinlocalminimums. Thisiscommonalso
in very basic ANNs implementations.
We were not specially interested in constructing opti-
malGRNs(meaningGRNswithlessunitsorconnections
and yet with a good performance). Network growing or
pruning algorithms could be implemented for this end.
Ourmaininterestforthispaperwastoshowsomework-
ing examples of the ideas developed, and thus we pro-
ceeded using the most basic methods.
Becausesomefreedomremainedtosetuptheκj andn
wechosen=2,whichisaveryrealisticvalueforsystems
FIG. 5 Synthetic GRN designed with the backprop-
modeled by Hill equations, and κ = 1. This applies to
agation algorithm. a Raw representation of the network
all the examples following.
obtainedforthecircleclassificationtask: 4-4-2unitsareused
intheinput,hiddenandoutputlayersrespectively. Genesin
the input layer are regulated by two input promoters. Each
A. Using GRNs to fit a function pair of nodes is linked by two arrows, one representing the
valueofαjj′ (red)andtheotheronerepresentingβjj′
(black).
Inthefirsttaskwewantedournetworktobehavesuch The basal expression is mediated by
that when an input x was given to the input layer, then by the vertical arrows. The width of each arrow bears some
the output layer would yield t(x), where t(x) is an arbi- information about how strong each affinity term is. A con-
trary mathematical function that we shall call the target nectionwillhaveinhibitoryorexcitatoryeffectsdependingon
of our training. In biological terms, the proteins at the the ratio αj ii j ′ ′ /β i j i j ′ ′ . b Schematic representation of the same
input layer of our GRN would be exposed to a concen- network: the relationships between pairs of nodes have been
reduced to excitatory (red) and inhibitory (black). The out-
tration x of their promoter protein X, and it would be
wished that the concentration xout of the protein Xout comeofouralgorithmicdesignofGRNscanbecomparedwith
the reconstruction of real webs of interacting genes from fig-
at the output layer would be exactly t(x).
ure 1. The parallelisms suggest that the cell does implement
We used t(x) = sin(2πνx)+2 with ν = 1, 2, 3, and
computations in a not so different manner.
4 and x ∈ [0,1). This is a function of only one variable,
thus proteins in the input layer would be controlled by
just one external promoter; it is always positive, as re- and the output layer. We used the error function:
quired in section II for minimally realistic systems; and
itisunidimensional,thus oneonlyunitisrequiredinthe ǫ(xout;T) = , (23)
output layer. 2
Manydifferentarchitecturesweretried,buttheresults where ξ is a Gausian noise with 0 mean and standard
shownherecorrespondtonetworkswiththreelayers: the deviation 0.1, so that perfect examples did probably not
inputone with4units, ahiddenlayerwith4moreunits, show up
For the training, 100 data points (x,t(x)) were gen- can be expected that much smaller GRNs can be de-
erated and each point was presented 1000 times to the signed to solve either of these problems (including also
GRN.Theback-propagationalgorithmwasappliedright the function fitting task) if network growing or prun-
after each data presentation. Results for the different ing algorithms were employed. Such methods are quite
ν are shown in figure 3. We appreciate how the per- common in ANNs architecture optimization, which is a
formance gets worst as the complexity of the function non-trivialproblem. Takingintoaccountthatwedidnot
within [0,1) increases. Apart from the obvious need for careaboutthewiringthatmuch,theresultsobtainedare
more units to reconstruct finer details, we must concede very satisfactory.
that the training points do not need to reveal the whole
structure of the target function because they are just a
noisy, finite sample of it.
V. DISCUSSION
Within the developing framework of biological com-
B. Three classification tasks
putation, in this paper we proposed that feed-forward
GRNs are a suitable substrate to implement the basics
We made up three classification tasks of varying dif-
of machine learning. They can cope perfectly with solv-
ficulty. For each task we generated 1000 data points
ing regression problems or with data classification, as it
belonging to classes 1 or 2. Each point consists of a
has been explicitly shown in four examples. This opens
two-dimensional coordinate and a label is attached that
the door to more complicated AI applications such as
indicates its class. The different classes are arranged on
data mining, data series prediction, clustering, signalfil-
a plane. We identify each task as circle, XOR, and spi-
tering, etc. Of course, using networks of Hill equations
ral after the geometricdispositionofthe data (see figure
does not suppose an improvement in performance when
4). Noise was added such that the classes overlap and
comparedtoexistingANNs. Thiswasnottheaimofthis
they are not easily separable. These points were used to
work. Our purposewas ratherto showthatrealistic bio-
train the network: back-propagation was applied right
logicalsystems have gota complexity enoughas to solve
after the presentation of each data point and each point
machine learning tasks. We did so with a constructive
was presented 100 times. When the learning phase was
– enough, but not completely rigorous – mathematical
over,agridthatcoveredtheareaspannedbythetraining
proof that the chosen GRN model can approximate any
sampleswasgiventothenetworktotestitsperformance.
bounded, positive, continuous function and presenting
The input now is a two-dimensional coordinate, thus
four practical examples.
proteinsoftheinputlayerhavegottwoexternalpromot-
GRNs appear as a quite adequate means to imple-
ers X andY withconcentrationsx andy. It wouldhave
ment ANNs-like architectures. Already in cellular sys-
been possibleto readoutthe resultwithjust one output
tems, genes appear arranged in networks and execute
unit, attending to whether its concentration was above
verycomplexduties. Becauseofthisnetworkdisposition,
or below an arbitrarythreshold. It was decided, though,
themodelsweworkwitharereadilysuitabletoderiveer-
to always use two units Xout and Xout in the output
1 2 ror back-propagation rules. This is the most successful
layer and interpret the result as class 1 if xout > xout
1 2 algorithm for training ANNs in implementing arbitrary
and as class 2 otherwise. It was used the following error
functions. It is an analytical tool, a theoretical device;
function:
so knowing these rules for networks of Hill equations we
(xout−t )2+(xout−t )2 can design ideal GRNs that would behave as we wished.
ǫ(xout;T) = 1 1 2 2 , (24)
Of course, back-propagation does not provide a tech-
nique to build synthetic networks in vivo,but rather the
where T = (1,0) if the input belonged to class 1 and instructionsforwhatwillbeneededwhenthemomentar-
T =(0,1) if it belonged to class 2. rives. Withtheideaofprovidingafaithful,realisticplan,
The circle task (figure 4a) happened to be the less there are a series of constrains that we should sooner
demanding one: it was solved with just 3 units in the or later impose in the large set of parameters that our
input layer and 2 units in the hidden layer, plus two GRNs would have. For the present paper we just de-
output units as said before. The network obtained is manded that our networks should always have positive
represented in figure 5. This reminds us of the small affinities and positive basal expression levels, and that
feed-forward network motifs from real cells (figure 1). Hill coefficients should be low enough. For the practi-
Because the tasks were of growing difficulty, the num- cal examples we used n = 2, which is among the lowest
ber of units needed to solve each problem changed. The possible. Also, in these examples we did not care that
XOR (figure 4b) required 5 and 10 units in the input much if the values of certain parameters turned out ex-
andhiddenlayers,andthespiral(figure4c)couldnotbe aggeratedly huge or small after training – as it was the
solved with less than 10 units in each non-output layer. case,amongotherreasonsbecausewehavebeenworking
Both of them had 2 units as an output. with equations in arbitrary dimensions. But requesting
Let us recall once more that it was not sought any that these parameters fall within a physically plausible
optimization in terms of wiring or number of nodes. It rangeandmanyothernecessaryconstraintscanbeeasily
incorporated into the back-propagation rules so that we of genes as computational devices.
would arrive to feasible GRNs.
An immediate critique to the idea introduced in this
paper is that its development in actual biological sys- Acknowledgements
temsmayrequireaveryfine-tuningofparametersthatis
outofreachforstate-of-the-artexperimentaltechniques.
We would like to thank the members of the Complex
The scenario might be even worst: since stochasticity is
Systems Lab. This work has been supported by grants
so in the core of molecular biology, narrowly controlling
fromtheSpanishMINECO,aEuropeanResearchCoun-
gene-gene interactions might never be possible. But this
cil Advanced Grant, the Botin Foundation and by the
observation is not so straightforwardly true. Indeed, a
Santa Fe Institute.
large GRN means tens or hundreds of parameters to be
tuned. Theycouldjustbeflexibleenoughastocarryout
a desired task with several different sets of parameters,