Ruetal.JournalofCheminformatics2014,6:13
DATABASE Open Access
TCMSP: a database of systems pharmacology for
drug discovery from herbal medicines
Jinlong Ru1, Peng Li1, Jinan Wang1, Wei Zhou1, Bohui Li1, Chao Huang1, Pidong Li1, Zihu Guo1, Weiyang Tao1,
Yinfeng Yang2, Xue Xu1, Yan Li2, Yonghua Wang1* and Ling Yang3
Background: Modern medicine often clashes with traditional medicine such as Chineseherbal medicine because
ofthe little understanding of the underlying mechanismsof action oftheherbs. In an effort to promote integration
ofboth sides and to accelerate the drug discovery from herbal medicines, an efficient systems pharmacology
platformthatrepresents idealinformationconvergenceofpharmacochemistry,ADMEproperties,drug-likeness,drug
targets, associated diseases and interactionnetworks,are urgentlyneeded.
Description: The traditional Chinese medicine systemspharmacology database and analysis platform (TCMSP) was
built based on theframework ofsystemspharmacology for herbal medicines. It consists of allthe 499 Chinese
herbsregistered intheChinese pharmacopoeia with29,384 ingredients, 3,311 targets and 837associated diseases.
TwelveimportantADME-relatedpropertieslikehumanoralbioavailability,half-life,drug-likeness,Caco-2permeability,
blood-brainbarrierandLipinski’sruleoffiveareprovidedfordrugscreeningandevaluation.TCMSPalsoprovides
drugtargetsanddiseasesofeachactivecompound,whichcanautomaticallyestablishthecompound-targetand
target-diseasenetworksthatletusersviewandanalyzethedrugactionmechanisms.Itisdesignedtofuelthe
developmentofherbalmedicinesandtopromoteintegrationofmodernmedicineandtraditionalmedicinefor
drugdiscoveryanddevelopment.
Conclusions:TheparticularstrengthsofTCMSParethecompositionofthelargenumberofherbalentries,and
theabilitytoidentifydrug-targetnetworksanddrug-diseasenetworks,whichwillhelprevealingthemechanisms
ofactionofChineseherbs,uncoveringthenatureofTCMtheoryanddevelopingnewherb-orienteddrugs.TCMSP
Keywords:TCM,Systemspharmacology,Drugdiscovery,ADME
Background Herbal medicines formula often combines different
Traditional herbal medicine with the longest history in botanicals, sometimes containing even up to 50 species
Asia, is a cost-effective system of medical practice that and thousands of chemical compounds. However, only
differs in substance, methodology, and philosophy from apartofthemexhibitfavorablepharmacokinetics(theab-
modern medicine, and plays an important role in health sorption,distribution,metabolism,andexcretion(ADME)
maintenanceforthepeoplesoftheworld[1].Theincreas- properties of a drug) with potential of a biological effect
ing popularity of herbal products has seen the monetary [2]. Moreover, the therapeutic effects of these herbal
valueoftheindustryincreasetohundredsofmillionsof products might arise from cooperate actions of the
dollars per annum, concomitantly, there is increasing herbalingredients.Alltheseresisttheconventionalana-
interests and need to dissect and evaluate the complex lytical chemistry and pharmacology technologies which
physiologicaleffectsof herbalproductsrigorously. intendtoisolateandidentifychemicalconstituentspos-
sessingpossiblepharmacologicaleffects.
Corresponding to the complexity of the components
*Correspondence:yh_wang@nwsuaf.edu.cn in diverse herbs or even in one herb, herbal medicines
1CenterforBioinformatics,CollegeofLifeScience,NorthwestA&FUniversity,
hit multiple biological targets involved in various patho-
Yangling,Shaanxi712100,China
Fulllistofauthorinformationisavailableattheendofthearticle genesis. Clearly, in a systems level to search potential
©2014Ruetal.;licenseeChemistryCentralLtd.ThisisanOpenAccessarticledistributedunderthetermsoftheCreative
reproductioninanymedium,providedtheoriginalworkisproperlycredited.TheCreativeCommonsPublicDomain
unlessotherwisestated.
Ruetal.JournalofCheminformatics2014,6:13 Page2of6
compound and target interactions, the ‘dry’ experiment keyways:(1)Integrationofalargescalestructuraldata
(computational method) should be the first choice, (29,384 chemicals in total with 13,144 unique mole-
owing to the shortages of the ‘wet’ experiment as time- cules)withmanuallycuratedinformationforallregistered
consuming, expensive and also being limited in small herbs in Chinese pharmacopoeia; (2) Incorporation of 12
scale [3]. Alternatively, a comprehensive systems-based key ADME-related properties from diverse sources for
approach, which could simultaneously prioritize all the active compound screening; (3) Establishment of the
active ingredients and their targets in the crude drugs, is compound-target, target-disease networks for deep
necessary. study of TCM theory, mechanisms of action and dis-
Moreimportantly,multi-componentandmulti-function covery of new drugs. In total, TCMSP contains more
featuresinherbalconcoctionsmaketheirpharmacological than84260compound-targetpairs(CTpairs)and 2387
and toxicological effects difficult to be evaluated inde- target-diseasepairs(TDpairs).
pendently. It might be more suitable to view through the In addition, the TCMSP website is more than a data
lens of systems-based approaches. By considering drug repository. It contains tools for visualization and ana-
actions and side effects in the context of the regulatory lysis of TCM results on the network level. Such ap-
networks within which the drug targets and disease gene proach to systematic and multi-target drug discovery
products function, systems analysis promises to greatly could lead to a new generation of candidates with
increaseourknowledgeofthemechanismsunderlyingthe improved physicochemical andpharmacokinetics prop-
multipleactionsofdrugs.Thus,theapplicationofsystems erties. Unexpected associations can also be revealed
pharmacology toherbalmedicineaffords new possibilities thereby furthering the understanding of the mecha-
for investigating the explicit targets of medicinal herbs’ nisms of diverse interactions and potentially indicating
active ingredients and their interactions in the context of novel treatments. Therefore, TCMSP is a powerful
molecularnetworks[4-7]. knowledge repository and analysis platform for chem-
In our previous work, we have proposed a novel inte- ists,biologistsandpharmacologists.
grated herbal medicine systems pharmacology (HmSP)
platform for the purpose of investigating how herbs Construction and content
interact with the human body from a molecular level to Databasescheme
the organism level [8]. This systems/network pharmacol- TCMSP is divided into three major categories: (1) Com-
ogy methodology has been successfully applied to dissect pounds, targets and diseases information (Figure 1 B1,
basic TCM theories such as yin-yang theory [9], qi-blood B2 and B3); (2) Herbal ingredients with their ADME-re-
[5],herbalsynergy[10,11],aswellastodevelopnewdrugs lated properties (Figure 1 C1); (3) Compounds-Targets
[7]. However, systems pharmacology, as a novel holistic, a relationships (Figure 1 C2) and Targets-Diseases rela-
multi-disciplinary, integrative field, is still difficult to be tionships(Figure 1C3).
widely applied. An accessible systems pharmacology plat-
form of Chinese herbal medicines that captures the rela- Herbalingredients
tionships between drugs, targets and diseases is urgently In order to gather all available information about ingre-
needed to help understand basic TCM theories, illustrate dients of herbal medicines, we performed an extensive
themechanismsofactionanddevelopnewdrugs. literature search for each herbal medicine. Structure files
Presently, several databases have provided useful tools of molecules were downloaded from PubChem [18]
indifferentaspectsfor TCMinvestigations.Forexample, Compounddatabase,ChEMBL[19]andChemSpider[20],
TCM-ID [12] and TCM Database@Taiwan [13] provide orproducedbyISISDraw2.5(MDLInformationSystems,
the largest number of herbal ingredients with 3D struc- Inc.)andfurtheroptimizedbySybyl6.9(Tripos,Inc.)with
turesandfunctionalproperties.Chem-TCM[14]andHIT Sybyl force field and default parameters [2,21]. Different
[15] focus on herbal compounds and their corresponding format types of the chemical files were converted to SDF
targets. TCMID [16] comprises TCM formulae, herbs, format by Open Babel [22]. The duplicates were removed
ingredients and the targets and diseases. CVDHD [17] accordingtoInChIKey.
collectsthosenaturalproductsrelatedtocardiovascular
diseases and targets. Comparisons among these data- ADME-relatedproperties
basesarelistedontheTCMSPwebsite. To analyze the druggability of herbs on molecular level,
Here, we constructed a unique systems pharmacology thedatabasewasstructuredtoincorporateseveralimport-
platform of Chinese herbal medicines, which is different antADME-relatedpropertiessuchashumanoralbioavail-
from the above-mentioned databases. The newly devel- ability(OB)[23],half-life(HL)YaoY,WeiZ,YonghuaW:
oped TCMSP provides up-to-date, quantitative and sys- AnovelSystemsPharmacologymodelforherbalmedicine
tems information about TCM ingredients, ADME-related injection: a case using Reduning Injection. submitted,
properties,targetsanddiseases.TCMSPisuniqueinthree drug-likeness(DL)[4],FASA-[24],Caco-2permeability
Ruetal.JournalofCheminformatics2014,6:13 Page3of6
Figure1Databaseschemeandsearchflowchart.ToobtaintheComprehensiveAnalysisPage(C)ofaherb,userscansearchfrom(A)with
Herbalname;SearchingbyChemicalname,InChIKeyorCASnumberofacompoundleadstoCompoundInformationpage(B1).Searchingby
TargetnametoTargetInformationpage(B2),DiseasenametoDiseaseInformationpage(B3),respectively;B1-B2-B3arecrossreferencevia
Herbs-Compounds-Targets-Diseases(H-C-T-D)referencesoneachpage,whichwillallleadtotheComprehensiveAnalysisPageeventually.C1offersa
screeningtoolforcompoundsscreeningwithdiversecriteria.CTNandTDNcouldbedownloadedinC2andC3,respectively.Finally,userscansave
andanalyzethenetworksinCytoscapesoftwareorothernetworkanalysissoftware(C4).
(Caco-2), blood-brain barrier (BBB) and Lipinski’s rule of analysis can be implemented with the NetworkAnalyzer
five (MW, AlogP, TPSA, Hdon, Hacc) [25]. Detailed pa- [30]plugininCytoscapesoftware[31].
rameters’ information, screening criteria and calculation
lsp/tcmsp.php. It is designed as a relational database and
Drugtargetinganddiseaseassociation implemented in MySQL 5.1.63 with Apache 2.2.22 as
Target information was obtained from DrugBank data- the web server. The website is built with PHP, HTML
base [26]. Drug-Target mappings were obtained from andCSS.
two sources. Experimental validated drug-target pairs
were retrieved from HIT database [15]. For those com- Utility and discussion
pounds without validated targets, the SysDT model con- Userinterface
structed in our previous work [27] was used to predict TherearesixmajorsectionsinTCMSPwebsite(Home-
the potential targets of a compound. SysDT shows im- page, How to search, TCMSP User Guide, Browse,
pressive performance of prediction for drug-target inter- Download and Parameter information). Users can
actions, with a concordance of 82.83%, a sensitivity of search herbal name, ingredient’s chemical name, InChI-
81.33%,anda specificity of93.62%,respectively.Thedis- Key, CAS number, target name or disease name in the
ease information was obtained from TTD database [28] search box at the TCMSP homepage. Querying princi-
movie tutorial on the “How to search” page gives users
Networkbuildingandanalysis a brief scope of TCMSP database. The “TCMSP User
Inordertoanalyze the CTand TDrelationships, wehave Guide” page offers a detailed case study. From the
developedavisualizationinterfacebyCytoscapeWeb[29], “Browse” page, users can browse all the herbal medi-
from whichthe networkcan be displayed within webpage cines, herbal ingredients, targets and diseases. “Parame-
and downloaded as XGMML format. Further topological ters information” page introduces each ADME-related
Ruetal.JournalofCheminformatics2014,6:13 Page4of6
propertieswiththe criteriaforscreening.Allthedatain diseases. Janus-function of these chemical compounds in
TCMSP can be freely downloaded at the “Download” both herbs was uncovered: directly inhibiting virus repli-
page. cations and simultaneously promoting host immune re-
sponse [35]. With the help of TCMSP, researches could
Drugdiscoveryanddrugcombination uncover the mechanism of pharmacological action of
ADMEevaluationsofdrugsarecriticalproceduresindrug herbal medicinesmore comprehensively.
discovery and development [32]. Unfavorable pharma-
cokinetics properties were the primary causes of costly UncoverthenatureofTCMtheory
late-stage failures in drug development [33]. To esti- The selection of those compound formula, or fufang, is
mate the possibility of converting a compound into a based on the holistic philosophy of traditional Chinese
drug, theTCMSP database incorporated a series of key medicine and follows traditional TCM theory, including
ADME-related properties including compound OB, DL, the holistic philosophy, qi-enriching and blood-tonifying
FASA-, Caco-2 permeability, BBB, HL and Lipinski’s naturesortheruleof“Jun–Chen–Zuo–Shi”,knownasthe
rule of five. This database can easily screen out the mole- Four Responsible Roles. However, the molecular basis of
cules which obey these rules or other customized thresh- thesebasictheoryandthemechanismsofactionarestill
olds. For example, in our case study of Licorice, 69 a mystery. Our previous research shows that systems
bioactive compounds of licorice were obtained by ADME pharmacology-based study of TCM may open up the
screeningwiththecriteriaOB≥40%andDL≥0.18. possibilitytounderstandtheTCMtheoryinthecontext
of a molecular network. For example, we have applied
Investigatemechanismsofactionofherbalmedicines systems pharmacology to dissect the rule of drug com-
andTCMformula bination for TCM [36], which is exemplified by Ma
Understanding how the diverse chemical components in huang Decoction (also known as Ephedra Decoction,
medicinal herbs contribute to the overall pharmaco- MHD). For the first time, by this methodology, we have
logical effect is a major challenge for current studies. revealed the chemical features of the qi-enriching and
TCMSP provides information on the ability of herbs to blood-tonifying compounds, and have uncovered the
overcome biological barriers and their associated drug targets, leading to the deep understanding of the nature
targets.The key techniques intheTCMSP platform have ofqi-bloodtheory[5].
beensuccessfullyappliedinthepreviousworktoexplore
the mechanisms of action of herbal medicines and TCM Casestudy
formula in the treatment of cardiovascular diseases and Licoriceisoneoftheoldestandmostpopularherbalmed-
virus diseases [2,7,34,35]. For instance, with this model, icinesintheworld.Ithasbeenbroadlyusedintraditional
two representative herbs Lonicera japonica and Fructus Chinese medicine as a cough reliever, anti-inflammatory,
Forsythiae were analyzed regarding their pharmaco- anti-anabrosis, immunomodulatory, anti-platelet, antiviral
logical effect on influenza, inflammation and other (hepatitis) and detoxifying agent. However, due to its
Figure2WorkflowofthegeneralTCMSPbasedresearch.
Ruetal.JournalofCheminformatics2014,6:13 Page5of6
extreme complexity in both chemical components and Abbreviations
mechanisms of action, deep understanding of licorice is TCM:TraditionalChinesemedicine;ADME:Absorption,distribution,
metabolism,andexcretion;OB:Oralability;DL:Drug-likeness;BBB:Blood
still difficult. This case will show us how to useTCMSP
brainbarrier;HL:Half-life;PBPK:Physiologicallybasedpharmacokinetics;
for screening active ingredients, identifying drug targets CTN:Compound-targetnetwork;TDN:Target-diseasenetwork.
and diseases. Here we will introduce the process and
results of this study briefly (Figure 2), detailed infor- Competinginterests
Alltheauthorsdeclarethattheyhavenocompetinginterests.
mation about the biological basis of pharmacology of
licoricecanbereachedatourpreviouswork[6]. Authors’contributions
We retrieved 280 known licorice compounds from YHWandLYconceivedthestudy.JLR,PLandJNWconstructedthedatabase
anddraftedthemanuscript.WZperformedtheADMEpropertiescalculation
TCMSP.TheADMEscreeningwasappliedwiththecriteria
withthehelpofCHandZHG.BHLdesignedandwrotetheusermanualof
OB≥40% and DL≥0.18. Under these criteria, 69 ingredi- thedatabaseandthedescriptionofthewebsite.PDLandJLRdesignedand
ents in licorice are identified as active substances. These developedthewebsite.WYT,YFY,XXandYLparticipatedindatasetcollecting
andprocessing.Allauthorsreadandagreedtothefinalmanuscript.
compoundsarethenmappedtotheCompound-Targetnet-
work and Target-Disease network. The networks can be
Acknowledgements
downloaded as a XGMML file from TCMSP, or imported Funding:TheresearchissupportedbytheFundofNorthwestA&F
UniversityandisfinanciallysupportedbytheNationalNaturalScience
into Cytoscape software and analyzed with the NetworkA-
FoundationofChina(GrantNo.31170796and81373892).
nalyzer plugin. We calculated two key topological parame-
ters,degreeandbetweenness,tospecifytheimportanceofa Authordetails
1CenterforBioinformatics,CollegeofLifeScience,NorthwestA&FUniversity,
node(acompoundoratarget)andhowthisnodeinfluences
Yangling,Shaanxi712100,China.2SchoolofChemicalEngineering,Dalian
thecommunicationbetweentwonodes. UniversityofTechnology,Dalian,Liaoning116024,China.3Laboratoryof
Finally,weobtained91targetsrelatedwithdifferentdis- PharmaceuticalResourceDiscovery,DalianInstituteofChemicalPhysics,
ChineseAcademyofSciences,Dalian116023,China.
eases, which are critical for understanding the pharmaco-
logicalmechanismsoflicorice.Thegenerateddrug–target
Received:11March2014Accepted:11April2014
network suggests that glyasperins C, licoagrocarpin, gly- Published:16April2014
cyrrhizic acid and the target proteins PTPN1, HRH1, F2