]CN.oib-q[
2v9095.2141:viXra
Noname manuscript No.
(will be inserted by the editor)
Teaching Computational Neuroscience
Reviews:
Britt Anderson: Computational Neuroscience and Cognitive Modelling A Student’sIntroduction to Methods
and Procedures. Sage, 2014
Hanspeter Mallot:Computational Neuroscience: A First Course, Springer, 2013
Thomas Trappenberg: Fundamentals of Computational Neuroscience. Oxford Univ. Press, 2010
P´eter E´rdi
Received: date /Accepted: date
Abstract The problems and beauty of teaching com- into sections reflecting the hierarchical organization of
putationalneurosciencearediscussedbyreviewingthree the nervous system: Overviews, The Synaptic Level,
new textbooks. The Network Level, Neural Maps, Systems. The flag-
ship conference of the emerging discipline was orga-
Keywords Computational neuroscience · Education
nized by Jim Bower [4] starting in 1992. As the Or-
PACS 87.19.L ganization of the Computational Neuroscience website
(www.cnsorg.org/)describes:”...Computationalneu-
MathematicsSubjectClassification(2010) 00A17·
rosciencecombinesmathematicalanalysesandcomputer
simulationswithexperimentalneuroscience,todevelop
a principled understanding of the workings of nervous
systems and apply it in a wide range of technologies.”.
1 Teaching Computational Neuroscience:
Diverse Perspectives
Withasomewhatdifferentperspective(shifting the
ComputationalNeuroscienceisadisciplinethathasde-
emphasis on models from structural to functional as-
veloped rapidly in the last twenty-five years. Roughly
pects)Cosyne(ComputationalandSystemsNeuroscience)
speakingithastwodifferentmeanings.First,howtouse
computational (more precisely theoretical and mathe-
ganizedsince2003byAnthonyZador,AlexPouget,and
matical)methods to understandneuralphenomenaoc-
Zachary Mainen. As the conference website specifies:
curring at different hierarchicallevels of neural organi-
”Cosyne topics include (but are not limited to): neural
zation. Second, how the brain computes (if at all).
coding,naturalscene statistics,dendritic computation,
neural basis of persistent activity, nonlinear receptive
While of course computational neuroscience has its
field mapping, representations of time and sequence,
predecessors(from”mathematicalbiophysics”,via”cy-
reward systems, decision-making, synaptic plasticity,
bernetics” to ”theoretical neurobiology”), most likely
map formation and plasticity, population coding, at-
the first book with the very title of ”Computational
tention, and computation with spiking networks. Par-
Neuroscience” was edited by Eric Schwartz [15]. The
ticipants include pure experimentalists, pure theorists,
chapterswerewrittenbycelebratedauthorsandgrouped
and everything in between.”
Center forComplex SystemsStudies
There is a reemergingfieldof mathematical neu-
Kalamazoo College
Kalamazoo, MI 49006 roscience with its ownjournalandconference(1st In-
1200 Academy Street ternational Conference on Mathematical Neuroscience
(ICMNS) in June 2015). I think this community will
Institutefor Particle and Nuclear Physics
emphasize the necessity of using advanced mathemati-
WignerResearch Centre for Physics,Hungarian Academy of
Sciences calmethods, mostly for modeling less for data analysis
E-mail: perdi@kzoo.edu purposes (but I might be wrong). The emphasis is on
2 P´eter E´rdi
thethestrictapplicationofdynamicsystemstheoryby sheet program. Of course, students should understand
using both deterministic and stochastic models. whatis a D in the DE, so derivatives as instantaneous
Computational neuroscience is a prototype of in- slopes and the elementary jargon are discussed.
terdisciplinaryscience,andscientistsfollowingdifferent
traditions would agree that education is a key compo- Numerical Application of a Differential Equation
nent in training new generationsof future experts, and
helping experimentalists (biologists, clinical scientists, There is a very simple, non-technical introduction
psychologists etc.) to understand what computational to the idealized behavior of spring, i.e harmonic oscil-
model can (and cannot) do. lator(Andersonmentionsthejokewiththephysicists’s
In this paper three recent textbooks are reviewed. ”spherical chicken” approach). The example makes it
I am going to argue that while there is no reason to clear that before doing anything students should un-
believe that it is possible or even necessary to write a derstandthe statevariablesofanysystemunderstudy.
single textbook, there are some overarching concepts Inthissimple mechanicalexamplethey arethevelocity
and methods of computational neuroscience. However, andacceleration.Themostcommonintroductiontothe
computational neuroscience is taught (i) to students, methodology of solving differential equations numeri-
not only with different backgrounds, but also with dif- cally is Euler’s method calculating the approximation
ferent goals; (ii) by teachers with diverse backgrounds; of the derivative by using small, but finite changes in
(iii) by reflecting upon different intellectual forerunner the variable.
disciplines;(iv)occasionallybyemphasizingtheimpor-
tanceofsomespecificlevelsoftheneuralhierarchyand From Action Potential to Programming Neurons: Inte-
(v) by emphasizing the importance of different mathe- grate and Fire
matical methods.
Thischapterbrieflyintroducestheconceptofaction
potential; and the integrate and fire model.The expla-
2 The Motivational Approach nationoftheunderlyingphysicsisrestrictedtothedef-
inition of Ohm’s law and Kirchoff’s law. It uses a Java
ComputationalNeuroscienceandCognitiveMod-
appletforsolvingthe Hodgkin-Huxleyequationsinthe
eling[2]iswrittenbyBrittAnderson,MD,apsycholo-
condensed form Eq. 1
gistatUniversityofWaterloo.Hismotivationisclearly
stated: ”I find many psychological undergraduates are τ =RI(t)−V(t), (1)
interestedincomputationalmodelling,butthatthereis
and explains the meaning of dV/dt, τ, I(t). The solu-
nota lotofliteratureortexts tohelpthemgetstarted.
tionoftheequationtellstheevolutionofthevoltage,or
To try and improve that, I took the notes from a semi-
membrane potential over time. Again, the author sug-
nar I have taught over the last few years, and wrote a
gests to write a spreadsheetprogramto solve integrate
textbook....”.
and fire models.
Actually among the four parts of the book only the
Hodgkin and Huxley: The Men and Their Model
firsttwo(1:ModelingNeurons,2:NeuralNetworks)be-
longtocomputationalneuroscienceinnarrowsense,the
PartIaboutneuronsisconcludedbyachapterabout
othertwoparts(3.ProbabilityandPsychologicalMod-
the pioneers, and the emphasis is to explain conduc-
els, 4. Cognitive Modeling as Logic and Rules) should
tance-based models. A single current is substituted by
instead be taught in Cognitive Science classes.
the sum of individual currents flowing on specific ion
channels, giving some hint to the interpretation of the
2.1 Modeling Neurons gatingvariables.Concerningtheeducationallevel,there
isanexplanationinaniceboxwiththetitle”WhatAre
What is a Differential Equation? the Parentheses for?”, where the reader should under-
stand that V(t) is a number, actually the value of the
This chapter is clearly written for those whom this function V at the time-point t.
is the first encounter with differential equations. It ex-
plains the difference between analytical and numerical Programming
solutions,bysolvingthealgebraicequationx =4,and
shows that an easy computational technique of numer- In addition to spreadsheet programming,Anderson
ical (as opposed to analytic) calculations is a spread- suggestslearningPython.Whilethebookcertainlycan-
Teaching Computational Neuroscience 3
not take the place of a programming class, it men- field nets? Hopfield transferred a mathematical tech-
tions some elementary concepts of programming, such nique from physics (no more details were given). Es-
asdeclaringvariables,controllingstructureswithloops, sentiallysomeremarkablefeaturesarementioned,such
and conditions. as error correction and the ability to complete pat-
terns.Herethe bookbecamealittle moredifficult,stu-
dents should understand some elementary concepts of
2.2 Neural Networks dynamical systems, such as the algorithm for calculat-
ing the outputs of a Hopfield network.Students should
Neural Network Mathematics: Vectors and Matrices make exercises to understand asynchronous updating
algorithms,andtoconvincethemselvesaboutthe algo-
How should we teach the elements of linear alge- rithm’s convergence.
bra for students without technical backgrounds? The
Programming
first question, of course, Anderson addresses:”What is
a Vector?”. In addition to the statement that a vec-
tor is a list of numbers, there is also some hint about Octaveprogramminglanguageissuggestedforlearn-
the geometric way of thinking on vectors.A number of ing how to write functions, and to implement and use
basic concepts are mentioned, such as row and column delta functions.
vectors,withasmoothtransitiontotheintroductionof
the conceptofmatricesandelementaryvectorandma-
2.3 Cognitive Modeling
trix operations, including inner products, dot product
and matrix multiplication.
Part III is about ”Probability and Psychological Mod-
els”, and Part IV is ”Cognitive Modeling as Logic and
An Introduction to Neural Networks
Rules”. While I see the importance of these concepts,
inmyownteachingexperienceitbelongstoaCognitive
The first question to be discussed is: ”What neural
science class, and will not be addressed in this review.
networksare?”.Itisnevereasytoclarifythesubtlecon-
nection between biological, real neural networks, and
abstract artificial neural networks. The author makes
3 The Systems Neuroscience Approach
somereferencestotheearlyhistory,startingwithmen-
tioning McCulloch and Pitts, John von Neumann and
HanspeterMallot’ComputationalNeuroscience[14]
his cellular automata, and more generally the emer-
grewoutofhisnotesonlecturesdeliveredtohisgradu-
gence of global structures from local interactions. It
ate students in neuroscience. The book provides an es-
mightbe agoodexercisefor psychologymajorsto play
sential introduction to computational neuroscience at
a little with cellular automata.
membrane, cellular, network and systems levels.
One of the best parts of the book is the simple ex-
planationofPerceptron.Whileitistruethatonemight 3.1 Excitable Membranes and Neural Conduction
decidenottoteachanyartificialnetworkinacomputa-
tional neuroscience class, its historical and conceptual Thebooksstartswithadescriptionofmembranepoten-
importancejustifiesitsplace.Thegeometricalinterpre- tials, by mentioning but not writing the Nernst equa-
tationofthe Perceptronlearningrule helpsstudents to tion.ItcontinueswiththeHodgkin-Huxleytheory.Based
understandhowlinearalgebraworks.Thechaptercon- on the example of conductance change it is explained
cludes with the description of the delta rule, and with what is a differential equation and its solution. By ex-
arguments about the necessity of having other neural plainingthephysiologyandkineticmodelsofpotassium
networks, such as multilayer Perceptron and support and sodium channels of the original(spatially homoge-
vector machines. neous) Hodgkin-Huxley model, a 4D ODE is specified,
andahintismadethatsuchkindsofequationscanonly
Auto-associative Memory and the Hopfield Net besolvednumerically.Thetwo-dimensionalapproxima-
tion of the model (the FitzHugh-Nagumo model), or
The Perceptronandits extensionswere designedto at least its qualitative properties can be studied ana-
solveclassificationproblems.Lookingbacktoitshistor- lytically. The book does not go into detail about how
icaldevelopment,is itreasonableto askaboutthe sim- changesintheinputparameterleadtotransitionsfrom
ilarities and differences between Perceptron and Hop- equilibrium to oscillatory response.
4 P´eter E´rdi
Itisalwaysdifficulttodecidehowtoteachconcepts 3.3 Fourier Analysis for Neuroscientists
such as the spatio-temporal propagation of action po-
tentials. The explanation requires some knowledge of Ireadthischapterwithgreatinterest.Itstartswithex-
basic concepts of partial differential equations. There amples of light spectra, acoustics, vision and magnetic
is a section on passive conduction to give an intuitive resonance tomography. Terms such as ”spectrum” and
introductiontothecableequation,andtocombinethis ”Fourierdecomposition”appear.Mathematicalconcepts
equation with the kinetic equations to channel models fromcomplexnumberstoGaussianconvolutionkernels
havebeenreviewed.Eigenfunctionsandeigenvaluesare
introducedascharacteristicsoftheoperatorconnecting
inputimagesandactivitydistributions.The eigenfunc-
3.2 Receptive Fields and the Specificity of Neuronal
tions of convolution is explained in detail, using both
real and complex number notations.
The basic theory of Fourier decomposition is based
How neurons integrate activities in space and time is
on the fact that most functions can be expressed with
an important topic for understanding the functions of
the linear superposition of sine and cosine functions.
specificneurons.Thesuperpositionprinciplestatesthat
Via the convolution theorem the construction leads to
stimulicomingfromdifferentspacepointscanbeadded.
algorithmsfor finding the coefficients of the Fourierse-
Therigorousunderstandingoftheconceptoftherecep-
ries. Generalizations for non-periodic functions and for
tive fieldfunction Φ(x,y)requiresadvancedmath,such
higher dimensions were also given.
asthe theoryoflinearoperators,whichbelongsto field
of functional analysis.The phenomenon of lateralinhi-
bition, i.e. the reduction of the activity of neighboring
3.4 Artificial Neural Networks
cells already demonstrated by Mach, and it is related
to the notion of convolution. Its understanding needs
I decided not to review ANN in detail. From an edu-
some insights about integral equations. Tuning curves
cational point of view the mathematics explained here
describe the responseof a neuron for different stimulus
is the dot product and matrix operations. Two fields
parameters.
of applications, namely classification and associative
memory are discussed.
Simple receptive fields are isotropic or show rota-
tional symmetry, and they are well modeled by the
Gaussian function. To describe orientation-dependent 3.5 Coding and Representation
effectsthecelebratedGaborfunction isextensivelyused.
The Gabor function is generated by multiplying sinu- This chapter contains two parts, population code and
soidal and Gaussian functions. retinotopic mapping.
Therelationshipbetweenthesetofallstimulusand There are different possibilities of coding with neu-
the set of possible excitatory responses in the general ralactivity. Intensity code means that the activity of a
case is described by nonlinear operators.Static nonlin- neuronisamonotonousfunctionofacodedparameter.
earitiesinreceptivefields(suchasthreshold,saturation Channel coding and population coding are used more
and compression) are illustrated. There is some expla- frequently. While population code needs more neurons
nation of the concept of Volterra kernels, for purely to encode some parameter value of a stimulus, it still
temporal systems. looks superior to others, e.g. it leads to better resolu-
tion.
Motion detection is identified to calculate velocity The section about information content of popula-
and direction. The computational problem was sug- tion codes is used to explain the basic notions of infor-
gested to be solved by designing coincidence and/or mation theory. The celebrated concept of the center of
correlation detectors. From and educational perspec- gravity estimator for reading a population code is de-
tiveitrequirestheknowledgeofsomeelementaryprob- scribed.
ability theory. The author jumps suddenly to intro-
duce auto- and cross-correlation functions, and hope- The last section about retinotopic mapping is writ-
fullymoststudentshavethebackgroundtounderstand ten based on the research the author did himself with
them. It might have been a reasonable question to ask Werner von Seelen (who actually wrote the Foreword
whattypeofcomputationscanbe implementedbysin- of the book) in the 1980s.In terms of mathematics the
gle cells, and what should remain for neural networks. problems is describing the coordinate transformation
Teaching Computational Neuroscience 5
from retina to visual cortex. Conformal maps and log- thedynamicsofneuralpopulations.Trappenbergwrites
polarmappingaretheappropriatetoolstodescribethe correctly: one trivial reason is to make possible calcu-
geometry of retinotopy. lations with large number of neurons, but conceptu-
ally more importantly to get an insight into the skele-
ton mechanism of the generation of emergent network
4 The Computational Approach properties.It issomewhatarbitrary,whatisa goodor-
der to explain different models. Here first we see leaky
ThomasTrappenberg’sFundamentals of Computa-
integrate-and-fire neuron, then spike response model,
tionalNeuroscience[16]isacomprehensivetextbook
Izikievich neuron and McCulloch-Pitts neuron. (I like
for advanced graduate students, It tries to teach the
to teach following the historical development, teaching
minimallynecessaryneurobiologythatacomputational
McCulloch-Pitts model first.) One challenge is to ex-
science student should know. In terms of using mathe-
plainthetheresponseofneuronsfordifferent(constant,
matics the author takes a pragmatic approach, men-
and time-dependent) inputs. While the integrate-and-
tioning mathematical concepts when explicitly used.
fire models neglect the details of subthreshold dynam-
Some elementary textbook notions of linear algebra,
ics,the Izikievichneuronis anice compromisebetween
calculus, numerical solutions, probability and informa-
biologicalplausibility and computational efficiency. All
tion theory and some introduction to MATLAB were
the previous models are deterministic, and cannot de-
put into the Appendix. I found the book very carefully
scribe the inherent random character of neural firing.
and clearly written and its spirit is close to that I am
Somehow stochasticity should be put to the models.
using in classes.
The book actually does not mention the methods grew
upfromtheclassicalpaperofGersteinandMandelbrot
The bookhasthreemainparts(BasicNeurons,Ba-
[7] which consider the membrane potential change as a
sicNetworks,System-LevelModels)followingthespirit
random walk. Spike-time variability can be explained
of bottom up modelling, preceded by a nice introduc-
with the introduction of stochastic threshold or reset.
tiontocomputationalneuroscience.Ofcourse,itissome-
Thenoisyintegratorputstherandomnesstothe input.
what a matter of personal taste how to write briefly
about such questions as ”What is computational neu-
One of the main challenge in theoretical neurobiol-
roscience?”,”Whatis a model?”,”Is there abrainthe-
ogy is to understand the nature of neural code: what
ory?”, and ”A computational theory of the brain”.
is the relationship between firing patterns and behav-
ior. There is a somewhat different question about the
relationship between sensory stimuli and neural activ-
4.1 Basic Neurons
ity patterns. Rate code (going back to Lord Adrian’s
Thispartstartswithachapteronneuronsandconductance-finding),correlationcodesandcoincidencedetectorsare
based models, with a little biology about cellular mor- explained, though maybe a little more about temporal
phology, synapses, ion channels and membrane poten- coding is missing.
tial. After writing about synaptic mechanisms, it ex-
plainstheproblemofmodellingsynapticresponse,maybe Whilewearestilldiscussingsingleneurons(moreor
alittletooearly.Thissectionseemstobealittledense, less:thereisasectionaboutpopulationdynamicstobe
and between the explanation of Kirchhoff’s law and studiedagaininalaterchapter).Thestateofthepopu-
Ohm’s law there is a short introduction to differential lationofneuronscanbe characterizedbysomepopula-
equations. The next sub-chapter explains the genera- tion activity vector. Actually the vague concept of cell
tion of action potential and the Hodgkin-Huxley equa- assembly (or local pool, based on the terminology used
tions followed by some elements of numerical integra- in the book) suggests that cells in a certain pool have
tion,anditsimplementationwithMATLAB.Cablethe- common features. I miss something more about meso-
ory uses partial differential equations (actually it is a scopicneurodynamics.(We workedslowlytwentyyears
parabolic, and not a hyperbolic equation, as it is writ- ago on a model of large populations of neurons. What
ten).Thespatialdiscretizationofneuronsleadstocom- we saw is that a ”mean field” approach is not enough,
partmentalmodels,andthereadergetsomereferenceto andthebehavioratleastasforan”averagecell”-which
the twomostfrequentlyusedneuronsimulators(GEN- is a hypothetical neuron receiving the average synap-
ESIS, NEURON). tic input calculated by a statistical approach - is also
necessary.) The chapter finishes with two clearly writ-
The next chapter comprises two reasonable topics: ten sections; one describes the different activation (or
why and how to simplify neurons, and how to treat transfer) functions, and the other networks with non-
6 P´eter E´rdi
classicalsynapsetaking into accountnonlinearinterac- domness in the small and structure in the large”. The
tions among neurons. remaining part of the chapter about more physiolog-
ical spiking networks based on Izikievich is plausible,
Whatmightbemorecomplicatedthanoneneuron? and appropriate for demonstrative simulations. From
Two neurons connected by a synapse. While the con- an educational perspective it is not convincing that
nectivity matrix of a network is able to store memory spectral analysis and fast Fourier transformation men-
traces, learning is related to the mechanism of synap- tioned without telling anything about them.
tic modifiability to be described by (generalized) Heb-
bianlearningalgorithms.Asthebookcorrectlyreflects,
The chapter about feed-forward networks belongs
Hebbianlearningmechanismsfirstexplainedpsycholog-
mostly to artificial neural networks, and according to
ical(andnotneurallevel)phenomena,suchaslearning
the spirit of this review I don’t discuss it in details.
byassociations,andconditioning.Goingdownwardson
The single and multilayer perceptron and support vec-
the ladder, then the physiological basis of plasticity is
tor machine are clearly presented for classroom teach-
given. As it is well known, the identification of the cel-
ing.
lular mechanism of synaptic plasticity (related to the
long term potentiation and long term depression) was
given a quarter century later after the proposal of the Cortical maps between two regions are used to rep-
Hebbian mechanism. Actually for me it was very use- resentfeatures.Oneofthemainprinciplesofneuralor-
ful to learn about the work of Alan Fine and Ryosuke ganizations states that maps often have a topographic
Enoki about their plasticity experiments by combining character, i.e. neighboring areas represent neighboring
paired-pulse facilitation and calcium imaging of single features.Thenormalontogeneticformationandtheplas-
synapses.Atevenlowerlevel,thebiochemicalpathways tic response of these maps for certain lesions have a
relatedtotheroleofNMDAreceptorsandcalciumions common mechanism modeled by self-organizing algo-
is discussed. rithms.ThefamousWillshaw-vonderMalsburgmodel
andtheKohonenalgorithmaretheparadigmaticexam-
While Hebb described his rule verbally, there are plesofthesealgorithms.Mapsgetnewertraininginput
nowmanyvariationsofmathematicalformsofthephe- patterns, but they should preserve their basic proper-
nomenologicallearningrules.Again,asamatteroftaste, ties.Thegeneralproblem”howcanasystemretainold
Trappenbergstartswithanewestrule(spiketimingde- memoriesbutlearnnew ones”iscalledasthestability-
pendent plasticity); the book does not mentionwhat it plasticity dilemma [9].
is nowwellknown:thatthere wasanearlydiscoveryof
the phenomenon by Levy and Steward 1983 [13]. I am
In certain applications it is plausible to use con-
comfortablewiththewayofpresentation(butwedida
tinuous space coordinates instead of discrete neurons,
different approachin the second edition of MichaelAr-
so the appropriate dynamic model to describe spatio-
bib’s wonderful Handbook of Brain Theory [3]). Also,
temporalactivitypropagationwouldbeapartialdiffer-
the last (very well written) section on synaptic scal-
ential equation. In the general case the system is non-
ing and weight distributions should have been written
autonomous, since the input is time-dependent. How-
within the section on mathematical formulation.
ever, the activity dynamic at a certain point depends
onotherspatialcoordinatetakenintoaccountbyanin-
4.2 Neural networks tegral(kernel).Gaussianfunctionandthe Mexican-hat
functionsarecharacteristicexamplesofcentre-surround
There is a very difficult question without a clear an- interactionkernels.Thedynamicsleadtodifferentqual-
swer: What to teach about neural organization? Trap- itative states. One of them is characterized by a stable
penbergdiscusseslarge-scaleneuroanatomyandhierar- active region even after the removal of external input,
chicalorganization,the layeredstructureandthe mod- somemorycanbestored.Mathematicallytheconstruc-
ularorganizationofthe cortex(accordingtomybiased tionleadstocontinuousattractors.Again,fromanedu-
view, John Szenta´gothai (and also Valentino Braiten- cationalperspective it is disadvantageousthat we have
berg) might have been mentioned). not yet read about the simpler concept of point at-
tractors.Inferiortemporalcortex,prefrontalcortexim-
Iamnottotallysurewhetherrandomnetworksshould plementingworkingmemoryandhippocampus’involv-
be studied emphatically Actually, Anninos and his col- ment in space representation are illustrative examples
leagues are mentioned, but more precisely they consid- of the computational concept.
ered neural networks with features described as ”ran-
Teaching Computational Neuroscience 7
Themaingoalofthechapter(Recurrentassociative the important aspects of the discussed topics. Modu-
networks and episodic memory) is to show how recur- lar mapping networks, coupled attractor networks, se-
rentneuralnetworksmightbetheanatomicalsubstrate quence learning, complementary memory systems, mo-
ofassociative(specificallyauto-associative)memory.Auto- tor learning and control, reinforcement learning are all
associative memory basically does pattern completion. important topics. However, I somehow missed the co-
The reentrant connections among the pyramidal cells herentstoryline.Mixtureofexpertsisclearlyatopicin
of the hippocampal CA3 region implement a network machine learning. ”Sequence learning”, gave a partial
capable of storing and retrieving, (at least static) in- answer about what to do with (at least some specific)
put patterns. While there were forerunners and fol- time-dependent inputs. It would have been possible to
lowers, John Hopfield [11,12] popularized an abstract show either motor sequence learning, or to discuss the
network implementing point attractors mostly for the role of the hippocampus in sequence learning.
physicist’s community (and it cannot be denied that
Google Scholar gives altogether twenty-thousand cita- Obviously it is very difficult to write a short chap-
tions for the two papers.). ter about the cognitive brain. What should be the il-
lustrativeexamples area matter of taste. The firsttwo
Section8.2nicelydescribesthestandardmathcom- examples Trappenberg chose are attentive vision and
ing from the physicists theory of phase transitions of the interconnecting workspace hypothesis. I find very
the spin glasses. A remarkable feature of the attractor important and also well-written the section about the
neural networks is their noise tolerance of the stored anticipating brain. A large school of computational
memories.While the originalwork(andthe underlying neuroscience adopts the top down computational ap-
mathematicaltheorems)arebasedonratherrestrictive proach. The starting point is that the brain builds a
assumptions,simulationresultsgenerallypermittheex- model of the external world and generates hypothesis
tensionofthe theory.In this book some importantfur- aboutthe consequences ofpossible actions.The formal
therstudies,suchastheeffectsofdilution(i.ethedevi- framework to formulate the predictive power is proba-
ation from the fully connected networks), and for non- bilistic. The subsection on probabilistic reasoning and
random, but correlated, input patterns are discussed. Bayesiannetworkbrieflydiscussesatechniqueforanal-
There is one neglected problem with attractor neural ysis.Themaincorpusofthebookisendedbytheadap-
networks,thatTrappenbergalsodoesnotmention:real tive resonance theory, Any author has the right to de-
neuralsystemsprocessestime-dependentinputs,sothe cide how to finish a book.
differential equations set to describe their dynamic be-
havior are non-autonomous. Non-autonomous systems
don’t have attractors in the general case.
5 Computational Neuroscience: A Wonderful
Subject to Teach and Learn
I find it somewhat arbitrary both the ”where” and
the ”how” of discussions of the dynamic systems and ThedisciplineofComputationalNeurosciencediscusses
chaoticattractors.Imightbe biased,butIthink asep- mathematical models, computational algorithms, and
arate chapter on the dynamic approach would be use- simulationmethods thatcontributetoourunderstand-
ful. Between the point attractors and chaotic regimes ing of neuralmechanisms. Students can learnthe basic
the very important neural oscillators should have been concepts and methods of computational neuroscience
studied. The Cohen - Grossbergtheroem is extensively research, and absorb some knowledge of neurobiologi-
described.I wouldhave likedto see Hirsch’s celebrated cal concepts and mathematical techniques.
paper [10], which gives a more generalized but still op-
erative study of the problem. Also, both the structural
What are the goals of teaching computational neu-
basisandthefunctionalsignificanceofthechaoticneu-
roscience? The first goal is to teach WHY mathemati-
ral network (see e.g [17] might have been discussed.
calandcomputationalmethodsareimportantinunder-
standingthestructure,functionanddynamicsofneural
organization.The second goal is to explain HOW neu-
4.3 System-Level Models ralphenomena occurringatdifferenthierarchicallevels
can be described by proper mathematical models.
Sectionnine(Modularnetworks,motorcontrol,andre-
inforcement learnig) and ten (The cognitive brain) are The books under review took some different per-
about system level models, and I find them somehow spectives,haddifferentgoals,anditis goodto seethat
the less convincing part of the book. I acknowledge teachers have alternatives. and there are not the end.
8 P´eter E´rdi
There are a couple of other books around, I simply se- 14. Mallot,H.:ComputationalNeuroscience.AFirstCourse.
lected books, which for one or another reasons were Springer(2013)
15. Schwartz, E. (ed.): Computational neuroscience. MIT
on my desk. Copies of [5] are on my shelves, both in
Press,Cambridge, Mass (1990)
Budapest and Kalamazoo, and this book is written by
16. Trappenberg, T.: Fundamentals of Computational Neu-
twoveryhighlyrespectedscientists.Thebookhasthree roscience. Oxford Univ.Press (2010)
parts (Part I: Neural Encoding and Decoding; Part II: 17. Tsuda,I.: Dynamiclinkof memorychaotic memory map
in nonequilibrium neural networks. Neural Networks 5,
NeuronsandNeuralCircuits;PartIII:Adaptationand
313–326 (1992)
Learning). When I used this book in an my undergrad
class, I felt I should skip the first part, and was able
to teach the large part of Part II, and a few exam-
ples from the Adaptation and Learning Section. There
are at least two more books written by equivalently
highly respected colleagues I should have reviewed. [6]
and [1] which clearly represent the high level state-of-
art of mathematical neuroscience. Another new great
book [8] is also left for another time and maybe for
another reviewer.
Acknowledgements Thanksformynumerousteachingas-
sistants over the years. I had many conversation with them
about the method of teaching of this discipline.I also thank
to the Henry Luce Foundation to let me to serveas a Henry
R Luce Professor. Thank you for Brian Dalluge (who is now
inmyComputationalNeuroscienceclass)forcopyeditingthe
manuscript.