]ics-lrtm.tam-dnoc[
1v1738010/tam-dnoc:viXra
Template-Directed Self-Assembly of Buried Nanowires and the Pearling
Instability
T. Mu¨ller, K.-H. Heinig, B. Schmidt
Forschungszentrum Rossendorf, Institut fu¨r Ionenstrahlphysik
und Materialforschung, PO-BOX 51 01 19, 01314 Dresden, Germany
(Dated: October 31, 2018)
The fabrication of more and more miniaturized electronic and photonic devices relies on new,
ingenious methods for the fabrication of spatially controlled nanostructures. Examples are elec-
tronicdevicesbased onsemiconductingnanowires andphotonicdevicesbasedonchainsofmetallic
nanoclustersthatguidelight bycoupledsurfaceplasmons. Inthiscontributionatemplate-directed
ion beam synthesis of nanowires and regular nanocluster chains will be presented. As templates,
V-grooves etched in (001)Si and subsequently oxidized are used. High fluence Ge+ implantation is
carried outintotheSiO2 layerat70keV. Thereby,theimplantedGeenrichesthemselvesintheV-
groove bottom to acritical amount,which mayresult in nanowire formation bynucleation, growth
and coalescence during subsequent thermal treatment. TEM investigations indicate the formation
of a nanowire buried in theSiO2 at theV-groove bottom.
Kinetic lattice Monte Carlo simulations of the nanowire formation process were performed in
order to understand the phase separation mechanism and results are compared to TEM images.
Furthermore, it is shown that even ideal nanowires show a instability and form during long-lasting
annealing equal-spaced and equal-sized nanoclusters (”nanocluster chains”) byself-organization.
I. INTRODUCTION Ge+
precipitated Ge
Awidefieldfornovelapplicationsopensatthebot- Ge SiO
tomofthelengthscaleaccessiblebymodernsemicon-
ductor preparation techniques. Synthesized nanos- (a) Si (b) Si
tructures show interesting physical properties being
completely different from the bulk material. Be-
FIG.1: Schemeoftheion beam synthesisof aburiedGe
sides other applications, this could help to miniatur- nanowire at the bottom of an oxidized silicon V-groove.
ize modern optical devices. Thus, having metallic (a) Ge+ ions are implanted at high fluence into the V-
nanoclusters arranged in a regular chain, light can groove. Atoms are sputtered from and are redeposited
be transported by the coherent coupling of surface- onto the sidewalls leading to a mass transport towards
plasmon-polaritons[1]. Along sucha chain, lightcan the V-groove bottom. During annealing (b) in an inert
be guided around corners well below the classical ambient a nanowire may form at theV-groove bottom.
diffraction limit, allowing the integration of optical
devices on the chip-level (Plasmonics) [2].
However, the precise synthesis of the nanostruc-
tures needed for such applications remains a great a similar approach Si nanowires were recently fabri-
challenge to current research. This becomes even catedbyO+implantationintoSiV-grooves[6]. How-
moreimportantsinceclassicalstructuringfailsatthis ever, the method of ref. [6] is restricted to Si wires
level. Here, self-organizationprocessesmight be able and is hard to control. Here, Ge was implanted as
to assemble structures with nanometer dimensions. it is a well-known material for nanocluster synthe-
In particular, the ion beam synthesis (IBS) became sis. However, also other ions can be easily applied,
successful for fabrication of buried nanostructures. e.g. Au forplasmonicdevices. Differentstagesofthe
Quantum dots were formed under various conditions fabricationprocessweremonitoredbycrosssectional
[3,4]. Usingveryhighionfluences,buriedlayerswere Transmission Electron Microscopy (X-TEM) investi-
synthesized [5]. gations.
Inordertoobtainspatiallywell-definednanostruc-
Theoreticalstudiesarepresentedtounderstandde-
tures, taming of self-organization of pattern forma-
tails of the phase separation mechanism. On the
tion is an attractive approach. In the present contri-
atomic scale, within kinetic 3D lattice Monte Carlo
bution,thisisachievedbyoxidecoveredSiV-grooves
simulations(KLMC),thediffusionofGeatoms,their
astemplates, whichguidethe self-assemblyofburied
nucleation to clusters, cluster ripening and coales-
nanowires from implanted Ge atoms during thermal
cencearetracked. Forlonglastingthermaltreatment
treatment. This scheme is depicted in Fig. 1. By
such simulations also describe the pearling instabil-
ity of wires. A nanowiretends to decay into droplets
driven by the minimization of interfacial energy and
∗T.Mueller@fz-rossendorf.de;Tel. +493512603148;Fax. +49 highly regularchainsof equal-sizedandequal-spaced
3512603285 nanoclusters form.
200 nm 200 nm
FIG. 2: XTEM images of (a) an as-oxidized and (b) an
as-implanted sample (70keV, 1×1017 Ge+cm−2). The
Ge content in the SiO2 appears as dark shadow in the
TEM image (b).
II. EXPERIMENTS Si
V-grooves aligned along the [110] direction on
(001)Si wafers were prepared by photolithographic FIG. 3: XTEM image of an annealed sample. The large
masking and anisotropic etching with 30% KOH at dark spot in the V-groove bottom appears to be a cross
◦ section of a Ge nanowire with 35nm diameter.
80 C. This self-adjusting process results in atom-
ically smooth (111) crystal facets forming the side-
walls of the V-grooves with an angle of 54.7 ◦ to the
plane wafer surface. V-grooves of 4µm width and
5mm length were studied. They were oxidized in
dry O2 at 1000 C, leading to 200nm thick SiO2 on
the (001)Si surface and 220nm thick SiO2 on the
(111) sidewalls of the V-groove. A sharp surface de-
pressionforms during oxidationat the V-groovebot-
tom, which canbe seen in X-TEM images (Fig. 2 a).
The SiO2 coveredV-grooveswere implanted at room
temperature with 1 1017 Ge+cm −2 at 70keV (flux
density 3 1012 cm −×2s −1). The content of Ge in the
SiO2appearstherebyasdarkshadowintheTEMim-
age(Fig.2b). Duringimplantation,Geisenrichedin
the V-groove bottom compared to the sidewalls due
to (i) the reduced ion density per surface area at the FIG.4: Highresolution TEMimageofaGeclusterinan
sidewallscausedbytheinclinationand(ii)duetoion annealedsampleshowinglatticefringes,whichprovesthe
erosion of the sidewalls. Sputtered atoms including crystallinity of theprecipitates.
Ge are redeposited at the opposite sidewall and refill
the sharp kink at the as-oxidized V-groove bottom.
The V-groove surface evolution under ion bombard- of the expected nanowire with a diameter of 35nm.
mentwasrecentlymodeledinacontinuumframework All Ge cluster are crystalline, which is confirmed by
[7]inniceagreementwithV-groovesshapesobserved a high resolutionTEMimage, Fig. 4, of a Ge cluster
in TEM images also proving a Ge accumulation of showing lattice fringes.
30% in the V-groove bottom. The continuity of the wire over long distances re-
Subsequent furnace annealing in N2 ambient was mains to be proven. Several XTEM images taken
performed at 950 ◦ C for 10 minutes. Thereby, the from different cross-sections show always the large
small amount of implanted Ge is extremely sensitive black dot with identical diameter and positionin the
to moisture, which may result in the oxidation of V-groovebottom,whichisanindicationforacontin-
Ge. Therefore, (i) the standard wet cleaning step uous nanowire.
in H2O2/H2SO4 prior to any thermal processing was
skippedand(ii)thesamplesweretransferredintothe
cold furnace and then purged in cold N2 in order to III. KINETIC MONTE-CARLO
reduce the moisture intake. Fig. 3 shows an XTEM SIMULATIONS
image of an annealed sample. Buried Ge clusters are
present in the sidewalls and the bottom. The dark KLMC simulations were performed in order to
dot,visibleintheV-groovebottom,isacross-section understand the wire formation from dispensed Ge
atoms. The interactions between impurity atoms
(Ge) were simulated by a Cellular Automaton ap-
proach. Gaugingthe bondstrengthE ofGe atoms,
their effective nearest-neighbor interactions within
the hostmatrix,the SiO2,mustbe considered. Here,
the most simple implementation is used, i.e. the in- (a)
teractionisassumedtobeconfigurationindependent.
The binding energy nE of a Ge atoms is just pro-
portional to the number n of nearest-neighbor sites
occupied by Ge and can be described by the Ising
model. Additionally, the diffusion of Ge monomers
in the host matrix is thermally activated with an ac-
tivation energy E .
Then, the transition from the initially out-of-
equilibrium state towards thermodynamical equilib-
riumisdescribedbytheimportancesamplingofcon-
figurationsaccordingtheMetropolisalgorithm[8]. A
sequence of states is produced representing the time
evolution,whereeachstate is generatedfromits pre-
decessor by a jump of a randomly chosen Ge atom
to an arbitrary empty nearest-neighbor site with the (c)
transition probability
FIG. 5: Kinetic lattice Monte Carlo simulation of the
P exp −k E B A T , n f ≥ n i, . nanowireformationfromaninitiallycylindricalGaussian
if distributionofimpurityatomswithapeakconcentration
∼exp (n nn ) EBo EA , n <n .
 − i − f kBT − kBT f i of 31% and 4nm standard deviation. Shown are (a) the
n o initial, (b)anintermediate(102kMCS),and(c)thefinal
Duringone Monte Carlo step (MCS) each atom per- (490 kMCS) state. The final wire diameter is approxi-
forms statistically one attempt to jump from its ini- mately 5nm.
tial site i to a final site f. Thereby, the activation
energyfordiffusionE isassumedtobethesamefor
each possible transition, i.e. for interface and bulk wire-like structure, see Fig. 5b,c). The complete co-
diffusion. Thus,itispossibletorenormalizethetran- alescence occurs only, if the initial profile is not too
sitionprobabilityP suchthateachdiffusionaljump broad and the Ge concentration not too low, i.e. if
is successful (E 0), which only scales the time of peak concentration of the initial Ge profile is larger
a MCS thereby improving the simulation speed than25%(atthegivenprofilewidth). Otherwise,the
clusters remain isolated and randomly distributed in
1, n f n i, size and space.
P ≥ .
if ∼( exp − (n i − n f ) k E B B T , n f <n i . is C ob o v m io p u a s ri t n h g at ex a pe b r u im rie e d nt n a a n n d ow K ir L e M co C ul s d im fo u r la m tio a n t s t , h i e t
n o V-groove bottom at the chosen Ge+ ion fluence. As
Thisapproachhasbeenprovenusefulforthedescrip-
seen from Fig. 3, the annealing has been interrupted
tion of precipitation after ion implantation [9], and
beforeallsurroundingnanoclustershavedisappeared,
the evolution of fcc surfaces under ion erosion [10].
which compares to Fig. 5b).
For the KLMC simulations of the nanowire forma-
Itshouldbe notedthattheKLMCsimulationuses
tion a simplified initial distribution of Ge atoms was
a lattice. Thus, a wire formed by coalescence will
assumed. A cylindrical profile with a Gaussian cross
be single crystalline, whereas an experimentally fab-
sectionalignedtothe[100]directionofthesimulation
ricatedwireisexpectedtobe polycrystalline. There-
lattice was used (Fig. 5 a) with a peak concentration
fore, the influence of grain boundaries is not taken
of 31% and4nm standard deviation. 95% of the im-
into account in the present study.
planted atoms lay in a cylinder of 16 nmdiameter,
which resembles the Ge-rich region at the V-groove
bottom, see Fig. 2b).
During annealing, Ge nanocluster nucleate from IV. PEARLING INSTABILITY
the supersaturation and grow in time. They mostly
have nucleated at the position of highest supersat- For long-lasting annealing, theory predicts that a
uration, which is the profile center. As they grow, continuous wire decays. Thus, a wire is an unstable
they start to touch each other and coalesce to ex- configuration. Itsdecayisdrivenbytheminimization
tended structures. A continuous wire forms if this of the interfacial energy. Harmonic perturbations of
coalescence proceeds further, while the surrounding the wire radius lower its interfacial energy if their
nanoclusters evaporate and Ge condenses onto the wavelength is larger than the circumference of the
1 Mill. MCS
2.25 Mill. MCS
4 Mill. MCS
5.6 Mill. MCS
FIG. 6: Kinetic lattice Monte Carlo simulation of the pearling instability of a nanowire with 8.6nm diameter. The
wire decay proceeds via interface diffusion and a chain of nanoclusters with an average diameter of 16.4nm is formed.
wire, λ > 2πR 0. This result has been first found by whichisingoodagreementwiththepredictionofthe
LordRayleigh[11]in1879forinviscidliquids. Linear linear stability analysis, d cluster =3.78 R 0 =16nm.
stabilityanalysisalsorevealedafastestgrowingmode Note that the simulation was carried out at high
λ of radius fluctuations during the initial stage of temperature. The ratio between the effective bond
the fragmentation. Thus, perturbations with wave- strengthE and the thermalenergy, k T,was set
lengthλ growatthefastestrateintimeandareex- to 0.7. An absolute value of the temperature T can
pected to dominate fragmentation. The value of λ not be given since the value of effective Ge-Ge bond
depends only on the specific mass-transport mech- strength in SiO2, E
, is unknown. It may be es-
anism and not on material parameters or tempera- timated, however,withinagoodapproximationfrom
ture. For liquid ”wires”, which changes their shape the solubility of Ge in SiO2.
by hydrodynamic flow, a value of λ m ∼ =9.02 · R 0 was The stability analysis as well as the Monte Carlo
predicted [11], which is also validfor internalvolume simulations neglect the influence of grain boundaries
diffusion as shown by Nichols and Mullins [12]. For of a polycrystalline wire. Grain boundary diffusion
surface diffusion, it holds mayprovideanothersourceofinstability,ifannealing
iscarriedoutbelowthemeltingpoint. Then,thesize
λ m =√22πR 0 ∼ =8.89 · R 0 , ofthedropletsmaydifferfromtheresultgivenabove.
while forexternalvolumediffusionthe valuea12.96
R 0 was obtained for λ m [12]. With the result of the V. SUMMARY
stabilityanalysisanaveragedropletdiameterd
canbegiven,ifoneassumesthatthevolumebetween
A novel fabrication method of buried nanowires
two consecutive radii minima forms a droplet. For
by ion implantation has been demonstrated. Ge+
surface diffusion this gives
were implanted into oxide coveredSi V-grooveslead-
d cluster = 3 6λ m R 0 =3.78 R 0 . ing to Ge enrichment in the oxide at the V-groove
· bottom. There, during annealing, the Ge forms a
Inordertocheckthepstabilityanalysisforlargeampli- nanowire extending along the V-groove. Other than
tudes of diameter fluctuations, Monte Carlo simula- a similar method published recently [6], this method
tions ofa wire decay drivenby surface diffusion were should work for any implanted ion species immisci-
performed. Volume diffusion is explicitly prohibited ble in SiO2. In particular, ion beam synthesized Au
within the simulation, i.e. atoms are not allowed to wires,whicharesubsequentlydisintegratedinregular
detach from the wire surface and vacancies can not nanocluster chains, are of interest for the fabrication
be generated within the wire. Snap shots of the wire of plasmonic structures [2].
evolution can be seen in Fig. 6. The initial wire, The phase separationmechanisms were studied by
R 0 =4.3nm, showsafter a long incubationtime sta- means of kinetic 3D lattice Monte Carlosimulations.
tisticalfluctuations,whichgrowfasterandfasterwith As shown, a cylindrical profile with Gaussian cross
increasing amplitude. They finally lead to the disin- sectionmaycoalescetoacontinuousnanowireofonly
tegration of the wire after 5600kMCS into droplets. a few nanometers diameter. For long-lastingthermal
The average diameter of these droplets is 16.4nm, treatmentatomisticsimulationsrevealedthepearling
instability. A wire decaysinto equal-sizedand equal- ameter of the initial wire.
spaced droplets. An average droplet diameter of ap-
proximately twice the initial diameter of the wire, as
it is predicted by linear stability analysis for a wire
decay by interface diffusion, could be confirmed by
Acknowledgments
Monte Carlo simulations.
Thus, nanocluster chains having a good periodic-
ity over long distances can be fabricated by the frag- We wish to acknowledge stimulating discussions
mentationofnanowiresusingthepearlinginstability. with H. A. Atwater and M. L. Brongersma related
Thereby, the droplet diameter is independent from totheapplicationofmetallicnanoclustersinphoton-
materialparametersandis controlledonly by the di- ics.
[1] M. Quinten, A. Leitner, J. R. Krenn, and F. R. [6] Y.Ishikawa,N.Shibata,andS.Fukatsu,Nucl.Instr.
Aussenegg, Opt.Lett. 23 (1998) 1331. and Meth. B, 147 (1999) 304.
[2] M.L.Brogersma,J.W.Hartman,andH.A.Atwater, [7] T.Mu¨ller,K.-H.Heinig,B.Schmidt,Nucl.Instr.and
Phys.Rev.B, 62 (2000) R16356. Meth. B 178/1-4 (2001) 109.
[3] C.W.White,J.D.Budai,S.P.Withrow,J.G.Zhu, [8] N. Metropolis, A. Rosenbluth, M. Rosenbluth, A.
S. J. Pennycook, R. A. Zuhr, D. M. Hembree Jr, D. Teller, E. Teller, J. Chem. Phys.21 (1953) 1087.
O. Henderson, R. H. Magruder, M. J. Yacaman, G. [9] M. Strobel, K.-H. Heinig, and W. M¨oller, Comput.
Mondragon, and S. Prawer, Nucl. Instr. and Meth. Mat. Sci. 10 (1998) 457.
B, 127/128 (1997) 545. [10] M. Strobel, K.-H. Heinig, and T. Michely, Surface
[4] K.-H. Heinig, B. Schmidt, A. Markwitz, R. Sci. (2001), in press.
Gr¨otzschel, M. Strobel, and S. Oswald. Nucl. Instr. [11] Lord Rayleigh, Proc. London Math, Soc. 10 (1879)
and Meth. B, 148 (1999) 969. 4.
[5] Y. Li, C.D. Marsh, A. Nejim, R.J. Chater, J.A. Kil- [12] F.A.NicholsandW.W.Mullins,Trans.Metall.Soc.
ner,andP.L.F. Hemment,Nucl.Instr.andMeth.B, AIME233 (1965) 1840.
99 (1995) 479.