]NM.oib-q[
1v7102050/oib-q:viXra
The large-scale logico-chemical structure of a
transcriptional regulation network
M. Cosentino Lagomarsino
UMR168/ Institut Curie,26rue d’Ulm75005Paris, France∗
Politecnico di Milano, Dip. Fisica, Pza Leonardo Da Vinci 32, 20133 Milano,
B. Bassetti
Universita` degli Studi di Milano, Dip. Fisica, and I.N.F.N. Via Celoria 16, 20133 Milano,
Identity,responsetoexternalstimuli,andspatialarchitectureofalivingsystemarecentral
topics of molecular biology. Presently, they are largely seen as a result of the interplay
betweenagenerepertoireandtheregulatorymachineryofthecell. Atthetranscriptional
level, thecis-regulatoryregionsestablish setsofinterdependenciesbetweentranscription
factors and genes, including other transcription factors. These “transcription networks”
are too large to be approached globally with a detailed dynamical model. In this paper,
wedescribeanapproachtothisproblemthatfocusessolelyonthecompatibilitybetween
gene expressionpatternsand signalintegrationfunctions, discussing calculationscarried
onthesimplest,Boolean,realizationofthemodel,andafirstapplicationtoexperimental
datasets.
I. INTRODUCTION
Regulation can be defined as the set of physico-chemical constraints operating within a living
cell that modulate the expression of the cell’s genes. In the present view of molecular biology,
regulatoryprocessesareoftenusedasaprimarycausalexplanationformanyphenomena,playing
a role in this disciplinethat is comparable to the role fundamental interactions play in physics. In
∗e-mailaddress:mcl@curie.fr
†e-mailaddress: patrizia.jona@fisi.polimi.it
‡e-mailaddress: bassetti@mi.infn.it
fact, it is widely believed that the repertoire of signal responses (and, more in general, of all the
informationprocessingandstructuraltasks)oflivingsystemsisencodedininterconnectedthreads
ofgenesregulatingtheactivityofeachother. Thesenetworksofinterdependenciesarestilllargely
uncharacterized, although they have begun to fall within reach of systematic experimentation in
the recent years (Babu et al., 2004; Herrgard et al., 2004; Leeet al., 2002; Nachman et al., 2004;
WolfandArkin, 2003).
Consideringtheso-called “central dogma”ofmolecularbiology,
transcription traslation folding
DNA −→ mRNA −→ protein −→ function,
regulation processes can intervene at all the separate steps (and also in different sub-steps). Reg-
ulation exploiting the process of transcription, or transcriptional regulation, constitute to date the
bestunderstoodamongall thepossibleregulationmechanisms.
FIG. 1 Schematics of our representation of a signal integration function at the cis-regulatory region of
a gene as a constraint on the gene expression variables. For general variables, the constraint involves
minimization ofthefreeenergyoftheShea-Ackersmodel. InGR1,theconstraint isBoolean.
Transcriptional regulation networks are defined starting from the basic functional building
blocks involved in transcription. These are (i) the promoter region of a gene or operon along
the DNA sequence, which contains the cis regulatory binding sites for the transcription factors,
(ii)thetranscriptionfactors,whichareproteinsthatregulatethebindingofRNA-polymerase,and
(iii) RNA-polymerase, the protein complex that performs transcription of a gene or an operon in
mRNA form (Alberts etal., 2003; Ptashne, 1992). Theamount ofmRNA transcribed is related to
the expression of a particular gene only if one takes for granted all the other steps that bring to
a functional protein. If this (big) leap is accepted, the “state” of a cell is identified to the mRNA
concentration of its genes. Experimentally, this is particularly sound for prokaryotes and simple
unicellularorganisms,butoftenassumedinmorecomplexcontexts,forexampleinDNAmicroar-
ray experiments. Under this assumption, the locations and orientations of the binding sites for
transcription factors, as well as the affinity of the transcription factors to different binding sites,
determine the expression levels of a gene in response to changes in the active transcription factor
concentrations inside the cell. In turn, the concentration of active transcription factors (the ones
thatcanactuallybind)encodestheconfigurationoftheenvironment,forexamplethroughdegrada-
tionoractivationbyinternalandexternalsignalingmolecules. Acis-regulatoryregioncancontain
manybindingsitesformanytranscriptionfactorswhichactincooperation(orcompetition)onthe
promoterregion,tocontrolinacombinatorialwaythebindingofRNApolymerase. Thisprocess,
referred toassignalintegration,isthelogicheart ofthenetwork. Atranscriptionalregulationnet-
work can be represented as a hypergraph containing both gene expression (“variable”) nodes and
signal integration (“function”) nodes. The connectivity is the source of the network complexity
(Fig. 2).
Thus, a transcriptional regulation network can work independently as a computational unit
in a living cell, being able to make decisions on which genes will be switched on at different
times. Studies focusing simply on the structure of the underlying graph have lead to interesting
results (Babu et al., 2004; Shen-Orret al., 2002; Warren and tenWolde, 2004). However, charac-
terizing and predicting gene expression patterns given a network structure remains an enormous
challenge. Two main problems exist. Firstly, the networks are only partially characterized ex-
perimentally (Herrgard et al., 2004; Nachman et al., 2004). In some instances (Babu etal., 2004;
Davidsonet al., 2002), the wiring diagram is well known, but in general the functions are de-
scribed only qualitatively, typically with annotations such as activation, repression or dual ef-
fects, and little is known about their actual structure. Secondly, transcription networks are fairly
large. Whiledetailedmodelsorsimulationsworkwellonsmall(sub-)systems(Arkin et al.,1998;
McAdamsand Arkin, 1997), typically a coarse grained approach is needed. Microscopically, it
is well accepted that the Gillespie algorithm (Gillespie, 1977), while disregarding spatial corre-
lations, correctly describes the stochastic asynchronous events of chemical kinetics involved. On
IN OUT OUT
OUT IN OUT
FIG.2 Graphrepresentation ofatranscription network. Eachdiamondnoderepresentsasignalintegration
function,whileeachblackcircleisavariable. Thedirectionality oftheconstraintisrepresentedgraphically
bylabelingthediamondswithINandOUTontwodifferentsides.
theotherhand,withamesoscopicaverageintime,itisstillunclearwhattheemergenttimescales
might be. In particular, the pioneering approach of Kauffman (Kauffman, 1969a,b, 1993, 2004),
suggesting a synchronous deterministic dynamics for a Boolean (i.e. ON/OFF) representation of
the network is still being debated, both in its assumptions and in its results (Bastollaand Parisi,
1998; Gershenson, 2004; Kaufmanand Drossel,2005;Socolar andand Kauffman, 2003).
Weconsiderthesecondproblem,anddevelopamodel(calledGR,fromGeneRegulation),that
focuses,ratherthanonpuredynamics,onthecompatibilitybetweengeneexpressionpatternsand
signal integration functions. The compatibility constraints are generated by the clauses encoded
by signal integration functions at cis-regulatory regions. Our framework describes the system as
a combinatorial optimization problem where N variables, the gene expression levels, are subject
to M constraints, representing the signal integration nodes. Simply put, a cell with N genes can
express them in exponentially many ways, 2N in the Boolean ON/OFF representation. However,
the cell never explores all the possible patterns of expression. It generates only clusters of corre-
lated configurations. To fix the ideas, one can think to the very elementary example of the cI-cro
switch of λ-phage (Ptashne, 1992; Thomas, 1973). In this case one could observe the states 10
(where cI is ON, and cro is OFF), 01, or perhaps 00, but never 11, because this state is ruled out
by the signal integrationfunction. In a cell, with the added complexityof the regulation network,
we can think that many of the states are not observable for the same compatibility reasons. The
approach is easily connected to detailed thermodynamic treatment of transcription from a signal
integrationnodeononeside(Buchler etal.,2003), andtothestatisticalmechanicsofspinglasses
and combinatorialoptimizationproblemson theother(Mezard etal., 2002).
Rather than the detailed quantitative prediction of mRNA expression states, the current chal-
lenge is to set a conceptual framework which can help to interpret the observations in concrete
examples,integratingasmuchaspossiblewithknowndata. Asathesimplestexampleofthis,we
studythebehavioroftheBooleanversionofourmodelonthenetworkstructureofE.coli. Build-
ing up from this simplest case, the aim is to analyze increasingly realistic network structures, in
ordertogenerateatheorythat,whilebeingconsistentwiththegenericqualitativefeaturesofregu-
lationnetworks,isusefultoanalyzesingleinstancesandrealizations. Thisismaximallyimportant
as biologicalknowledgeisconstructedon specificities,and noton typicalcasebehavior.
This paper is structured as follows. Sec. II introduces the model abstractly, as an optimization
problem, which, in sec. III is connected to themore concrete thermodynamicShea-Ackers model
oftranscriptionalregulation. Sec. IVabandonsthisgeneralsetting,and takesonthesimplestpos-
sibleformulationofthemodel,GR1,whichhasBooleanfunctionsandvariables,showingthatthis
casemapsdirectlytoaso-calledsatisfiabilityproblem(Sat). Thescopeofsec.V,istoanalyzethe
typical number N of gene patterns of a random instances of GR1, starting from the case of fixed
connectivity. The “leaf removal” algorithm allows to carry this analysis in the annealed approx-
imation. An important premise is the fact, which is evident looking at the data (Shen-Orr et al.,
2002), that some genes are essentially “free” from the point of view of transcription. These are
mainlycontrollersandareconnected toexternalstimuli. Theexpressionoftherestisconditioned
tothestateofothergenes. Thealgorithmallowstodefinethe“complexcombinatorialcore”(CCC)
of the network, as the set of genes able to control its global state. The number of non-controlled,
or“free”variablesinthecoredeterminesthecomplexityofthesystem. Thephasediagramshows
three distinct regimes of gene control. In the first (UNSAT), there are no free genes in the core,
and the system cannot control the simultaneous expression of all its genes. In the second regime
(“complex control” or HARD-SAT), the core contains free genes that control, both directly and
indirectly,manyothers. Thegeneraldynamicsisresidual(manyvariablesarefixed,theotherscan
change). Inthethirdregime,thecoreisempty. Eachfreegene(whichisexternaltothecore)con-
trolsthestateofasmallnumberofgenes(“simplecontrol”,orSATphase). Sec.VIconcernsitself
withthewidthofthedistributionofN,whichhasbothatechnicalsignificanceasavaliditytestof
theannealedapproximation,andabiologicalone,asthevariabilityinthenumberofgenepatterns
at fixed gene number. Sec. VII discusses generalizations of these results to non-fixed connectivi-
ties. Finally, sec. VIII describes one first attempt to put this findings to work on an experimental
dataset.
Ouraimistodescribeinaminimalwaygeneexpressioninatranscriptionnetwork,separating
theissuesrelated tothedynamicsfrom thoserelated to itslogical and computationalstructure. In
ordertodothis,wewillformulateamodelthatseesthesystemasanoptimizationproblem,where
a set of variables, the genes, is subject to a set of constraints, the signal integration nodes. Upon
thislogicbackbone,manyadynamicscanbesuperimposed,includinginthemostgeneralcasethe
kineticMontecarloschemecommonlyusedtomodelgeneticnetworks. Ratherthangoingtowards
thedirectionofhighestdetail,wewillchoosetosimplifythemodelasmuchaspossible,reducing
thenumberofdetailstotheminimum,andstudyingthegeneralqualitativefeaturesofthesystem.
Themodelis specified by
1) AsetofN discretevariables{x } associatedtogenesoroperons,whichinthesimplest
picture are identified with their transcripts and protein products. These variables represent
theexpressionlevelsandingeneraltakediscretevaluesin{0,..,q}. Inparticularsituations,
theyare well-approximatedby continuousvariables.
2) A set of M interactions, or constraints {I (x ,x ,...,x )} between the genes, rep-
b i0 i1 ikb b=1..M
resentingthesignalintegrationfromtranscriptionnodes.
This formulates an optimization problem, which we call GR, from Gene Regulation. GR asks to
find thestatescompatiblewith theconstraints.
The model can be easily generalized to include other relevant degrees of freedom, such as
translation, protein modification and protein-protein interactions. However, each addition adds
complexityandparameters. Thereforewestartwiththeminimalpossibledescription. Admittedly,
neglecting non-transcriptional regulation is a drastic simplification of the system. A complete
genetic network should in principle include all forms. On the other hand, the justification for
considering transcription alone is that it is the first step in the chain of regulation events and it is
experimentally well characterized. From the physics point of view, this model can be seen as a
“spin glass”, a system where some variables, our gene expression levels, interact through some
coupling constants, specified by the constraints (Mertens, 2002). This approach to optimization
problems of computer science has proved to be very useful in the recent years (Mezard et al.,
2002).
The network structure is naturally represented on a “factor graph”, where two kinds of nodes
are present, N “variable nodes” and M “function nodes” respectively (Fig. 2). Here k = 1+K
can beseen as the local connectivityof a functionnode. Notethat thefactor graph is also defined
by a variable connectivity c , the number of functions connected to x . In fact, this is the typical
structure of a constraint satisfaction problem of theoretical computer science, such as q-coloring
orsatisfiability(Mertens,2002).
III. THECONSTRAINTSAND THESHEA-ACKERSMODEL
To specify the model one has to give a structure for the function nodes, i.e. the constraints.
This requires a physical model for signal integration. In order to take this step, in this section we
startfromthewell-knownandwidelyacceptedthermodynamicmodelofSheaandAckersofgene
activationbyrecruitment,to showthatitis thenatural settingto expressourconstraints.
LetusconsiderafunctionnodewithK regulatorsandoneoutputvariable. Thisismodeled,in
the version presented by Buchler and collaborators (Buchleret al., 2003), as a neural network (a
“Boltzmannmachine”)withHamiltonian
H = J s s + h s ,
ij i j j j
i,j X =0..L jX =0..L
where s ,..,s are the occupation variables of the cis- binding sites, h are external fields,
functions of x ,...,x representing the concentrations of “input” transcription factors, and J
are interaction constants associated to competitive versus cooperative binding. More precisely,
h = −β−1log(Q ),whereQ = [TFi] ∼ xi isthebindingaffinityofasitei,andκ adissociation
j j j κi κi i
constant. Normally, the concentrations are approximated with continuous variables. In general,
L ≥ K, becausemultiplebindingsitesare present. Finally,s ,h are theoccupation variableand
the external field (a fixed parameter corresponding to the polymerase binding affinity) associated
totheoutputnodeofthefunction(seeFig 3).
(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)
TF2(cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:1)
TF1 (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) s(cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) 3(cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) s 0 h 2 h 1 h 3
(cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1)s 2 1 J 2 J 3
(cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) s 1(cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) 12
FIG. 3 Exemplification of a Shea-Ackers node. s are occupation variables for the transcription factors
binding sites, while the coupling constants J encode cooperative or competitive binding. The external
fieldsh arethephasespacevariables ofGR.
Given all the binding constants and the interaction parameters, the -intrinsically probabilistic-
output of the gate is computed as a function of the input fields, simply as the probability that
s = 1. Thisexpectationvaluecan beobtainedthroughthepartitionfunction
Z[h ,...,h ] = e−βH
whereβ = 1/kT.
Equivalently,onecan computethelocalfree energy
− logZ = F[h ,...,h ] = F[x ,...,x ] (1)
and find theaverageoutputthroughminimizationwithrespect to thex coordinate.
In other words, the function nodes are local equilibrium conditions for the variable nodes,
specified by the Shea-Ackers model of the cis-regulatory region of each variable node. The ex-
pression variables {x } need to satisfy the constraints specified by the local minimizations
ofthefree energies {F (x ,x ,...,x )} . Since thereis aclear input-outputlogicencoded
b i0 i1 ikb b=1..M
by the chemical equilibrium of each signal integration nodes, one could refer to this backbone
staticstructurethe“logico-chemical”structureofthenetwork,and separateit from its“dynamic”
structure. The logic it encodes is of course not Boolean. In fact, it is intrinsically non-Boolean
evenwithBoolean variables,as theoutputsareprobabilisticfunctionsoftheinputs.
Fromthepointofviewofstatisticalmechanics,thisisaPottsspinsystemwithdilutedinterac-
tionsdescribedbythelocalfreeenergiesF (whichinthiscontextshouldbeinterpretedaseffective
Hamiltonians). Interestinglyfortheanalogywithspinglasses,themodelforthegatecanbeseenas
amessage-passingprocedureanalogoustothatexploitedbythecavitymethod(Mezard and Parisi,
2003; Mezard et al., 1987; Mezard and Zecchina, 2002), where, in the approximation of factor-
ized probability distribution of the variables, one evaluates the local fields h , describing the
local influence of the couplings on variable i in absence of interaction b, and u , the contri-
bution of interaction b on the local magnetic field on spin i, together with their histograms in
the presence of many states. In our case, the “messages” described above can only travel in the
input-to-outputdirection. Wearecurrentlyinvestigatingwhetherthisanalogycanbeexploitedfor
further calculations, and we are aware of work in this direction, in a simpler setting, by another
group(Correale et al., 2004).
In principle, the variables x directly stand for the number expressed of molecules in a cell.
Provided the set of all binding constants and interactions is known, all the function nodes can be
computed and the model is complete. It could be solved, for example by numerical simulations,
onceadynamicsisspecified.
On the other hand, with a few exceptions of small systems, these (many) parameters are in
general not known. For this reason, rather than aiming for the highest level of detail, we choose
to simplify as much as possible, while trying to keep the most relevant features. For practical
purposes, in order to be able to advance furtheranalytically and numericallyin the understanding
of the model, it is convenient to introduce coarse grained expression levels, thereby effectively
reducing q. The resulting model, GRq, is identical, mind the fact that variables and constraints
are now subject to implicit averaging. One advantage of this approach is that local free energies
become easier and easier to specify, and it is possible to study, as is commonly done for spin
glasses,thetypicalbehaviorofthesystemas a functionoftheparameters.
In the simplest possible scenario q = 1, and the expression levels are Boolean variables.
The assumption behind this is that what matters is only if the level of expression is high or
low (Kauffman, 1969b, 1993). The simplest case (which we will still call GR1), assumes also
Booleanfunctions. Inthefollowingsection,wewillshowhowGR1 mapstoaSatisfiabilityprob-
lem(Sat), an optimizationproblemwhereN Boolean variablesareconstrainedbyM conjunctive
normal form (CNF) constraints (i.e. by a Boolean polynomial constructed as a product (∧) of M
disjunctivemonomials(∨)).
IV. GR1,MAPPINGONA SATISFIABILITYPROBLEM
As we have shown in the above section, for general variables x that represent real expression
levels,theconstraintscanbederiveddirectlyfromthemodelofSheaandAckersofgeneactivation
by recruitment (Buchleret al., 2003; Sheaand Ackers, 1985). If the x represent coarse-grained
expressionlevels,thesamemodelcanbeusedtoconstructthelocalfreeenergyinEq.(1),associ-
atedtoeach signalintegrationnode,thatgeneratestheconstraintsthroughminimization. Herewe
considerthesimplestpossiblescenario,treatingtheexpressionlevelsasBooleanvariables,setting
q = 1, and the signal integration functions as boolean functions {f (x ,..,x )} . We also
b b1 bkb b=1..M
restricttothecaseoffixed in-wardconnectivityk = K, ∀b. Theseconditions,definingK-GR1,
are also found in Kauffman networks (Gershenson, 2004; Kauffman, 1993). We will relax the
hypothesisoffixedK to explorenetworkswithfluctuatingconnectivityinsection VII.
X1 X2 X1 X2
FIG.4 Translation ofa2-GR1node in3-SatNodes. Theinput-output direction isfrom toptobottom. Sat
constraints are represented as squares, where the black and white vertices indicate that the corresponding
variableentersnegatedoraffirmedrespectively inthe3-Satconstraint.
The expression x = f (x ,..,x ), which imposes that the variable x is the output of the
b0 b i1 iK b0
functionf , translatesintotheBoolean constraint
In a Kauffmannetwork, this expressionis equivalenttothefixed point condition,and there is one
such constraintforevery variablex . Theformula
b= ^ 1..M b= ^ 1..M
defines a Satisfiability problem (Sat) on the variables x ,..,x . From the biological viewpoint,
this is a logic representation of the computational tasks encoded in the transcription network by
evolution,i.e. whichsetsofgeneshavetobeswitchedonatanygivencondition. Moreabstractly,
having in mind Kauffman networks, each satisfying solution of this problem corresponds to a
fixed point in the Kauffman dynamics (independently from the update scheme). The number of
variablesinvolvedinoneconstraintisalwaysexactlyk = K+1,thereforethismappingassociates
anetworkwithfixedconnectivityK,toak-Satisfiabilityproblemwhoseconnectivityisincreased
by one unit. For example, a K = 2 Kauffman network corresponds to a 3-Sat problem, and so
on. The suitable order parameter for such a system is γ = M/N. GR1 assumes that each gene
expressionvariableisregulatedat mostbyonesignalintegrationfunction,sothat γ ≤ 1.
To further understand the logic structure if GR1, we can write the CNF constraints on each
variable x . This allows to make a connection to the order parameters used in k-Sat, i.e. the
local constraint α, defined as the number of conjunctive-normal-form(CNF) clauses per Boolean
variable. In order to do this, we recast the Boolean formulas I into CNF. Reshuffling the truth
tableoff inawaythatthefirstz terms(1,..,z)givezeroasanoutput,asimpleprocedureshows
b α=1 b0 α1 αK
(cid:16) (cid:17)
(cid:16) (cid:17)
x ifelement α,j oftruthtable = 0
 ¬x ifelement α,j oftruthtable = 1
having exactly 2K clauses of K+1 elements. Thus, a network with connectivity K maps into a
(K+1)-Sathavingalwaysα = 2Kγ. However,wecannotimplydirectlythatthetypicalbehavior,
andthereforethephasediagramofthesystemwillbethesameasthatofthecorrespondingrandom
k-Sat. Considering random realizations of the constraints, these are a priori only a subset of all
the possible realizations of a k-Sat constraint. In fact, it is immediate to realize that the 2K CNF
clauseswritteninEq.(3)containallthepossible(fixed)combinationsfortheinputsvariablesand
the corresponding (random) 2K outputs for the output variable. This is best exemplified on the
factorgraph (Fig. 4).
HavingestablishedalinkbetweenGR1andaparticularoptimizationproblemwesetouttolook
at random instances for the signal integration functions. For fixed connectivity one can expect a
similarbehaviorforK-GR1asrandomk-Sat,ork-XORSAT(aSatproblemwithclausescontain-
ing only XOR clauses), with the presence of a phase transition in the number of satisfying states.
The suitable order parameter for such a transition is γ = M/N. Notably, the space of functions
of the three models have different dimensions. Furthermore, differently from Sat or XORSAT, in
GR1 each geneexpressionvariableisregulated at mostbyonesignalintegrationfunction,so that
γ ≤ 1. In practice, both forease ofinterpretation and for simplicityof theanalytical formulation,
fromnowonwewillabandontheformulationofGR1intermsofCNFconstraints,andworkwith
theinput-outputfunctionsf .
V. LEAFREMOVALANDTHECOMPUTATIONALCORE
The aim of this section is to compute the number of satisfying solutions N, for random in-
stancesoftheconstraints. Foraccessoryreasons,wewillmapGR1toaspinsystem. Quitesimply,
each Boolean variable x ∈ {0,1} is transformed into a spin σ ∈ {−1,1}. Each constraint, or
diamondfunctionnodegenerates theinteractionHamiltonianH
⋄,b bl bl b0 b0
Jb1 X,..,JbK l= Y 1..K
Under the restrictions defining GR1, the total energy of the system is simply the number of
violated constraints. A zero-energy configuration satisfies all the constraints, and is therefore
able to comply to all the logic functions encoded by the network. The 2K coupling constants
{Jb1 ,..,JbK }
= ±1 are a representation of the truth table of the function f . With the correspon-
dence{0,1} ↔ {−1,1},J ,..,J standforthepossiblevaluesoftheinputvariablesx ,..,x ,
b1 bK b1 bK
{Jb1 ,..,JbK }
is the associated output value. The Hamiltonian (4) is the cost function of the
corresponding optimization problem K-GR1. It encodes the logic constraint of Eq. (2), in the
sensethatitisonewhenevertheconstraintisviolated,andzerootherwise. Fromthepointofview
of transcription networks, H is the coarse grained local free energy of the Shea-Ackers model.
Notethat,eveninthecaseofBooleanvariables,thecouplingconstantsrepresentbindingaffinities
and interactions between transcription factors. In general, they need not be plus or minus one.
Herewe tookthisfurtherassumption.
The conventional average of N on the realizations might be biased by the weight of ex-
ceptions (Mezard et al., 1987). The correct quantity to compute is the “quenched average” of
the system’s free energy, logN, which is usually accessed with the replica, or similar meth-
ods(Mezard et al.,2002),passingfromHamiltonianslikeH . However,inthecaseunderexam-
inationwewilluseasimplermethod,basedonthe“leafremoval”(Mezard et al.,2003)algorithm,
which allows to compute only the annealed average logN. As we will discuss, this method has
theadvantageofanimmediatebiologicalinterpretationintermsoftherolesplayedbygenesinthe
network. For the case of random XORSAT, Mezard and collaborators (Mezard et al., 2003) have
shownthattheannealedaverageonthecorevariablescoincideswiththequenchedone. Ingeneral
logN ≤ logN. For GR1, we performed estimates that indicate the presence of the same self-
averaging property in a well-defined region of parameter-space (see sec. VI). Within this region,
ourannealed calculationisexact.
For a given realization of the constraints {I ~ ,f ~ }, the number of satisfying states N can be
b i(b,1) i(b,Kb) i(b,0)
Here, the randomness is contained: (i) in the specification of the network structure, I~ =
(I ,...,I ), i.e. in the coordinates i(b,l), which point at the variable occupying place l in the
bth constraint; (ii) in the specification of the functions f ~ = (f ,...,f ) with a certain probability
distribution in the class F. An overbar (¯) indicates an average on both distributions, p(I~ ) and
p(f ~ ). We willfirst concentrateon thecasewithfixed in-wardconnectivityK.
Incarryingthisaverage,therearethreerelevantpreambles. ThefirstisthatnotalltheM equa-
tionsandN variablesaremeaningfultocalculateN. Indeed,everyoutputvariablethatappearsin
only one constraint can be trivially fixed according to its function. Thus, both the constraint and
thevariablecan beeliminatedwithoutaffecting thenumberofsolutions. This procedure is called
“leaf removal”(Mezard et al., 2003). It is a nonlinearprocedure, as more variables can disappear
together with a single constraint, because input free genes that regulate a leaf remain as isolated
points. The iteration of this mechanism leads to the definition of a “core”, the CCC, of signifi-
cant variables and constraints, in numbers of N and M respectively. In the CCC, M genes
are controlled, and ∆ = N −M are the “free” genes with an essential role in controlling the
expression states, as a function of an input signal. The second relevant fact is the hypothesis that
the functions are independent and identically distributed random variables. Thirdly, we consider
a set of functions in a family F which satisfy the condition 1 p(f ~ )f(~x) = ρ, as will
K 22K f∈FK
always bethecase iftheoutputsofthefunctionsareuncorrelated, eveninthepresenceofbias.
Itis theneasy toverify that
X ~σ,I~ Yb=1(cid:0) (cid:1)
sothat, as fortheXORSAT model,
N = 2NC−MC . (5)
Incidentally,wenotethatthesameprocedure isvalidforGRq, whereN = qNC−MC.
(cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:1) d (cid:0)(cid:1) (cid:0)(cid:1) c (cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1) γ
(cid:0)(cid:1) (cid:0)(cid:1) (cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:1) (cid:0)(cid:1) (cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:1) (cid:0)(cid:1) (cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:1) (cid:0)(cid:1) (cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
FIG. 5 Phase diagram of 4-GR1. Forγ > γ no solutions exist in the typical realization (UNSATphase).
For γ < γ the system is paramagnetic typically a satisfying state exists (SAT phase, or simple gene
control). Forγ < γ < γ thereiscomplexgenecontrol.
Wecan use ∆C as an order parameterin thethermodynamiclimitN → ∞, γ const.,to distin-
guishthreetypes ofphenomenology,orthree“phases”. (i)For ∆C ≤ 0,there areno free genes in
thecore,andthesystemcannotcomplytoalltheexpressionprogramsencodedintoitsDNA.This
isaUNSATphasefromthecomputationalpointofview. (ii)For0 ≤ ∆C < 1,the∆ genesofthe
CCC control O(N) genes each, and therefore are able to determine an expression state. This is a
“complexgenecontrol”phase,orHARD-SAT(iii)For ∆C = 1thenumberofcontrolledvariables
isavanishingfractionofthetotalnumberofgenes. Inotherwords,M = 0inthethermodynamic
limit, the free genes control at most O(1) genes to generate a satisfying state (“simple control”,
or SAT phase). In the simplecontrol phase, the systemis underconstrained, which means that the
logic conditions imposed by the signal integration functions are generally insufficient for a strict
determinationoftheexpressionpatterns.
The three phases described above depend both on the value of γ and on the class of
random functions considered. In general, if all the possible functions are taken into ac-
count, the phase diagram can be explored studying the rank and the kernel of the connectiv-
ity matrix (Caracciolo and Sportiello, 2002). Following the analysis of Mezard and collabora-
tors (Mezard et al., 2003), in the case of Poisson variable connectivity, i.e. with the distribution
π(c) = (kγ)c e−kγ, the phasediagram as a function of γ is identical to the random XORSAT prob-
c!
lem. It is illustrated in Fig. 5. For γ > γ no solutions exist in the typical realization (UNSAT
phase). Forγ < γ thesystemisparamagnetic(SATphase). Forγ < γ < γ exponentiallymany
satisfyingstatesexist. Here,thespaceofsolutionsbreaksdownintoclustersseparatedbyfreeen-
ergy barriers. Thetypicaldynamicsinaclusterwillberesidual,in thesensethatablock ofgenes
arefixed(onoroff)andtherestmaymove. Thenumberofclustersiscontrolledbythe(computa-
tional) complexity Σ of the system. The number of observed configurations is N∗ ∼ exp[N∆ ].
Thus, by definition Σ is directly related to the order parameter ∆ /N , i.e. to the partitioning of
thecoregenes. Howthesystemexplores(ornot)theclustersdepends ondetailsofitsdynamics.
VI. STATE-FLUCTUATIONSANDSELF-AVERAGE
In this section, we discuss a calculation of the width of the distributionof the number of com-
patible states. In order to do this, we compute the quantity [N]2. This calculation is relevant
both from the technical and from the qualitative point of view. The technical aspect, as already
anticipated,deals withtheself-averaging property,which holdswhenthequantity
(cid:2)2 (cid:3)
(cid:2) (cid:3)
vanishes in the thermodynamic limit N → ∞ at constant γ. When this condition is met, the
annealedaveragecomputedabovecoincideswiththequenchedone,andnoextraeffortisrequired.
When it is not, thebehavior of thesystem can be qualitativelydifferent from what emerges in the
annealed picture. In particular, thetypical numberof solutionis overestimated. In thiscase, more
complicatedformalisms,such asreplicas, need tobeadopted (Mezard et al., 1987).
The qualitative aspect involves the possible physical, and biological, interpretation of [N]2.
Thisisanindicatorofthewidthoftheprobabilitydistributioninthenumberofcompatiblestates,
inpresenceofrandomfunctionsandnetworkstructure. Therefore,itcanbeseenasthefreedomthe
systemhasofvaryingthenumberofstatesthatcomplytothesignalintegrationfunctionsbyacting
onitsconstraints. Biologically,havinginmindDarwinianevolutiononemayinterpretitasakind
of“adaptability”. Thisisdoneasfollows. IfN isinterpreted as thenumberofpossibleresponses
of gene patterns to external or internal conditions, it is reasonable to assume that a given system
with a fixed number of genes will be fitter by maximizing N. Now, if the distribution is wide,
the system can vary greatly N by acting on the signal integration functions. If the distribution is
peaked, thechangesin thefunctionswillbelesseffectivein increasingthenumberofstates.
If the self-averaging property holds, all the width, this adaptability,comes only as a finite-size
effect. This is not irrelevant, considering that the value of N is in the range 103 − 105, quite
far from the usual Avogadro’s number! On the other hand, if the self-averaging property does
not hold, it means that a residual width exists even in the thermodynamic limit. In this case,
an evolved system can be ultra-specific, finding the very exceptional situations in which a high
numberofsolutionsexistsagainstthetypicaloddsinwhichthesystemcannotexpresscompatible
genepatterns,thebiblicalneedleinahaystack. Suchputativehighlyspecializedorganismswould
be particularly sensitiveto changes in the environment. Given these considerations, it seems that
thelack ofself-averaging foramodellikeGR1 wouldmakeitslightlyless appealing.
The final result for GR1 is that N is indeed self-averaging. The details of the calculation are
reported in Appendix A. It relies on two basic assumptions. The first relates to the choice of a
familyofrandomfunctionssuchthat:
(a) 1 p(f ~ )f(~σ) = 0,as above,and
Here, Λindicatesthesizeofthefamilyoffunctions,and weusedtheobviousnotationthatmakes
thefunctionsassumevalues±1 ifexpressed intermsofspins.
The second assumption in the computation can be seen as a mean-field-like hypothesis of in-
dependence of spins belonging to different clauses. It can be argued as follows. Differently from
the evaluation of N, the computation of [N]2 depends both on the class of functions and on the
underlying network. The essential problem is that while the function nodes are independent ran-
domvariables,thevariablenodesclusteredbyfunctionscanberepeated. Thus,onehastoanswer
to the question: how many distinct variables n are connected to r constraints? For small r, we
can estimate that n ≃ r · k, while for r ∼ M, n ≃ M. These extremes set the “fork” of val-
ues for which our estimate is consistent and robust. In these conditions, we obtain the scaling as
4∆C, in the relevant regime of the phase diagram 1/K < γ < γ∗, with γ∗ > γ . This enforces
the self-averaging property. The same procedure can be carried with the k-Sat model yielding no
self-averagingforthenumberofsatisfyingstates.
VII. DIFFERENTCONNECTIVITIES
So far we have discussed the idealized case where the in-ward connectivity, the number of
transcription factors controlling one gene, is fixed. In that case, only the out-ward connectivity,
or the number of genes controlled by a transcription factor, can fluctuate. A biologically more
realistic case is when both the inward connectivity K and the outward connectivity c vary along
thenetwork,and thedecay ofthelatterisslower(seeFig. 8a).
Considering p(k|c) = (kγ)c e−(kγ), the conditioned probability that a variable is in c clauses of
c!
the k kind, we have π(c) = (kγ)c e−(kγ) · p(k). The leaf removal algorithm can be applied
k c!
separately to sets of clauses with a given connectivity, defining N ≡< N > and M ≡<
M > , where < X > = p(k) · X(k). Choosing p(k) = Z−1(ν)e−νk does not affect the
exponentialasymptoticdecay ofπ(c)forlarge c.
Toshowthis,letus constructthegraph withthementionedproperties
1. Theprobabilitytohaveaclausewithk elementsisp(k) = Z−1(ν)e−νk (k > 1).
2. p(k|c) = (kγ)c e−(kγ) is the conditioned probability that a variable is in c clauses of the k
c!
kind.
k c!
and computeπ(c). Setting ξ = γ +ν,
c!
(cid:0) (cid:1)
where Z[f(c)] = f(c) is the Z-transform, and for us z = eξ. Now, Z[pc] = Li (z−1), where
Liis thepolylogarithm,which can bedefined fornegativeintegersas
Li (z) := rc−i ,
-0.02 ν = 1.8
0.4 0.5 0.6 0γ.7 0.8 0.9 1
0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1
FIG. 6 ∆ as a function of γ for different values of ν in the multi-Poisson case. The discrete jumps are
duetotheonsetofHARDphasesforthedifferentvaluesofk. ∆ canbecomenegativemanytimes,giving
risetoreentrant UNSATphases. Thefigurereferstoaconnectivity distribution withacutoffatk = 12
where c areEuler’s numbers. Thisgivesacondensedexpressionforπ(c):
(cid:10) (cid:11)
Zc!
(cid:8) (cid:9)
It can be easily checked that, for large c, this function decays exponentially, after having reached
amaximum.
We can call this case multi-Poisson, as the graph is a superimpositionof graphs that follows a
Poissondistribution,eachgraphhavinginturnafixedclause-connectivityandaPoissonvariable-
connectivity. The behavior of GR1 on such a topology is different from the fixed connectivity
case. Themain reason forthis isthat, while∆ (γ) is stilllocally decreasing, manynew disconti-
nuitiesemerge, duetotheinfluenceofclauseswithdifferentconnectivities. Thisgivesrisetotwo
phenomena. Firstly,∆ can increase globallywithincreasingγ. Indeed, it doesincrease afterγ ,
to decrease again before γ (Fig. 6). After the onset of thecomplexcontrol phase, the complexity
initiallyincreases(step-wise),reachesamaximum,andthendecreasesmonotonically. Thishasan
influenceonthenumberofobservedstatesas afunctionofγ. Secondly,∆ canbecomenegative
simple control
0.5 complex control
(HARD-SAT)
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
FIG.7 Phasediagram γ −ν for the multi-Poisson case. Thedashed line represents the meanvalue ofthe
numerically evaluated critical parameter γ (ν) for the SAT-HARDtransition of network realizations with
N = 3×104.
and then jump back to a positive state, creating a reentrant HARD-SAT phase (Fig. 7). We are
currentlystudyingwaystoextendourcalculationofthemeannumberofcompatiblestatesandthe
widthofitsdistributionon graphswithmoregeneral connectivities.
VIII. AN EXAMPLEFROM ANEXPERIMENTALSETTING
The results described so far focused on the typical behavior of GR1 as a formal model for a
genetic network. To resume them, we can predict the existence of a core of variables, the CCC,
which determines the behavior of the system. The phase diagram of the system contains two
regimes of gene control, simpleand complex. In the complex control phase, the free genes of the
core control O(N) other genes. These phases also depend on connectivity. On the other hand, a
very important question is how to relate them to concrete systems. There are many possibilities
in this direction that we are currently exploring. In this section, we will discuss a first attempt.
Specifically, we will make useof the data set for thestructure of theE. coli transcription network
from the RegulonDB database (Salgadoet al., 2001), with the modifications of (Shen-Orr et al.,
2002). Thegoalistoapplytheleafremovalalgorithmusingtheinformationcontainedinthedata
set.
The data set consists of an annotated graph, where the signal integration functions are de-
scribed as sets of annotated links. The annotations consist in three modes of activity: activation,
repression, and “dual” activity (meaning that the activity depends on the context). The data on
the combinatorial activity of transcription factors are not part of the set. For this reason, in what
followswewillignoretheannotations,concentratingonthestudyofrandomGR1 realizationson
thegivenexperimentalnetwork structures. ConsideringtheconnectivitymatrixC defined as
1; Genej regulatesgenei
 0; Otherwise
a “leaf” corresponds to a column containing only zeros. An iteration of the algorithm removes
these columns, together with the corresponding lines. Note that the leaf removal algorithm is not
guaranteed topreservethenetworkstructureas intheabstractcases discussedabove.
During the iterative leaf removal procedure, one is confronted with an important choice, con-
cerning how to deal with autoregulators. These create a problem, as, for particular assignments
of the functions they create trivial contradictions. In reality, this self-contradiction is inexistent,
as negativeautoregulations are known to play the role of controlling the overexpression of a par-
ticular gene. A standard, and the simplest, way to avoid the problem is simply to eliminate the
autoregulations, and impose that the diagonal of C is zero. However, this total cancellation is
notbiologicallymotivated-asautoregulationsmightreflect someglobalpropertiesofthesystem,
other than control of overexpression. To clarify, let us consider a gene that regulates itself and
is regulated by some others (“rest”), that is a “regulated autoregulator” (RAR). It is then subject
to the constraint σ = f(σ |rest) = A(rest)σ + B(rest). If A(rest) = 0 the gene is regulated
simply,forB ∈ −1,1 and theautoregulationisirrelevant. Conversely,when B(rest) = 0, the
(cid:8) (cid:9)
autoregulationplaysarole, butifA(rest) = −1 thesystemisUNSAT.
Tosolvethisproblem,weproposeaway tokeep theroleofautoregulatorsintoaccount, while
at the same time avoiding the trivial self-contradiction. In order to do this, we introduce the
constraint A(rest) = 1 that codes for the avoidance of trivial contradictions. With this technique,
we aim to save the autoregulation role, while taking into account the notorious fact that auto-
inhibitionscannotberepresented withBooleanvariables. Wecan call thisthe“RAR hypothesis”.
NUMBER OF EDGES
NATURE OF AUTO-EDGE
FIG. 8 Data inferred from the E. coli transcription network. (a) Degree distribution. (b) Activity of au-
toregulators. Seealso(Martinez-Antonio andCollado-Vides,2003)
.
We will see that this hypothesis brings to a different final result. The same reasoning can be
carried for GRq-type variables. Assuming the RAR hypothesis, the problem becomes a mixed
optimization problem, that includes the usual GR1 constraints, plus a set of Sat-like constraints
thatcomefrom theA (rest) = 1 conditionson theRARs.
A. TheE.coliTranscriptionNetwork
In the E .coli data set there are 423 genes, and 59 autoregulations. Among these, 24 are RARs
(Fig. 8). Applying the leaf-removal algorithm with cancellation of autoregulations leads to an
empty core. This means that the system finds itself in the simple control, SAT phase. However,
theapplicationoftheRAR hypothesisleads toanon-emptycore(Fig. 9).
24 arcA 66 crp
127 fhlA 69 cspA
292 ompR_envZ 114 exuR
136 flhDC 143 fnr
σ 156 GalR
c 229 lysR
4 282 nlpD_rpoS
154 fur 346 rpoN
169 glnALG 358 soxR
193 hns 370 tdcAR
267 nac 413 yhdG_fis
FIG. 9 The CCC of E. coli with the RAR hypothesis. It contains 22 variables (of which 14 are free or
regulated only by themselves, 4 are non-free, and 4 are RARs) and 22 constraints (of which 18 are RAR
constraints).
The genes in the core can be divided in three different classes, free, which we will denote by
τ, non-free (σ), and RARs, or (α). The core contains a total of 22 variables (of which 14 are free
orregulated onlyby themselves,4 are non-free, and 4 are RARs) and 22 constraints(ofwhich 18
are RAR constraints). Biologically speaking, these core gene include some “global regulators”,
or transcription factors with a high out-ward connectivity (Martinez-AntonioandCollado-Vides,
2003), including (a) the sigma factors rpoS and rpoN, (b) proteins belonging to the family of
the DNA bending global regulator crp (c) himA, or IHF, another DNA bending factor. More
interestingly, also lower connectivity proteins, connected to metabolism (e.g. respiratory control
and irontransport),and to structuraltasks(e.g synthesisoftheflagellum)are foundinthecore.
The residual optimization problem on the core variables is small and simple enough to be
solved for general functions, as exemplified in Fig. 10. The final solution gives only two states,
afterhaving fixedthefree genes.
What is the meaning of the CCC in the RAR hypothesis, if any? The answer can come from
two directions: simulations and experiments. For the numerical case, one must study how fixing
the core variables affects the reach of a fixed point or a steady state in a Boolean network. Our
simulations on both asynchronous spin-flip and synchronous update dynamics show that, fixed
some random functions on the whole network, the core free genes control a larger set of genes
than the non-core ones (these results will be published elsewhere (CosentinoLagomarsinoet al.,
2005)). This is an indication that the CCC found with the RAR hypothesis might have some
significance. Thesamefeature can betestedwithmicroarray expressionexperiments.
IX. CONCLUSIONS
In conclusion, we have presented and discussed a novel conceptual framework for theequilib-
riummodelingoflargescaletranscriptionnetworks. Initsmostgeneralformulation,ourapproach
isdirectlyconnectedtotheShea-Ackersmodelforthecis-regulatoryregionofagene,andconsists
ofacompatibilityanalysisoftheconstraintsestablishedby thesignalintegrationfunctions.
Theadvantageofthisapproachisthatitallowstoseparateissuesrelatedtothedynamicsofthe
network from the basic logic structure that underlies it. Obviously, dynamics is a very important
factor of a real biochemical network, possibly the most important. On the other hand, we feel
that the disentanglement the two aspects might lead to further insight. In the spirit of theoretical
computerscience,anydynamicssuperimposedonGR1canbeseenasanalgorithm. Theproblem
becomesthenthefollowing. Howeffectivelydoesagivenalgorithm,modellingchemicalkinetics
explore configuration space? Naturally, this addition may carry intricate issues, connected to the
nonequilibrium nature and the asymmetry of the interactions. These issues are particularly com-
plex if one wants to add a coarse-graining of time, as is commonly done in Kauffman networks.
Inabsenceofanexplicitknowledgeoftheemergenttimescalesinvolvedinthedynamics,wefeel
ours is an appropriate approach. Particularly in the Boolean approximation, GR1, which we treat
here.
From a general, speculative standpoint, our model shows that the “biological complexity” is
not simply measured by the number of genes. For a transcription network, a more proper indica-
tor is ∆ . Interestingly, for GR1 this coincides exactly with what is called the “computational”
24 arcA 66 crp 20 49 64 68 123
127fhlA 69 cspA
292ompR_envZ 114 exuR 137 151 157 197 233
136 f σ lhDC 156 GalR 241 246 252 270 299
c 190 himA
229 lysR 325 359 362 369 401
154 fur 282 nlpD_rpoS
169 glnALG 346 rpoN
193 hns 358 soxR α
267 nac 370 tdcAR nc
413 yhdG_fis
8 simple constraints on
4 RAR constraints (67)
4 K=1 constraints
4 K=2 constraints
1 K=3 constraint 22 −8 variables
1 K=5 constraint 18 − 8 =10 constraints
4 RAR constraints
24 arcA 66 crp 20 49 64 68 123
127fhlA 69 cspA
292 ompR_envZ 114 exuR 137 151 157 197 233
136 flhDC 241 246 252 270 299
σ 156 GalR
c 190 himA
229 lysR 325 359 362 369 401
154 fur 282 nlpD_rpoS
169 glnALG 339 rob
193 hns 358 soxR α
267 nac 370 tdcAR nc
c 413 yhdG_fis
3 RAR constraints
nc 4 − 2 =2 variables
1 K=2 constraint
(314) 2 − 1 = 1 constraints
3 − 3 = 0 RAR constraints
FIG.10 SolutionofthegeneraloptimizationproblemonthecorevariablesofE.coliintheRARhypothesis.
In this procedure, variables are fixed with respect to each other according to the constraints that connect
them. (a)Secondstepofthecomputation (b)Laststepofthecomputation.
complexity, Σ. Looking at the phase digram, Σ depends on the order parameter γ, or - loosely
- on the number of transcription factors per gene. At fixed number of genes, it is known that
this quantity increases in bacteria that need to react to more environments (Cases et al., 2003).
Imaginingthatprokaryotes,beingunicellular,naturallyfind themselvesinasimplecontrolphase,
our phase diagram predicts an intrinsic limit to this adaptation process, represented by the phase
boundary with the HARD-SAT. Consideringvarying N, onemay wonderwhy, in real organisms,
a small γ is correlated with a small N (van Nimwegen, 2003). A possibleanswer to this question
is the following. With large N and small γ, the system is shifted to the SAT phase, and therefore
needs to explore a very big configuration space without sufficient “guidelines”. In other words,
theavailableconfigurationsaretoomanyto bereached in reasonabletimebythedynamics.
Similar considerations can be carried for the width of the distribution of satisfying solutions.
Thefactthattheself-averagingpropertyholdsindicatethatthisisnegligibleinthethermodynamic
limit. On the other hand, the typical value of N for a living system is in the range 103 − 105.
While being large for detailed modeling, this is a smaller number than the size of the typical
system treated with statistical mechanics. Thus, the effects of the system size are expected to be
important.
ConsideringthephasediagraminFig.5,thecomplexcontrolphase,havinggeneralresidualdy-
namics, matches a qualitative feature of many cells, where some genes are constantly expressed,
and the rest vary. On the other hand, the dynamical slowing down characteristic of any glassy
phase raises an issue that must be solved by the chemical dynamics of the cell. In analogy with
Kauffman’s ideas, the breakdown in many different attraction basins might be interpreted as epi-
genesis. That is, in the HARD-SAT phase there will be typically many cell types. How many, is
determined by the complexity Σ, which is directly measured by our ∆ . While for fixed K this
quantity simply decreases with increasing γ, its behavior is more interesting in the multi-Poisson
case. However, this remains an open issue which has to be regarded with more detail. The ex-
perimentalscaling ofthenumberofcell types is sub-linearin thenumberofgenes N (Kauffman,
1993,2004). In thefixedK case, GR1givesexponentialscalingwithN atfixedγ inthecomplex
controlphase. Ontheotherhand,theresultsofrandom-GR1areperhapsmoreeasilyrelatedtothe
number of species times the number of cell types at equal number of genes. In the same way, the
behavior of [N]2 with N should roughly predict the scaling of the variability in the total number
of cell types for all the species with equal number of genes N. According to GR1, this quantity
shouldvanishin thethermodynamiclimit.
To be biologically useful, the model has to deal with the details of an individual realization
the system. In this respect, an advantage of the leaf removal algorithm is that it transforms a
problem related the states of variables on a graph, the gene expression patterns, into a problem
regarding the structure of the graph. This is particularly of interest as long as the data regarding
the activity of function nodes are only partially known. For example, the first application to the
E. coli core, in the RAR hypothesis leads to interesting results, that have a numerical counterpart
andmightbetestedwithexpressioncorrelationdata. Theapplicationtomore,larger,datasetsand
to other forms of regulation might lead to further insight. Notably, some of the core variables do
nothaveahighconnectivity. Thisisanindicationthatadditional,global,propertiesofthenetwork
structure other than local order parameters must contribute to establish the hierarchy of states in
configurationspace.
Finally, besides the extensions to the work presented here, we believe the framework of GR
might be used as a setting for many different problems involvingfairly large networks, from evo-
lutionary models to regulation network optimization, from network inference to design. It will
be potentially useful in the years to come, as more and more data will be available from high-
throughputexperiments.
Acknowledgments
We would like to acknowledge interesting discussions with L. Finzi, A. Sportiello, J. Berg,
M.Leone, M. Caselle, P.R. ten Wolde,R. Zecchina.
APPENDIXA:Self-averagingpropertyofGR1.
The following paragraphs describe the calculation of the width of the distribution of N. By
definition,
n(1,m) n(k,m) n(0,m) n(1,m) n(k,m) n(0,m)
mY=1 (cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:1)
X ~σ,~τ XC mY=1 (cid:16) fXm∈F (cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:17)
Forfixed states~σ and~τ, wecan writethefactors oftheproduct aboveas
n(0,m) n(0,m) m m n(0,m) n(0,m) m m
(cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:1)
n(0,m) n(0,m) m m n(0,m) n(0,m) m m
(cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:1)
WhereA, B, C, D,are theweightsofthefunctionsf ∈ F such that,respectively
Now,as A+B +C +D = 1,and A+B = A+C = ρ, wecan write, choosingρ = 1/2
m m n(0,m) n(0,m) n(0,m) n(0,m)
(cid:2) (cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:1)
n(0,m) n(0,m) n(0,m) n(0,m)
(cid:2) (cid:0) (cid:1)(cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:1)(cid:0) (cid:1)(cid:3)
Theproduct onmgivesriseto 2M terms ofthekind
kY =1 k′Y =r+1
where A and R indicate factors of the two types in the previous expression. For every r there
are M terms of this kind in the sum. Applying the properties that characterize our family of
P (cid:2)(cid:0) (cid:1)(cid:0) (cid:1)(cid:3) (cid:2) (cid:3)
With this consderation, the sum over the configurations ~σ~τ can be simplified. It involves the
(cid:2) (cid:3)
(cid:2) (cid:3)
Letusnowdistinguishagainbetweenfreegenesandnon-freeones,whichareoutputsofsome
signal integrationfunction. The sum overnon-free genes is such that (i) there is a contribution
due to the Kronecker deltas in the A part and (ii) if a type R non-free σ n(0,k′) or τ n(0,k′) variable
appears in the input of a type A clause the contribution is zero. A little thought leads to the
conclusionthatthenon-freegenes sumupto theterm
(cid:18)2(cid:19) N
(cid:16) (cid:17)
The sum over the 2(N − M) free genes would give a 4∆ contribution in case of complete
independence. However, a delta function on the input genes reduces the double sum to a single
one. Toestimatethiscontributiononehastoevaluatetheprobabilitythattwofreegenesappearas
inputofatypeAclause. Inamean-fieldlikeestimate,thisiskr N−M ,leadingtothecontribution
4∆ ·2 − 1+ kr ∆ r
The4∆termfactorsoutofeverything,andalonewouldgivethedesiredself-averagingproperty.
It remains to evaluate the sum over r. Restricting the sum over the core genes, and evaluating it
withasaddlepointmethodleads totheminimizationofthefree-energy-like functional
wherex ∈ [0,1],andγ := MC. Minimizationofthisfunctionalalwaysleadstothesolutionx = 0,
with the exception of the regions: γ < 1/K and γ > γ∗, where γ∗ is a threshold that always lies
intheUNSAT region. Fork = 3,γ∗ ≃ 0.9722.