2v3885.9031:viXra
THE JOSEPH GREENBERG PROBLEM: COMBINATORICS
AND COMPARATIVE LINGUISTICS
ALEXANDERYONG
1. INTRODUCTION
In 1957, the eminent linguist Joseph H. Greenberg (1915–2001) proposed the method
of Mass comparison (also known as multilateral comparison) for determining genetic relat-
edness between languages [Gr57a]. I first learned about his work though the PBS/BBC
documentary “In search of the first language”; a transcript (quoted below) is found at
AllowingGreenberg himselftosummarize hisidea:
“I usually had preliminary notebooks in which I took those elements of a
language, which, on the whole, we know are the most stable over time.
These are things like the personal pronouns, particularly first and second
person, names for the parts of the human body... I would look at a very
large number of languages in regard to these matters, and I did find that
they fellinto quite obvious groupings.”
This “presorting” technique is controversial, see, e.g., [Ri92, Gr93]. Its use [Gr87] to see
that 650 languages of North and South America fall into three families (Eskimo-Aleut,
Na-Deneand Amerind)ishotly debated. For example,JamesMatisoff argued:
“Eyeballing data is prescientific, or nonscientific. There are so many ways
you can be led astray, because very often, words look as if they have some
connection, and theyhave nohistorical connection whatsoever.”
Now, asuccinct andcombinatorial argument forMass comparison isin [Wi13a]:
“He also criticized the prevalent view that comprehensive comparisons of
two languages at a time (which commonly take years to carry out) could
establish language familiesof anysize. Hepointed out that, evenfor 8 lan-
guages, there are already 4,140ways to classify them into distinct families,
while for 25languagesthere are 4,749,027,089,305,918,018ways.”
The two numbers offered are from [Gr57b] (he gives no other such enumerations). In-
deed,theexactnessofhisenumerationfor25languagesmakesastrongvisualimpression.
However, in the interest of accuracy, we point out that in fact it is slightly erroneous: the
correct enumeration is4,638,590,332,229,999,353.
Combinatorialists will recognize that the numbers Greenberg wanted to be Bell num-
bers B(n). Nowadays, a quick lookup at the On-Line Encyclopedia of Integer sequences
ical interest, we elaborate upon the correction, and howone comes to notice it.
Date:September30,2013.
Actually, a purpose for this elaboration is pedagogical. The author introduces the
“Joseph Greenberg problem” to introductory classes in combinatorics: Compute Green-
berg’s stated numbers. Thus, the discussion might be of interest to the combinatorics in-
structor, or to the readerwhoisnot alreadyversed on the topic.
We now turn to the main goal of this paper. While Greenberg used Bell numbers to
support Mass comparison, the same combinatorics does not support the plausibility of
the resulting Americas classification. The probability, under the uniform distribution, of
a classification of 650 languages having less than 100 families is near zero, but almost
100%forthose in the range [120,150].
This estimate is close to the more generally accepted viewpoint that there are between
150and180families(alistoffamiliesisfoundin,e.g.,[Wi13b]). Infact,mostrandomclas-
sifications with this number of families and languages have a moderate number (9 to 19)
of language isolates. This issomewhat consistent with the number ofisolates/unclassified
languages in the actual consensus classification (we seem to underestimate the number
ofisolates/unclassified languagesby afactor of5 to 10).
We propose these combinatorial tests as simple mathematical baselines to quantita-
tively measure the typicality of an actual language classification, in cases of (subjective)
uncertainty. Since these tests use a different perspective than more standard statistical
methods, we contribute the analysisto the above debate within comparative linguistics.
2. MULTISET COUNTING, STIRLING AND BELL NUMBERS, AND GENERATING SERIES
2.1. The 8 languages case. Greenberg’s calculation of 4,140 for the number of ways to
classify 8 languages into families is correct. One can first try to determine the number
using multisetcounting.
Suppose that the (Native American)languagesto beclassified are
Alutiiq, Eyak, Cup’ik, Naukan,Mahican, Inupiaq,Tlinqit, Kalallisut
There are 22 partitions of 8. Each partition describes language family sizes. For exam-
ple, in the case 5 + 2 + 1, classifications correspond to to arrangements of the multiset
A,A,A,A,A,B,B,C. Hence,the arrangementA,B,A,A,C,A,B,Aencodes
A ↔ {Alutiiq, Cup’ik,Naukan, Inupiaq,Kalallisut}, B ↔ {Eyak, Tlinqit}, C ↔ {Mahican}
Thusthere are 8 = 8! such arrangements.
52 1 5!2!1!
For the partit(cid:0)ion 4(cid:1)+2+2,we rearrange A,A,A,A,B,B,C,C andboth
A,B,B,A,C,C,A,A and A,C,C,A,B,B,A,A
encode the same language groupings. As there are two repeated parts one corrects for
this overcount bydividingby 1 so that the numberofdistinct groupings is 1 8 .
Similarly,forthepartition2+2+2+1+1thecountis 1 1 8 . Itisnotto (cid:0) olab (cid:1) orious
3!2! 22 211
to compute all 22 numbers of this kind, add them all up,(cid:0)and thu(cid:1)s recover Greenberg’s
stated number. PerhapsGreenberg did somesuch calculation asa check.
2.2. The 25 languages case. The method just used for the 8 language case becomes un-
palatable for 25 languages because now there are 1,958 partitions. It is logical to discuss
nowstandard combinatorics, found in textbooks such as[Br10].
Suppose {a n } n∈Z ≥0 is a sequence of answers to a counting problem (such as the Joseph
Greenbergproblemfornlanguages). Theuninitiated mightfind itsuprisingthatonecan
ever get traction on a problem by considering the infinitely many such problems, and
then rephrasing the question asthe coefficient of
in the exponentialgeneratingseries
n!
∞ xn x1 x2 x3
n! 1! 2! 3!
LetS(n,k)bethenumberofwaystosplitnlanguagesintoexactlyk languagefamilies;
this isknown asthe Stirlingnumber. Onehasthe exponential generatingseries identity
n!
Thiscan be obtained bythe productrulefor exponential generating series: Given
f(x) = f , and g(x) = g ,
k! ℓ!
the coefficient of xn in h(x) = f(x)g(x) is n f g . This is interpreted as counting
n! k+ℓ=n k k ℓ
two (ordered) boxes worth ofcombinatoriPal object(cid:0)s:(cid:1)
(I) the first of the type enumerated byf(x), and
(II) the second ofg’stype;
(III) with the labelsdistributed to the boxes in all possible ways.
Note that ex −1 is the series for unordered collections of languages. Thus, (ex −1)k is the
seriesfor classifications into k orderedfamilies– a k!factor overcount of S(n,k).
Expandingthe right handside of (1)bythe binomial theorem, one deduces
k! (cid:18)i(cid:19)
whereS(n,0) = 0. Onecanlamentthatwhilethisexpressionisexplicitandnonrecursive,
itis notmanifestly nonnegative oreven rational, even though it computes S(n,k) ∈ Z .
Greenberg’s problem for n languages is computed by the Bell number defined by
B(n) = S(n,k). By (2) we have a non-recursive expression for B(n). However,
computinPg B(25) byhand thisway isimpractical.
Actually, Greenberg’sfootnote on page43 of[Gr57b]shows heknewthe recurrence
(cid:18)k(cid:19)
presumablyusedinhiscomputation.1 Acombinatorialproofof(3)followsbydecompos-
ing all classifications of n+1 languages by the numberof other languages in that family.
Still, executingthe calculation for B(25) would have beena task.
1Greenberg cites [Or42] that cites [Ep39] (which has values of B(n) for n ≤ 20). By 1962, [Le62] gave
valuesforn ≤ 74andcite[Gu50]whohadvaluesforn ≤ 50. HenceB(25)wasknownatleasttoexperts,
ifnotwidelyavailable,bythetimeof[Gr57b]. Anyway,itseemslikelyhejustcomputedithimself.
Now, since (ex − 1)k/k! is the generating series for S(n,k), summing over all disjoint
casesk of the numberoffamilies, ∞ (ex−1)k = eex−1 isthe generating seriesfor B(n).
k=0 k!
Often, this is where the classroPom or textbook analysis stops, with the computation
treatedasmoot. However,carryingitout,using,e.g.,Maple,theinstructorcanmakeclear
the speedone calculates the answer. For example,in Maple one computes asfollows:
> 25!*coeftayl(exp(exp(x)-1),x^25);
Inthe interpretation for the Joseph Greenberg problem, thisisa small surprise.
3. BACK-OF-THE-ENVELOPE CALCULATIONS
An advantage of generating series is that they are adaptable to related enumerations.
WhileGreenberg used B(25) to support Masscomparison, similarnumerics donot seem
to beconsistent with akey consequence, hiswork on languagesof the Americas[Gr87].
3.1. A simple plausibility test for Greenberg’s classification. Greenberg [Gr87] classi-
fied 650 indigenous languages of North and South America into three families2. This has
beencriticized for, e.g., notproviding sufficient statistical evidence forclaimed common-
alitiesbetweenlanguages. Specifictothissituation istheuseofadisputedmethod(Mass
comparison) and a large disagreement (two orders of magnitude) among linguists as to
the number of families. Side-stepping well-established lines of debate, imagine a restart
using combinatorics. Roughly, howmany language familiesshould there be?
Consider each classification in an unbiased way. The generating series for language
families with between a and b families is
. Using this, the probability a ran-
k=a k!
dom classification on 650 languages has aPt most 3 families is 0.238 × 10−843%. (This is
comparabletotheprobabilityofrandomlyfindingaprechosenatomfromtheobservable
universe correctly, ten times in succession.) This hardly disproves Greenberg’s classifica-
tion –but itdoes quantifyhow improbable itisfrom the baseline.
Theprobabilitythatthenumberoffamiliesareintheranges[50,110],[111,120],[121,130],
[131,140] and [141,150] are 0.0000565%, 0.56%, 37.1%, 58.8% and 3.5% (rounded), respec-
tively. Hence almost all of the density is in the range [121,150]. Thus, we would na¨ıvely
guess (taking into account margin of error) that there are a few hundred families. This is
decentagreementwith today’sconsensus of 150to 180families[Wi13a, Wi13b].3
3.2. Languageisolates. Alanguageisolateisalanguagefamilyconsistingofonlyonelan-
guage. Euskara, the ancestral language of the Basquepeople, isone such example.
If all (modern) human languages originate from a single source, then one should con-
sider, as Greenberg does, language classifications with no isolates. Indeed, in his Ameri-
casclassification,Greenbergplacedmanygenerallyregardedisolates(Yuchi,Chitimacha,
Tunica, amongothers) intohis Amerindsuperfamily.
Thus, suppose we consider such classifications for eight languages. The number of
possibilitiesisthecoefficientof
x8 ineex−x−1
(whichis715). Whilethisisnotsmall,itsays
8!
2The650figureisfound,e.g.,in[ChRo05,pg.105]
3For 1,000 languages, which seems to me to be the upper end of the number of described indigenous
languagesoftheAmericas,themodelpredictstherange[180,200].
that the probability of a random language grouping having no language isolate is 715 or
approximately17%. For25languages,theprobabilityisabout8.75%,whereasfor200lan-
guages itisabout 1.93%. Inthe case ofn = 500(about the number oflanguages analyzed
in [Gr63]), it is 0.927%. For 650 languages (roughly the number studied in [Gr87]) it is
0.747%. In other words, most random language family configurations have a language
isolate. This isnot supportive ofGreenberg’s hypothesis.
By the product rule, the number of classifications on n languages with f families and
i isolates is the coefficient of
. For n = 650, if f = 150, the expected
n! i! (f−i)!
numberof isolatesisabout 9 andnearly 5%havemore than 14isolates in the right tail. If
insteadf = 180(theupperrangeoftheconsensusnumberoffamilies),theexpectednum-
berofisolatesisroughly19.5withnearly5%havingmorethan26isolatesintherighttail.
Thus,thecoupleofdozenisolates/unclassified languagesidentifiedintheactualclassifi-
cation seems somewhat high (or our estimate seems somewhat low). This would predict
that a number of current isolates/unclassified languages should amalgamate, reducing
the total numberoffamiliesdown towards 150. Werefrain from a “just-so” argument for
whythe number ofisolates seemshigherthan the model predicts.
3.3. What about Africa? About 1,500 languages ([ChRo05, pg.104]) of Africa were clas-
sified by Greenberg [Gr63], using Mass comparison, into 4 language families. Our na¨ıve
tests alsoreject this conclusion, estimating instead a fewhundred language families.
YetGreenberg’sclassification isgenerallyregarded asasuccess! However, in[Sa09, pg
561] this success is qualified: “for the majority of Africa’s best documented languages”.
In loc. cit. it is noted that there is a documentation problem for less popular languages,
andthetotal numberoflanguagesin Africavariessubstantially: from 2058byonecount,
to1441inanother. Moreover,thereview[Di08]arguesthatthereare19languagefamilies,
givenpresentknowledge. Also,D.Ringesuggested tousthatAfricaisspecialbecauseof
2,000 years of Bantu expansion that wiped out many language families. In any case, the
situation ismore complicated than first supposed.
Indeed, it is reasonable to tune the model, by factoring out uncontroversial language
classifications, such as the Afro-Asiatic languages. However, since an accounting of the
currentwisdomonAfricanlanguagesseemstometobeamatterforanexpert,andwould
take us too farfrom the mathematics, further discussion mayappearelsewhere.
In conclusion, further interpretation, analysis and simulation may come from ideas in
both combinatorics andcomparative linguistics.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank Donald Ringe for a helpful and encouraging email correspondence (and his
appearance in the documentary), from which I learned much of the comparative linguis-
ticsbackground I’vepresented(anyerrorsaremyown). WealsolthankEugeneLerman,
Oliver Pechenik (especially for suggesting a criticism of [Gr87]), Anh Yong, and the Fall
2013Math 580classat UIUC.Theauthor wassupported byan NSF grant.