The ‘who’ and ‘what’ of #diabetes on Twitter
Mariano Beguerisse-D´ıaz,1,2,∗ Amy K. McLennan,3 Guillermo
Gardun˜o-Hern´andez,4 Mauricio Barahona,1,† and Stanley J. Ulijaszek3,‡
1Department of Mathematics, Imperial College London, UK
2Mathematical Institute, University of Oxford, UK
3School of Anthropology and Museum Ethnography, University of Oxford, UK
4Sinnia, Mexico City, Mexico
Social media are being increasingly used for health promotion, yet the landscape of users, mes-
sages and interactions in such fora is poorly understood. Studies of social media and diabetes have
focused mostly on patients, or public agencies addressing it, but have not looked broadly at all
the participants or the diversity of content they contribute. We study Twitter conversations about
diabetesthroughthesystematicanalysisof2.5milliontweetscollectedover8monthsandtheinter-
actions between their authors. We address three questions: (1) what themes arise in these tweets?;
(2) who are the most influential users?; (3) which type of users contribute to which themes? We
answerthesequestionsusingamixed-methodsapproach,integratingtechniquesfromanthropology,
network science and information retrieval such as thematic coding, temporal network analysis, and
community and topic detection. Diabetes-related tweets fall within broad thematic groups: health
information, news, social interaction, and commercial. At the same time, humorous messages and
references to popular culture appear consistently, more than any other type of tweet. We classify
authors according to their temporal ‘hub’ and ‘authority’ scores. Whereas the hub landscape is
diffuse and fluid over time, top authorities are highly persistent across time and comprise bloggers,
advocacygroupsandNGOsrelatedtodiabetes,aswellasfor-profitentitieswithoutspecificdiabetes
expertise. TopauthoritiesfallintoseveninterestcommunitiesasderivedfromtheirTwitterfollower
network. Ourfindingshaveimplicationsforpublichealthprofessionalsandpolicymakerswhoseek
to use social media as an engagement tool and to inform policy design.
I. INTRODUCTION tional,top-downsocialmarketingandadvertisingstrate-
giestodisseminatehealth-relatedmessagestoawideau-
dience [22]. The recent use of Twitter in health pro-
Ofanestimatedthreebillioninternetusersaroundthe
motion coincides with the influx of commercial agen-
world(over40%oftheglobalpopulation),approximately
cies into social media to sell commodities, trends and
310 million actively use the social networking site Twit-
ideas [22]. The confluence of health promotion and
ter [71]. Since Twitter’s launch in 2006, the platform
commercial agents on Twitter has led to a cacophony
and its users have been the protagonists of several ma- of short health-related messages directed at users and
jor events (e.g., the Arab Spring, protest movements in
passed through social networks. Some users who cre-
Iran, Spain and elsewhere [1–7]), and it has become a
ate and disseminate content have the exclusive aim of
prominent venue for companies, personalities, and ordi-
promoting health, while others may have additional or
nary people to broadcast news and events, send public
alternative aims (e.g., commercial interest, self promo-
messages, express opinions, and socialise [8, 9].
tion). Yet this complex environment is rarely acknowl-
ThereisgrowinginterestinthepotentialusesforTwit- edged in public health promotion research, reviews and
ter, and other social media, in public and population planning. Instead, public health marketing strategies
health. ResearchhasbeencarriedoutontheuseofTwit- and evaluations focus on the quantity of messages dis-
ter for epidemiological applications and public health seminated by health authorities over time, the number
surveillance. For instance, influenza spread [10, 11], con- of followers an account has attracted, and the design of
tagious disease outbreaks [12] and tobacco use [13] have new slogans [20, 21]. There is little critical analysis of
been mapped using public data from Twitter. Geo- the wider landscape of, and relationships underpinning,
graphic or spatial risk factors have also been elucidated health-related content on Twitter, or of the impact that
using Twitter [14, 15]. This medium is being increas- messages have in the broad user base.
ingly used for health information sharing [16], primary
care,deliveryofhealthsupport,primaryprevention,and In this paper, we investigate messages on Twitter
public health education [17–21]. (‘what’ is discussed, and by ‘whom’) relating to a sin-
gle clinical and public health concern: diabetes. Dia-
Health promotion has typically drawn on unidirec-
betes is a clinical condition associated with blood sugar
regulation by the hormone insulin and other endocrine
factors. Complications associated with unmanaged or
poorly-managed diabetes can typically affect the heart,
∗Electronicaddress: beguerisse@maths.ox.ac.uk
†Electronicaddress: m.barahona@imperial.ac.uk blood vessels, eyes, kidneys and nerves. There are two
‡Electronicaddress: stanley.ulijaszek@anthro.ox.ac.uk types of diabetes: Type 1 (often abbreviated as T1 or
]hp-cos.scisyhp[
4v46750.8051:viXra
Apr 2013 Jun 2013 Aug 2013 Oct 2013 Dec 2013
Diabetes tweets
Mathematics joke
May 2013 Jul 2013 Sep 2013 Nov 2013 Jan 2014
FIG.1: ThenumberofdailytweetsinEnglishcontainingtheterm‘diabetes’(blueline),thenumberofdailytweetscontaining
some version of the ‘Mathematics joke’, a particularly recurrent tweet (red line, see also Table VII), and the number of tweets
mentioning the actor Tom Hanks (green dashed-line), who revealed his diabetes in October 2013.
T1D on Twitter) occurs when the pancreas does not holdersonaninitialequalfootingwithrespecttoTwitter
produce sufficient insulin; Type 2 (T2 or T2D) develops exchanges around the broad category ‘diabetes’.
when the body does not effectively respond to insulin. We compiled over 2.5 million English-language tweets
In 2012, the global prevalence of diabetes of both types containing the term ‘diabetes’, which were generated by
was estimated to be nine percent among adults aged 18 more than one million users over a period of 8 months
years and over [23]. However, this is likely to be an un- (March 2013 to January 2014). These are the type
derestimate; intheUnitedStatesalone, 27.8%ofalldia- of messages that users encounter when they search for
betescasesarethoughttobeundiagnosed[24]. Globally, the term ‘diabetes’ on Twitter, or click on the hashtag
around 10% of all people with diabetes have T1, which #diabetes. We analysed these tweets (public messages
typicallyrequiresthedailyadministrationofinsulin. The comprising of text strings with a maximum length of
remaining90%havediagnosesofT2, whichiscommonly 140 characters), using a mixed-methods approach that
associatedwithobesity,poornutritionandphysicalinac- combines mathematical and computational techniques
tivity. Bothtypeshavegeneticcomponents, althoughno with anthropological analysis. We used tools from data
known genes directly cause diabetes by themselves [23]. and network science to detect patterns in social inter-
T2 is managed predominantlythrough health education, actions [1, 32, 33] and to extract topics from the mes-
diet activity change, and weight loss; treatments also sages[34,35]. Wetheninterrogatedthesepatternsusing
may include medication, and in more advanced cases, discourseanalysisapproachesfromanthropology[36–38],
regular insulin administration [23]. People who have di- which permit the elaboration of themes, personalities,
abetes are encouraged to self-surveil their blood sugar and contexts. As a result, we extract and classify the
levels and self-manage their lifestyles and insulin levels topics that appear in the messages, and identify the im-
(through diet, physical activity, and medications, where portant participants in the conversations (which include
prescribed) in order to control their blood sugar levels patients, practitioners, public health authorities, com-
and minimise related health complications such as those mercial entities and others).
described above.
Researchershavecalledforimprovingourunderstand-
Previousresearchondiabetes and socialmediahas fo- ingofsocialmediatoinformitsuseinpublichealthpol-
cusedonthepossibilitiesthattheinternetandsocialme- icy making and practice [29]. Our work contributes to
dia open up for both self-management [25, 26] and clin- this understanding by addressing three questions. First,
ical management [27–29] for people living with the dis- what are the main themes of messages posted on Twitter
ease. Others have focused on the dissemination of infor- thatcontaintheterm‘diabetes’? Toanswerthisquestion,
mation relating to diabetes-specific outreach events [30] we extract the topics that appear in the tweets by pro-
orfromspecificplatforms[31]. Ourapproachisdifferent; cessing word co-occurrence networks, and analyse their
instead of assuming that patients, clinicians and health content, participants, and evolution. Second, who talks
promotionorganisationsarethemainprotagonistsinthe about diabetes on Twitter and in what capacity? To an-
Twitter conversation about diabetes, we place all stake- swer this question, we investigate the Twitter users who
driveconversationsbyanalysingnetworksofinteractions Interest
(posting,sharing/retweeting,following)amongtheusers.
Andthird,whichuserscontributecontenttowhichtopics
Source Target
and themes? We answer this question by examining the
type of accounts that post in the different themes. We
discusstherelevanceofthisinterdisciplinaryresearchfor
Information
public health professionals and policy. The methods em-
ployed in this project are general and may be applied in
FIG. 2: In retweet networks, nodes that are exposed to
other studies where similar data become available.
content can “pass it on” to their followers. The flow of data
goes in the opposite direction to the interest of the users,
where interest is represented by arrows which indicate the
direction of attention.
II. METHODS
A. Data from Twitter
Retweet network: Foreach week w, we constructa
directed,weightedretweetnetwork withN(w)nodes,cor-
Wecollectedeverytweetcontainingtheterm‘diabetes’
responding to all the users who participated in a retweet
(2,698,114 tweets in total), posted between 26 March
eventeitheractively(byretweeting)orpassively(byhav-
2013 and 19 January 2014 by 1,202,143 different users
ingtheirstatusesretweetedbysomeoneelse). Adirected
(Fig.1). Wealsocollectedinformationabout‘retweets’—
connection (edge or arc) exists between two nodes if the
a retweet event is when a user re-broadcasts a message
source node has retweeted the status of the target node,
(or ‘status’) originally posted by another user and which
and the weight of the edge corresponds to the number
is disseminated to his or her followers. Each retweet is
of retweets (see Fig. 2), i.e., we define the N(w)×N(w)
atime-annotatedinteractionbetweentwousers: thetar-
adjacency matrix of the retweet network as A(w), where
get (the author of the original tweet, or the target of the
the element A (w) records the number of retweets from
attention) and the source (the user who retweeted the
i to j over week w. For a given node, the in-degree cor-
message, or the source of the attention). We recorded
respondstothenumberofuserswhohaveretweetedsta-
1,219,282 retweets from June 2013 up until when the
tusesofthatnode,andtheout-degreecorrespondstothe
data collection ended. We also recorded 41,582 friend-
numberofuserswhosestatusthatnodehasretweeted. In
follower relationships among a select subset of the users
theexamplenetworkfromFig.3A,node1hasretweeted
alongwiththeirTwitter biographies,messagesofatmost
statuses of nodes 3, 4 and 7, and has had nodes 2, 6 and
140characterinwhichuserscandescribethemselves. All
8 retweet some of her own (i.e. the in-and out-degree of
datawerecollectedbySinniausingTwitterGnipPower-
node 1 are both three). A weakly-connected component
TrackAPI[72]. Wehavemadeavailablealistcontaining
is a group of nodes that are all mutually reachable if we
tweet IDs used in this study (see Data Statement).
ignorethedirectionoftheedges. Forexample,theinitial
There is an ongoing debate about the ethical implica- networkinFig.3Aconsistsofonlyoneweakly-connected
tions of using Twitter data for research. Some authors component, but its co-citation and bibliographic projec-
maintainthatthelackofcomplicatedprivacysettingson tions (defined below) have six and five components re-
Twittermeansthatmessagesplacedinthepublicdomain spectively.
areintendedtobethere;alternatively,otherauthorscon-
In a retweet network, the direction of the edge signi-
sider that posting tweets should not be interpreted as
fies an explicit declaration of interest (i.e. source nodes
permission to use tweets for research [39]. We believe
findcertainmessagesworthpassingalongtotheirfollow-
that the topic, analysis and results presented here serve
ers) and information flows in the opposite direction (i.e.
the public interest and pose no risk to users. None of
from the target nodes), as shown in Fig. 2. Such retweet
the tweets we analyse and reproduce here contain no-
networks have a distinct structure, with many weakly-
table amounts of sensitive or private material. Indeed,
connectedcomponentsandanabundanceof‘star’motifs,
the most prominent users in our data set also maintain
inwhichahighly-retweetednode(withhighin-degree)is
other online profiles and produce tweets for public con-
surroundedbymanynodesthatpointalmostexclusively
sumption.
to the star node. Figure 3B shows a typical network for
one week in our data with 34,000 nodes and about 4,000
weakly-connected components. Over 50% of the nodes
B. Construction of the different networks belong to a giant connected component (nodes in pur-
ple)whereaseachofthesmallercomponentscontainless
The number of ‘diabetes’ tweets follows weekly cycles that 1% of the nodes.
of activity (Fig. 1). Consequently, we group the data in A fundamental feature of retweet networks is the fact
weekly bins. Given that the date of the original mes- that they are directed (they may contain extreme asym-
sage and the date of its retweet are not always the same, metry of interest, ‘leaders’ and ‘followers’ and other
retweets are labelled by the date of the original posting. roles). Directionality entails additional computational
A Initial network Co-citation projection Bibliographic projection A Co-citation network
3 4 3 4 3 4
2 1 6 2 1 6 2 1 6 104
8 7 8 7 8 7
B Example of a Co-citation Bibliographic
retweet network
Apr 2013 Aug 2013 Dec 2013
FIG. 3: A: Projections of a retweet network. The origi- B Bibliographic network
nal retweet network is directed. The co-citation projection 105
joinsnodeswhoarethetargetsoftheinterestofothernodes.
Nodes 5 and 6 have both been rewteeted by node 4, hence
they are connected in the co-citation projection (edges in 104
red). In turn, nodes 2 and 8 have both retweeted statuses
by node 1, which is why they are connected in the biblio-
graphic projection (edges in magenta). Both of the projec-
tions have several disconnected components. B: Example of
retweet, co-citation and bibliographic networks constructed
from one week’s worth of interactions in our data. There are
approximately44,000nodes,eachcolouredaccordingtotheir
weakly-connected component in each network.
Apr 2013 Aug 2013 Dec 2013
Number of nodes
challenges, which is why it is often neglected. However, Number of components
Size of giant component
ignoring directionality in such settings destroys valuable Size of second component
information and can severely affect the results and their
interpretation [1]. Our analysis below takes the directed
FIG.4: A:Numberofnodes,numberofcomponentsandsize
and temporal nature of the network into full account.
of the two largest connected components in the co-citation
Co-citation and bibliographic projections of the projection through the observation period. B: Same mea-
retweet network: To understand not only who drives surements for the bibliographic projection.
conversations and produces influential content, but also
whichusersareinstrumentalinthedisseminationofcon-
tent,westudytwousefulnetworksderivedfromtheorig- activity (Fig. 3). The number of disconnected nodes in
inal retweet network: the co-citation and bibliographic the co-citation network is typically large (Fig. 4A). For
projections[33]. Theseprojectionsreflecttheasymmetry example,allnodeswhosein-neighbourshaveamaximum
of the original adjacency retweet matrix A(w), and pro- out-degree equal to 1 in the retweet network will be iso-
vide (a) information about the shared interests of users lated in the co-citation projection (Fig. 3).
who have retweeted tweets by the same authors (biblio- The bibliographic network projection is the converse of
graphic) and (b) information about whose tweets gener- the the co-citation network. It is also built from the
ate responses from the same users (co-citation). originalretweetnetworkA(w)andhasadjacencymatrix
Theco-citation network projection ofA(w)isanundi-
rected,weightednetworkdefinedonthesamesetofN(w) B(w)=A(w)A(w)T. (2)
nodesastheoriginalretweetnetworkwithadjacencyma-
This projection links pairs of users who have retweeted
trix C(w):
messages posted by at least one author in common; in
C(w)=A(w)TA(w). (1) other words, the bibliographic projection connects users
who share interests. In a retweet networks context the
An edge of the co-citation network C (w) exists when sizeofthelargestcomponentinthebibliographicprojec-
atleastoneuserhasretweetedmessagesfrombothusers tion is typically larger than in the co-citation projection
i and j during week w. Hence this network links authors (Figs. 3B and 4); this is due to the fact that, on average,
of tweets that elicit interest in users, even though they Twitter users retweet more than they are rewteeted.
themselvesmaybelongtodifferentspheresofinterestand Notethatallnodesintheoriginalretweetnetworkex-
istinbothprojections. However,dependingontheircon- posted by a small minority of ‘elite users’. On the other
nectivity (induced by the interest elicited or the interest hand, since the number of users who retweet is much
bestowed)theymayappearisolatedinoneorbothofthe largerthanthosewhosemessagesareretweeted, thebib-
projections. Figure 3 shows an illustration of the con- liographic projection has a much larger giant connected
structionoftheco-citationandbibliographicprojections component, with about 75% of the nodes.
in a simple example, as well as the retweet, co-citation Given the fragmented nature of the projection net-
andbibliographicnetworkscompiledfromatypicalweek works,wecomputehub/authorityscoresweight-averaged
in the data. over all components as follows. Let the co-citation net-
Follower network: In addition to the retweet net- work for a given week C have K weakly-connected com-
work, we also constructed a follower network for a small ponents(excludingcomponentsofsize1),whichwelabel
subset of users of interest (see Sec. IIIB2 below). In with the index k in order of decreasing size (i.e., k = 1
this network a directed connection between two nodes corresponds to the largest and k = K to the smallest
exists when the source node follows the target node on component). Therefore, C= (cid:76)K C , where C is the
Twitter (i.e., is subscribed to the target’s content). The N ×N adjacency matrix of the k-th component. For
interpretation of the follower network is similar to the each component k, we compute the authority score, v :
retweetnetwork(Fig.2)inthesensethatadirectedcon-
nection is a declaration of interest, with content flowing C v =λmaxv ,
in the opposite direction [1]. One key difference between
retweet and follower networks is that connections in the where λm k ax is the largest eigenvalue and v k is nor-
retweet network can be understood as localised expres- malised such that all its entries add up to 1 (i.e.,
sionsofinterestassociatedtoaspecifictweet,whereasin ||v k || 1 = 1). The authority score of the i-th user in
follower networks a connection may be understood as a component k is v k (i). We then aggregate the authority
more general (and stable) expression of interest. scores of all components into the weight-averaged vector
v= (cid:2) (N /N)vT, ..., (N /N)vT(cid:3)T . Thescoreforeach
node is weighed according to the size of the component
C. Computation of the hub and authority scores in which it is found, thus ensuring that the scores are
over time comparableandthatwedonotdiscardinformationfrom
the smaller components.
To extract the hub scores in each week we follow the
Hubandauthorityscoresprovideausefultooltoanal-
same procedure on matrix B.
yse directed networks [32]. Intuitively, a hub is a node
whose outgoing connections point to important nodes
in the retweet network (authorities); conversely, an au-
D. Topic extraction
thority is a node with many incoming connections from
hubs. The entries of the lead eigenvectors of the adja-
cency matrices of the co-citation and bibliographic pro- Topic extraction from the data proceeds in several
jectionsC(w)andB(w)correspondtotheauthority and steps. First, the tweets in the dataset are grouped in
hub centrality scores ofthenodesduringweekw. Anode weeklybins(asforthenetworksconstructedabove). For
may rank highly as hub, authority, both or none, as we each week, the raw text is pre-processed and a word co-
will show below. occurrence network is created. The probability that the
Henceforth, for notational simplicity, we drop the w tweets in each bin belong to different topics is computed
fromthematricesA(w),C(w)andB(w),butthedepen- using techniques from textual analysis and community
dence on w remains implicit. detection for graphs. Note that topics are extracted us-
An alternative way to understand hub and authority ing only the original tweets—retweets are excluded be-
scoresisthroughthesingularvaluedecomposition(SVD) cause they do not add any new topical information. The
of A: A = UΣVT, where U and VT are unitary ma- details of each of the steps for topic extraction are as
trices containing the left and right singular vectors, re- follows:
spectively, and Σ = diag(σ ) is the diagonal matrix of a. Text pre-processing: Priortotopicextraction,
theN singularvalues. Theentriesoftheleadingleftand the text of each tweet is processed in the following way:
right singular vectors of A correspond to the hub and
• Convert words to lowercase, e.g., the terms ‘di-
authority scores, respectively [40].
abetes’, ‘Diabetes’ and ‘DIABETES’ are all pro-
As explained above, the bibliographic and co-
cessed as the same word.
citation networks contain several disconnected compo-
nents (Figs. 3 and 4). The largest connected compo- • Remove all punctuation signs and non-
nent in a typical co-citation network in our dataset con- alphanumeric characters, i.e., we compare tweets
tains about 10-15% of the nodes, yet it is responsible based only on the words they contain.
for producing about 50% of messages that have at least
one retweet. This observation is consistent with Ref. [9] • Replace collocations for specific terms (e.g., ‘Type
which reports that about 50% of URLs on Twitter are 2’ or ‘T2D’ are replaced by ‘type2’) in order to ho-
Raw tweet Processed tweet
US FDA approves Johnson & Johnson diabetes drug, canagliflozin - usfdaapprovjohnsonjohnsondrugcanagliflozinreuterhealth
SAVOR-TIMI53setsnewstandardforcardiovascularoutcometrials savortimisetstandardcardiovascularoutcomtrialpharma
RESEARCH AND MARKETS: Type 2 Diabetes - Pipeline Review, researchmarkettype2pipelinreviewh2
Last Dec my son (then 4) was diagnosed with type 1 Diabetes. last dec diagnos type1 jdrf uk excel research prevent lifestyl cure
JDRF UK do excellent research into prevention, lifestyle and cure. walkforcur
#walkforcure
TABLE I: Examples of ‘raw tweets’ and their processed version prior to topic extraction.
mogenisetermsthatareknowntorefertothesame 4. We make the assumption that, given their brevity,
concept. each tweet can only belong to at most one topic.
This entails collecting only the assignments of top-
• Remove stop-words and special words (articles,
icstodocumentswithabnormallylargevalues(i.e.,
conjunctions, etc) [35], numbers and vestigial
the outliers) of P(t |d ), and discarding all other
URLs, which bear no topical information.
values. A tweet is assigned to a topic if P(t |d )>
• Stem the text [41]. This step strips suffixes so that pc(99)+IPR, where pc(99) is the 99th percentile
of the distribution and IPR is the inter-percentile
related words are mapped to the same stem, e.g.,
range: IPR= pc(99)−pc(1). Figure 5A shows an
‘house’, ‘houses’, ‘housing’ are replaced by ‘hous’.
example of this criterion where a tweet about the
Theresultofthispre-processingstepisillustratedinTa- FDA’s approval of a diabetes drug is assigned to a
ble I, which contains examples of ‘raw tweets’ and their topic that contains almost 2,000 tweets about this
processed version. event.
b. Topic extraction from word co-occurrence
graphs: After text pre-processing, we extract the top- This method for topic extraction is applied separately
ics from the tweets in each weekly bin in the following to each of the 43 weeks in our dataset. Figure 5B shows
steps: the number of topics in each week. The average number
of topics per week is 75.
1. FollowingLancichinettiet al [34],wecreateaword
adjacency graph for each weekly bin. The nodes in
the graph are words, and edges indicate two words E. Themes from topics:
that co-appear in tweets with higher probability
than one would expect at random (i.e., when the
In order to identify the dominant themes in the
probability of such an edge in a random network
dataset, weappliedopen thematic coding [38]tothetop-
with the same degree sequence is less than 0.05).
ics obtained in the previous section, for a random selec-
tion of weeks. In total, we analysed in-depth 290 topics
2. We analyse the word co-occurrence graph using
(from weeks 34, 39, 44 and 50 of 2013, and week 2 of
Markov Stability [42, 43] (in contrast with the use
2014) containing 63,000 processed tweets with identified
ofInfomapinRef.[34])toextractrelevantcommu-
topic.
nities(orgroups)ofwordsthatco-appearintweets
Theanalysisconsistedofreadingallthetweetsineach
more consistently than with words outside of their
topic, and assigning a label to the topic according to the
own group, and to consider groupings of different
dominant theme present. In general, one or two themes
granularity [1, 44].
clearly dominated each topic. In some cases, tweets in
3. Thecommunitiesofwordsareusedastheinputfor onetopicweretoomixedtoidentifyonesingletheme; in
theLatentDirichletAllocation(LDA)topicextrac- this case, we did not assign a theme label but we read
tionmethod[45]. Hence,thecommunitiesobtained the tweets to ensure that no new themes emerged within
with Markov Stability provide an initial guess for the topic. As per standard practice, we continued this
the topics to which a tweet is likely to belong. process until saturation; that is, until no new themes
Specifically,weassumethateachdocument(tweet) emerged from the evaluation of topics, and the repeti-
d belongs to a topic (community) t with a prior tionofexistingthemelabelswasconstant[37]. Thispro-
probability P (d |t ) that is proportional to the cesswasrepeatedtwicebythesameresearchertoensure
number of words that document d has in topic t . consistency. For ease of representation, we then grouped
LDA then proceeds iteratively to produce the pos- the themes identified through open thematic coding into
teriorprobabilitythatdocumentd belongstoeach thematic groups, as seen in Table II.
topict : P(t |d ). LDAalsoproducesP(h |t ),the In summary, our analysis of content progressed as fol-
probability of finding word h given topic t . lows: first,weautomaticallyextractedweeklytopicsfrom
di= "US FDA approves Johnson & Johnson diabetes drug,
10-4 10-3 10-2 10-1 100
ant connected component of this network comprises 880
nodes, with the rest being either isolated or suspended.
Toextractthecommunitiesinthenetworks, weusedthe
Markov Stability community detection framework as de-
scribed in Refs. [1] and [46]; we found a robust partition
of the network into seven communities of different size.
Welabelledthecommunitiesaccordingtothetypeofac-
counts that each contains (e.g., health agencies, diabetes
advocacy, research scientists, and so on).
III. RESULTS
B A. The ‘what’ of diabetes on Twitter
Asdescribedabove,thetweetsonourdatasetwerefirst
automaticallygroupedintotopics, andtheircontentwas
100 thenmanuallyassignedthemesusingopenthematiccod-
ing. These themes fall into one of four broad thematic
groups: healthinformation, news, socialinteraction, and
50 commercial. For tweets in these groups, although the
content and messages changed from week to week, the
themesremainedconstant. Inadditiontothesefourthe-
0 matic groups, we identified a fifth group of tweets with
Apr 2013 Jun 2013 Aug 2013 Oct 2013 Dec 2013 consistent and recurrent content. In this distinct group,
Date the specific content was repeated consistently across the
data sample (i.e., the tweets did not change from week
FIG.5: A:Box-plotoftheposteriorprobabilityofaspecific to week). In Table II, we present the thematic groups
tweet d after LDA optimisation. The red line indicates the and the themes within each group. Figure 6 contains a
medianLDAassignmentscoreforthistweet,theboxindicates visual summary of the thematic groups as ’word clouds’
the 25th and 75th percentiles, and the whiskers mark the with the 200 top words in each thematic group (i.e., the
interpercentile range (IPR, see text). There are three topics words most likely to appear in the topics), and ‘word
(redcrosses)thatlieoutsidetheinterpercentilerange,theone clouds’ with the usernames (scaled to size of number of
furthest to the right is designated as the topic of the tweet.
tweets) of the 200 most active users (available also as a
ThistweetbelongstoatopicwhichcoverstheFDA’sapproval
Supplementary spreadsheet (see Data Statement). Note
of a diabetes drug in late March 2013. The topic belongs
thatthetermdiabeteshasbeenremovedfromtheanaly-
to a theme the ‘Commercial’ thematic group in Table II. B:
sisbecauseitappearsinallofthetweets. Itisimportant
The number of topics extracted varies for each week with an
average of 75. to remark that the most active users (e.g., those who
tweet the most) are not necessarily the most important,
or ‘central’ in the different networks, from the point of
the tweets; second, we manually applied open thematic view of information generation.
coding until saturation to obtain a list of coded themes; We now discuss in more detail the themes, topics and
andthird,wemanuallyplacedthesethemesintothematic users found in each of the five thematic groups.
groups.
Inordertolearnwhichthemesdominatedintweetsby
themostinfluentialaccounts,wealsoanalysedthetweets 1. Health information tweets
by the top authority nodes. Here, tweets belonging to
each user were coded according to themes identified in One of the largest thematic groups consists of health
the thematic analysis. information, research findings, recommendations, advice
and warnings, which are all abundantly tweeted and
retweeted. Figure6Acontainsaword-cloudwiththe200
F. Interest communities in the follower network of mostprobablewordsinthetopicsofthisgroup(thetotal
authorities: numberofdistincttermsis29,647in90topicsfromopen
thematic coding). The top 10 words in this thematic
To complement the textual analysis above, we also group are: risk, type2, disea (disease, diseased), heart,
analysed the community structure of the follower net- research, month, obe (obese, obesity), fruit, news, awar
work of the 1,000 accounts with the highest cumulative (aware, awareness). Such terms are typical of tweets
authority score over the observation period. The gi- that fall within this broad thematic group, as seen in
Thematic group Theme
Publichealthmessages
Linkstoarticles,blogsandstudiesaboutrisks,treatmentandcure
Populationhealthfears
Publicityaboutoutreachandawarenesseventsandactivities
Health information
Adviceaboutdiabetesmanagementanddiagnosis
Lifestyle,dietandcookerytips,newsandlinks
Lifestoriesandexperiences(someformarketingpurposes)
Dangersofsugar,sugarreplacementsand/orsoda
Headlinelinkstoparticular‘breakthrough’studiesortechnologies
Celebritynews
Generalnewsarticlesaboutdiabeticpeopleorpets
Newsrelatingtothepharmaceuticalindustryandtheeconomy
Usersjokingabouthowwhattheyhaveeatenislikelytogivethemdiabetes
Chatterandsocialinterchangesthatincludementionsofdiabetes
Everydayexperiencesofdiabetes
Social Interaction
Stigmatisingcomments
Banterandsexualinnuendoandhumourrelatingtosweetnessanddiabetes
Advertisementsforjobsinthepharmaceuticalandcareindustries
Marketingforaspecificproduct,app,treatment,eventorservice
Commercial
Pharmaceutical,healthindustryandstockmarketupdatesandFDAapprovals
Saleofdiabetesdrugs,dietsortreatmentproductsonline
Songlyric: ‘Allthetime’byJeremih[47]
Songlyric: ‘I’mstillhappy’byBoosieBadazz[48]
Viral‘fact’: Alcoholreducesdiabetesrisk
Recurrent content
Viral‘fact’: Urinetasting
Themathematicsjoke
TABLEII:Thematicgroupsandassociatedthemesobtainedthroughopencodingappliedtothetopicsdetectedinthetweets
of the collected dataset.
Figure 6A and Supplementary Spreadsheet, as well as clude advice about diabetes management and diagnosis,
in Table III in the Appendix containing specific exam- cookery and diet tips, life stories and experiences, and
ples of tweets. The tweets in this group include informa- linkstoarticlesaboutnewtreatmentsorpromisingcures.
tion about diabetes (its causes, treatments and cures); Some tweets make claims about ‘curing’ diabetes, or of-
technologies and pharmaceutical products that can be fernaturalor‘miracle’treatments. Adviceofthisnature
used for managing it; as well as risks associated with the appears to be authoritative in tone and language, mak-
disease. Other health-related messages include publicity ing it difficult to distinguish it from advice disseminated
about outreach and awareness events, activities and in- by official health authorities. Links contained in such
formation. These individual messages are typically not tweetspointtodifferenttypesofauthoritativesourcesof
long-lived,andareonlyvisibleatthetopofauser’stime- content: from people who have first-hand experience of
line for short periods of time [49]. In general, there is a diabetes, to marketing agencies trying to sell a particu-
highturnoverinthecontentthateachuserisexposedto, larfood,supplementordevice,tohospitalsattemptingto
eventhoughmanymessages(e.g.,thosefromnewspapers communicate a specific health message. Home remedies
and online media) are posted multiple times. One of the and ‘miracle’ cures appear alongside health tips and rec-
themes that is less variable in this regard concerns the ommendations. Digests and newsletters specifically con-
dangers of sugar, sugar replacements and/or sodas. Its taining diabetes-related news (where the authors gather
frequency is unsurprising given the nature of diabetes as information from multiple sources around the internet
a problem of blood sugar regulation. It is worth men- and supply it to their followers) appear at different mo-
tioning that the largest spike of activity in our data (in ments in time and mix all such messages together.
November 2013, see Fig. 1) is in part due to a surge in
tweetsaboutWorldDiabetesDayon14November2013.
The health information in the collected sample does 2. News tweets
not appear to be directly or specifically associated with
healthpromotiongroups. Instead,suchtweetsareposted News-related tweets in the collected dataset typically
by users with different claims to expertise: individuals list a headline of a news article; they sometimes give the
who have experienced diabetes; personal trainers mar- first line of the story and often also provide a weblink to
keting their services; companies selling lifestyle products the complete story. These tweets rarely relate to health
or services; and other users with an apparent interest in promotion or education messages. Figure 6B contains
diabetes, cookery and healthy eating. These tweets in- the 200 most probable words theme (out of 10,416 in 29
topics). The top 10 words are: type2, risk, fruit, type1, On the other hand, stigmatising comments, especially
eat, peopl (people, peoples), blueberri (blueberry, blueber- tweets which blame diabetic people for bringing the dis-
ries), cut, research, juic (juice, juicer, juicing, juicy). ease on themselves through, for example, poor diet or
Some news-related tweets communicate research break- lack of physical activity, are abundant in the dataset.
through studies or technologies, which may be reported Figure 6C and the Supplementary Spreadsheet contain
with messages of hope for those who have diabetes, in numerous examples of profanity and pejoratives. Faced
particularT2. Justascommoninthisthematicgroupare with such messages, users with T1 diabetes frequently
tweets with celebrity news (especially about celebrities point out that it is important to differentiate between
diagnosed with diabetes) and diverse news about peo- T1 and T2, insinuating that while T1 diabetes is not a
ple or pets with diabetes. Another prominent theme in person’s ‘fault’, T2 may well be. Other tweets include
this group consists of tweets disseminating news head- calling other people ‘diabetic’ as an insult and wishing
lines about the pharmaceutical industry and stock mar- diabetes upon a person a user does not like. Table V
ket. Diabetes treatment is a lucrative industry because in the Appendix contains examples of social interaction,
diabetes is a chronic condition that requires regular and humorous and stigmatising tweets.
ongoingtreatment(ratherthancure),andsothedemand A distinct theme in this category consists of tweets
for pharmaceutical products and lifestyle aids is inelas- withsexualinnuendo. Attheirmildest,suchtweetsrefer
tic [50]. Furthermore, the number of people with T2 to boy-band members or other (often celebrity) ‘crushes’
is projected to increase dramatically in the future as a that are so sweet they are diabetes-inducing. At their
result of population ageing and obesity [51], which will most extreme, tweets joke that others’ bodily fluids and
further expand the market. Table IV in the Appendix genitals are so sweet they are diabetes-inducing. These
contains examples of tweets in this category. tweetscontainweblinkstopornographywebsitesorother
explicit material. Like the jokes discussed earlier, these
tweets might reflect a baseline awareness of the links be-
3. Social interaction and humorous tweets tween sugar and diabetes.
Twitter is not simply an information-sharing technol-
4. Commercial tweets
ogy, but also a space that permits (virtual) social inter-
action [3, 8]. Social interaction tweets use language dif-
ferentlytothethematicgroupsabove: theyaretypically As mentioned previously, diabetes is an industry with
informal in tone, their attention to spelling and gram- an attractive (and expanding) market: it is a chronic
mar is limited, and they often use exclamation marks condition which is currently incurable, and it requires
and punctuation to express fun, laughter, exasperation, constantandregulartesting,surveillanceandtreatment.
sarcasm, irony, and abuse. The top 10 words (out of Thetop10words(outof5,841wordsin20topics)inthis
31,061 in 97 topics) in this group are: give, health, food, group are: type2, drug, job, manag (manage, manager),
die, think, fat, year, diet, diseas (disease, diseased), cau care, health, marijuana, sale, test, forsal (for sale). See
(cause, causes, causing). See Fig. 6C for the theme’s Fig. 6D for the theme’s word-cloud and the most active
word-cloud. Users frequently joke about how what they users within this topic. People with diabetes depend on
have eaten is likely to give them diabetes, with a wide different technologies, consumables, health services, and
variety of sugary foods and drinks, junk foods and other pharmaceutical products. This commercial dimension of
‘unhealthy’ options being cited. Such tweets indicate a diabetes is reflected in many Twitter messages. Tweets
level of awareness of dietary guidelines and diabetes ae- concernedwithstockmarketlistingannouncements,FDA
tiology. Users have conversations and interact about a approval (e.g., Fig. 5A), court cases, and business re-
diversity of topics in a chatter that is not necessarily di- cruitment (for example, a company hiring a new CEO,
rectly related to diabetes but may include references to or advertising for new staff) are common. Table VI in
it. Peoplewhohavediabetes—particularlyT1—alsotalk theAppendixcontainstypicalexamplesofthesetypesof
about their daily experiences of their bodies, sugar man- message.
agement, and social acceptance or stigma; such tweets
may elicit retweets or messages of support from others.
Some users also talk in terms of “us” (with T1) and 5. Recurrent content
“them”(without). Forexample,oneusertalksaboutT1
asbeinga‘perk’orfeaturehe/shelooksforinaromantic Whilethespecificcontentoftweetsindifferentthemes
partner: varies over time, there are some tweets whose content
appears consistently across time over our dataset. The
Ihaven’tstoppedthinkingaboutthisgirlforseriously
top 10 words (out of 8,731 words in 19 topics) in this
like...a month. AND she has diabetes! #diabetes-
theme are: sugar, eat, blood, sweet, risk, type2, drink,
high, reduc (reduce, reducing, reduction), health. Fig-
Such chatter often elicits retweets and replies, including ure. 6E contains this theme’s word-cloud. There is a
messages of support, or appreciation of a joke. large number of tweets repeating lyrics from two specific
A Health information Most active users been reported to reduce diabetes [53]). These few spe-
cific facts appear intended to entertain or amuse. They
retainalmostidenticalphrasingovertime,withsustained
popularity. In fact, such facts are repeated more consis-
tently over time than other headlines, health messages
and reports.
B One of the most prominent instances of recurrent con-
tent in our data corresponds to various versions of a
mathematics-themedjoke. Atypicalinstanceofthisjoke
Math Problems: If Jim has 50 chocolate bars, and
eats 45, what does he have? Diabetes. Jim has dia-
Social interaction betes...
See Table VII in the Appendix for more versions of the
same joke. This joke appears consistently in our dataset
(44,130 times including retweets, Fig. 1). As with other
jokes about certain foods that are linked to diabetes, for
D Commercial this joke to be amusing or entertaining (which its sheer
volumesuggestsitistomany)itrequiresthatreadersand
retweeters have a minimum awareness of certain foods
that might contribute to diabetes. To highlight the con-
sistencywithwhichthemathematicsjokeappearsinour
data, we also show on Fig. 1 the number of tweets men-
E Recurrent content tioning the actor Tom Hanks. In October 2013, Tom
Hanks announced he had Type 2 diabetes, which was
discussed and shared widely on Twitter (13,454 tweets
inourdataset). Incontrasttothemathematicsjoke,the
number of tweets about Tom Hanks displays an abrupt
‘exogenous peak’ (evidence of external events affecting
the behaviour of a system [54]) followed by a steady re-
FIG. 6: Top 200 words and most frequent authors in each laxation to a baseline level.
of the thematic groups in Table II. The size of each word is
proportional to its probability of appearing in a topic in the
group. Thesizeoftheusernameisproportionaltothenumber
B. The ‘who’ of diabetes on Twitter
of tweets in the thematic group.
We now turn our focus to the analysis of the users in
the retweet networks extracted from our dataset. Fig-
rapsongs, bothofwhichcontaintheterm‘diabetes’(see
ure 6 provides a visual illustration of the users that
Table VII). Of these, ‘All the Time’ by Jeremih [47] was
postedmoretweetsinthetopicscontainedwithineachof
released in 2013, so it is possible that the appearance of
the thematic groups. Although helpful, this figure does
onelinefromthesonginmanytweetsinoursamplemay
notprovideinformationabouthowimportanttheseusers
be linked to marketing and initial responses to the song.
areperceivedtobeinthecommunity,ortheimpactthey
The lyric repeated from the song relates to the sexual
haveintheconversationaboutdiabetes. Therefore,inor-
innuendo discussed previously, so its continued presence
der to understand who are the key users that influence
may result from it being used to express a joke rather
diabetes-related content on Twitter over time, we exam-
thanasadirectanddeliberatecitation(indeed,thesong
ine the hub and authority scores of all nodes for each of
name or artist are rarely mentioned). The second song
the weekly retweet networks from June 2013 to January
‘I’m Still Happy’ by Lil Boosie (now Boosie Badazz) [48]
2014 (see Section IIC for a description of the method-
was released on a 2010 digital mixtape, suggesting that
ology). We then examine the content generated by the
the lyric has been consistently attractive to users over
mostimportantusers(accordingtotheirhubandauthor-
time. This lyric is about determination in the face of
ity scores), and we finally analyse their follower network
challenges; the artist himself has T1 and has talked with
(i.e., who follows whom within this group of important
his fans about the challenge of managing his diabetes.
users).
In addition, several specific viral ‘facts’ and jokes are
postedfrequentlyandrepeatedly(forexample,thattast-
ingurineforsweetnesswasamethodtodetectdiabetesin
the past [52], or that consuming alcohol moderately has 1. Authorities and hubs in the weekly retweet networks
User Rank Aggregate score Weeks Description
0.1 @diabetesfacts 1 1.099528 25 News and information about diabetes from the editors of @EverydayHealth (see below).
0.1 @diabetesblogs Updates from Diabetes Daily, a website and blog founded in 2005 by entrepreneur
2 0.797916 29 David Edelman, and Elizabeth Zabell a T1D patient.
0.1 @JDRF 3 0.779938 31 G wi l t o h b a a l c f o u n n n d e e c r t o io f n T 1 to D t h re e s d e i a s r e c a h s , e c . r H ea a t s e d s t a ro n n d g l e v d o l b u y n t T e 1 e D r b p a a s t e ie . ns or people
0.1 @AmDiabetesAssn 4 0.775563 31 A gr m ou e p ri c o a f n p D hy ia s b ic e ia te n s s A in s s 1 o 9 c 4 ia 0 t . ion: Advocacy and research organisation founded by a
0.1 @DiabetesSocMed Diabetes Social Media Advocacy is a program provided by the Diabetes Community
5 0.671353 31 Advocacy Foundation. It was founded by Cherise Shockley (T1D patient) and
obtained not-for-profit status in 2012.
0.1 @diabetesalish 6 0.637761 31 D 8 i y a e b a e r t s e , s a b n l d o g w g h e o r, s a e d f v a o m c i a ly t e a l a s n o d h w as ri t a e r s , t K ro e n ll g y, h w is h t o o r w y a o s f i d t. iagnosed with T1D aged
0.1 @Diabetes_Sanofi 7 0.627676 31 Diabetes division of Sanofi, a global pharmaceutical company.
0.1 @DiabetesAssoc 8 0.586427 31 Canadian Diabetes Association, founded in 1953 to unite provincial branches.
0.1 @WDD 9 0.543949 28 W Fe o d r e ld r a D ti i o a n b , e a te n s u D m a b y r e (N lla o v o e rg m a b n e is r a 1 t 4 io ) n i s u a n it c in a g m o p v a e ig r n 2 l 3 e 0 d n b a y t i t o h n e a I l n d te ia r b n e a t t e io s n a a s l s D o ia ci b a e ti t o e n s s
that was founded in 1950.
0.1 @EverydayHealth 10 0.524492 31 M wi a th rk A e O tin L g , G fir o m o g fo le u , n Y d o e u d T i u n b 2 e 0 , 0 th 2 e b M y a B y e o n C W lin o i l c in t h a e n d A M BC ik . e Keriakos; it has partnerships
Jun13 Aug13 Oct13 Dec13 Jan14
Top 10 users by aggregate authority score
FIG. 7: Top ten users by aggregate authority score, number of weeks with nonzero authority score, and brief description.
a. Authority nodes: Figure7showsthescoreover @WDD (which belongs to the International Diabetes
timeforthetoptenauthoritiesrankedbytheiraggregate Federation). The latter account is established especially
weekly score. Of these authorities, nine are institutional topromoteWorldDiabetesDay(November14),although
accounts andone belongs to an individual blogger, Kelly it disseminates diabetes information and messages all
Kunik(@diabetesalish). Thisbloggerisadiabetesadvo- year round. These associations were originally founded
catewhohashadT1forover30yearsandisinvolvedwith by physicians and they focus on advocacy and research.
a number of diabetes advocacy organisations. She also The remaining three authorities in the top ten be-
administrates the Diabetesaliciousness blog [73], which long to not-for-profit organisations founded by people
‘spreads diabetes validation through humour, ownership whohaveexperiencedT1. TheseorganisationstargetT1
and advocacy’. Kunik’s tweets and blog posts are hu- specifically: one is a funding body (@JDRF, an organ-
morous, casual, and interpersonal in style. isation previously known as Juvenile Diabetes Research
Three of the institutional accounts belong to Foundation), and the other two are blog platforms that
stockmarket-listed commercial ventures (i.e., established hostdiscussionsanddisseminateinformation(@diabetes-
with the purpose of generating profits for shareholders). blogs and @DiabetesSocMed).
Ofthese,two(@diabetesfactsand@EverydayHealth)be- Figure 8 shows the complement of the cumulative dis-
long to Everyday Health Media. This company, which tribution (CDF) (i.e., 1−CDF) of the aggregate author-
does not claim to have any specific diabetes expertise, ityscores(bluetriangles). Thedistributionofauthorities
owns and operates a range of brands. It was founded shows that over 95% of users involved in a retweet event
in 2002 by Ben Wolin (an entrepreneur who has pre- do not feature as an authority at all (in our weekly bin-
viously worked for Beliefnet, acquired by News Corp., ning). Users who do attain a non-zero authority score
PBS, Warner Brothers and Tribune Interactive), and fall into two categories:
Mike Keriakos (a media sales expert who began his ca-
(i) users with a sporadic or marginal appearance (i.e.,
reer at Procter and Gamble and who built partnerships
they appear in only a handful of weeks and/or not
between Everyday Health and AOL, Google, YouTube
in the giant components of the weekly co-citation
and the ABC). The other listed company account, @Di-
networks). Theseusersareconcentratedinthelong
abetes Sanofi, belongs to the global pharmaceutical firm
plateau in Fig. 8.
Sanofi, which produces diabetes treatments.
Another three of the top ten authorities correspond to (ii) users who appear more regularly usually as part
national and international diabetes associations: @Am- of the weekly giant connected components. These
DiabetesAssn(theAmericanDiabetesAssociation)@Di- usersconstitutethetop2%intheheavytailofhigh
abetesAssoc (the Canadian diabetes association) and scores in Fig. 8.
10-15 10-10 10-5 100
100% These hub nodes have a highly variable number of fol-
lowers. For instance, in August 2016 @Diabetes Month
Top 2% 10% had over twenty thousand followers, whereas @abdSauce
had about 50. What all hubs have in common is a high
Top 600 1% rate of retweeting and a feeble, unsustained presence
authorities
throughout the observation period. Figure 9A shows the
0.1% scores over time for the top ten hubs based on aggregate
Top 20 hubs score,alongwiththenumberofweeksinwhichtheyhave
anonzeroscore. Thedatashowsthat, inmostcases, the
highaggregatehubscoreistheresultofa‘one-off’surge.
We thus term these ‘intermittent hubs’.
The biographical information provided by these users
about who they are and what they do is sparse, often
vague, and difficult to corroborate. For example, the ac-
count @1MEDICAL2NEWS claims to be a Dr Richard
FIG. 8: Cumulative distribution of aggregate hub (red) and
Billard from Los Angeles, but while the account had a
authority (blue) scores on a doubly-logarithmic scale. The
high level of activity on Twitter in our data (and un-
horizontaldotted-linesshowtheproportionofnodeswithzero
til August 2014) there is no other evidence online that
aggregate hub (<10%) and authority ((cid:39)95%) scores.
this doctor exists. Given the extremely active Twitter
account, it is unusual that this doctor has absolutely no
other online presence. The rate at which this particular
In the Supplemental Spreadsheet, we provide the top
user retweeted (on average, 65 times per day), together
1000 accounts by aggregate authority score as a further
with the lack of any original tweets (or non-retweets),
resourceforresearch. Aswiththetoptenusersdiscussed
further suggests that it could have been an automated
above, this longer list contains accounts of known com-
account assigned an authoritative-sounding alias.
mercial, public and advocacy organisations, as well as
medical schools, hospitals, individual activists and blog- Figure 8 shows the complementary CDF of aggregate
gers. In addition, we note the appearance of academic hub scores for all users (red squares). In contrast with
publishers(@bmj latest,ranked55,@NEJM,ranked67); theauthorityscores,mostusers(∼90%)haveanon-zero
comedians(@ChelcieRice,ranked28,@SherriEShepherd, aggregate hub score), and the split between low scoring
ranked 85); news and media outlets (@medical xpress, and high scoring hubs is more even, with around 50% of
ranked 40, @foxnewshealth, ranked 82); entertainment the∼1.2Muserscontainedintheheavy-tailedpartofthe
(@FoodPorn, ranked 197); and large health-oriented or- distribution. There is a distinct bend at the right end of
ganisations (@WHO, ranked 88, @NIH, ranked 111), all the heavy tailed regime of the distribution that contains
of which have a focus much broader than diabetes. the top 20 users by aggregate hub score, most of which
These accounts disseminate content and information have been discussed above.
aboutdiabetesonTwitterefficiently,withmessagesthat Toobtainaclearerpictureof‘persistent hubs’, wecre-
elicit a wide, measurable response through re-tweets and atedanadditionalactivityrankingofhubsbynumberof
replies from the general population. The sustained pres- weeks in which the users have a nonzero hub score (Fig-
ence of the top authorities (i.e., the sustained strictly ure 9B). The top hub according to this persistence score
positive authority score in Fig. 7) is an indication that is still @1MEDICAL2NEWS, which is a hub in each of
these users consistently produce content that resonates the31weeksforwhichwecomputedthehubscores. An-
with the general Twitter-using population. other noteworthy appearance is @diabetesalish, who is
b. Hub nodes: The top ten accounts by aggre- also a top ten authority, and who was active as a hub in
gate hub score have a markedly different character to each week as well. The top 1000 (intermittent and per-
the authorities, both in behaviour and types of users. In sistent) hub accounts are included in the Supplemental
the context of a retweet network, hubs are connectors; Spreadsheet as a resource for further research.
theyforwardinformationgeneratedbyauthoritiesacross c. Authorities vs. hubs: Our results in Figs. 7, 8
Twitter. The top accounts by aggregate hub score over and9showthatthebehaviourofthetopauthoritiesand
time (see Fig. 9A and the Supplemental Spreadsheet) hubs in our data is fundamentally different: top author-
contain: content aggregators (i.e., accounts that gather ities tend to have a more sustained presence throughout
internetcontentforre-usesuchas@1MEDICAL2NEWS the observation period than top hubs. We therefore in-
or @Diabetes Month); accounts designed to promote vestigatethecombinedcharacterisationofusersinterms
products like @reTouchMD; automated accounts (e.g., of joint aggregate hub and authority scores. Figure 10
so-called ‘robots’); and some individual accounts. Some shows the accounts with high hub and authority scores
oftheseaccountshavebeensuspended(@shaschneider1); (i.e., in the global top 2% in both rankings). It is rele-
have become inactive (@1MEDICAL2NEWS); or have vant to study users that have a prominent role as both
seemingly changed hands (@abdSauce) since the data hub and authority. These include not only the the blog-
was originally collected. ger @diabetesalish and the advocacy group @Diabetes-
User Rank Aggregate score Weeks User Rank Aggregate score Weeks
0.2 @1MEDICAL2NEWS @1MEDICAL2NEWS
1 0.391319 31 1 0.391319 31
0.2 @Diabetes_Month 2 0.294995 6
@askmanny 2 0.006057 31
0.2 @reTouchMD 3 0.253294 19
@diabetesalish 3 0.00444 31
0.2 @shaschneider1
@angelvega307
4 0.252854 3 4 0.012851 30
0.2 @DHDrugstore 5 0.186591 10
@aussiecoley 5 0.010768 30
0.2 @abdSauce
@DiabetesClothes
6 0.184703 15 6 0.009532 30
0.2 @dr_bolajidauda 7 0.148287 14
@theNGdoc 7 0.006306 30
0.2 @Tommyjyde 8 0.144251 12
@diaTribeNews 8 0.004475 30
0.2 @mybalony
@DiabetesMine
9 0.109222 7 9 0.003196 30
0.2 @DiabesityChat 10 0.107601 4
@PortblPancGrl 10 0.001445 30
Jun13 Aug13 Oct13 Dec13 Jan14 Jun13 Aug13 Oct13 Dec13 Jan14
Top 10 users by aggregate hub score Top 10 users by weeks with nonzero hub score
FIG.9: Twodifferentrankingsofhubnodes. A:Toptenusersrankedbytheiraggregatehubscore,alongwiththenumberof
weeks in which they appear with a nonzero hub score. B: Top ten users ranked by their number of weeks with a nonzero hub
score. Note the change in the scale of the y-axis.
SocMed,butalsothefollowingusers(highlightedinblack • @theNGdoc: Nigeria Diabetes Online Community,
in Fig. 10): anon-governmentorganisationlaunchedin2013to
provide empowerment, education and support for
• @JDRFAdvocacy: a US Government-funded or- diabetics in Nigeria. An original idea by Cherise
ganisation which focuses on building support for Showkley (@DiabetesSocMed), the site is officially
T1D research; the advocacy account of @JDRF; recognised by the International Diabetes Federa-
(authority rank, hub rank) = (38, 234). tion, and two of its Directors are medical doctors;
(authority rank, hub rank) = (127, 200).
• @askmanny: Manny Hernandez, a prominent
Venezuelan-American diabetes advocate who has • @BattleDiabetes: Account of
haddiabetessince2002,andwhoseprofessionalex- informationaboutdiabetes.com, a website
pertise is in social media, technology and health with no details about who it belongs to, but which
(authority rank, hub rank) = (12, 208). traces to Jill Knapp, a T2 diabetic who is an
advocate for the American Diabetes Association;
• @amidiabetic: DiabetesadvocateandwriterStuart (authority rank, hub rank) = (49, 442).
Wimbles, who runs a diabetes information website
andreportedlyhasT1D,althoughthereislittlead- • @KellyRawlings: Diabetes advocate, T1 diabetic,
ditional information about him online; (authority journalist, and editor of Diabetes Forecast, a pub-
rank, hub rank) = (20, 366). licationoftheAmericanDiabetesAssociation;(au-
thority rank, hub rank) = (107, 387).
• @DiabetesMine: Awebsite/blog/newsletterrunby
Healthline,aconsumerhealthinformationwebsite. • @diaTribeNews: Account of the diaTribe Founda-
The company has a large team of staff and a panel tion, a non-profit organisation founded by T1 di-
ofthreemedicaladvisors(aProfessorofEmergency abetic Kelly Close to help people with diabetes
Medicine,adruginformationspecialist,andaphar- to live better lives. Close was previously a finan-
macist) who provide insights into user needs; (au- cial sector analyst and also runs Close Concerns,
thority rank, hub rank) = (13, 208), a healthcare information firm focusing on diabetes
and obesity; the Foundation Board contains one
• @KayleighAdams3: Account currently suspended; medicaldoctor; (authorityrank,hubrank)=(171,
(authority rank, hub rank) = (300, 64). 273).
Authority percentile
elitnecrep
2. Extended analysis of authorities: content and
relationships.
mybalony dr_bolajidauda
DiabesityChat
deeonak dee_yor Theanalysissofarhasestablishedthepersistenceand
relevance of a relatively small number of authorities in
the collected retweet networks. To further our under-
WeightLossBio KayleighAdams3 standing of the group of authorities, we perform two
seyeben further analyses. First, we analyse in detail the the-
InkStain t1 _ in D ternationa th l eNGdoc askmann D y iabetesSocMed matic content produced by the top ten authorities. Sec-
TheB C e D te C s C B h lo ro g nic diaTr M ib y e G N l e u ws JDR a F m A i d d v ia o b c e a d t c ic i y abetesalish ond, we extract the network of followers within the top
TwiceDiabetes KellyRawlings DiabetesMine
BattleDiabetes 1,000 authorities and characterise the interest communi-
diabeteshf ties within the network of authorities [1, 46].
SweeterCherise IntDiabetesFed
a. Topical analysis of authorities: We analyse
AmDiabetesAssn
SherriEShepherd
D_Advocates txtngmypancreas into which of the topics and themes obtained through
ourearlieranalysisofthewholedataset, thetweetsfrom
CardioNews TeamNovoNordisk the top ten authorities are classified. All of the top ten
2% 1% 0.1% 0.01% 0.001% authorities post messages frequently and consistently in
all the themes listed under the thematic group ‘Health
Information’ in Table II. Some ‘News’ related tweets are
FIG. 10: Twitter accounts with the highest combined aggre-
also featured, although these are less common.
gatehubandauthorityscore(top2%onbothrankings,ona
Two accounts, @Diabetes Sanofi and @diabetesblogs,
logarithmicscale). Thecolourofeachdatapointcorresponds
donotappeartobedominatedbyanyoneofthethemes
to the user’s combined hub/authority score; blue denotes a
listed, but contain a mixture of all the ‘Health Informa-
lower hub or authority both (relative to the other accounts
tion’ themes. Two other accounts, @WDD and @Am-
onshownhere),atransitiontowardsreddenotesstrengthon
both scores. Shown here are the usernames of 35 accounts DiabetesAssn participate in themes that are related to
that score highly both as hubs and as authorities; usernames outreach and advocacy activities, events and news. The
in black are discussed further in the text. not-for-profit organisation and research funding body
@JDRF produces tweets that contain life stories and ex-
periences of diabetes sufferers more than any other top-
ten authority.
• @MyGlu: T1DExchange,anon-profitorganisation
Two accounts, @diabetesfacts and @EverydayHealth
providing connectivity for people whose lives are
(owned by the same company) focus predominantly on
affected by diabetes. The site’s leadership team
lifestyle and diet-related tips, hints and advice. Unlike
contains a physician and pediatric endocrinologist;
the other authorities, these do not produce outreach or
butitalsomakesacleardisclaimerthatdiscussions
advocacy messages at all. Typical messages posted by
on the site should not be a substitute for medical
these accounts include:
advice; (authority rank, hub rank) = (122, 326).
@diabetesfacts: Tipsonadjustingyourinsulinpump
duringexercisefromdiabeteseducatorGaryScheiner
• @abdSauce: Tophubaccount,hasbeentakendown
@EverydayHealth: Medical costs for people with
or switched hands since data were collected; a Pin- #diabetes are more than 2x those of people
terest account with the same handle belongs to without it. Are you budgeting for diabetes?
betesOnlineCommunity(@theNGdoc);(authority
@EverydayHealth: The best beverages to quench
The vast majority of the tweets from these two accounts
providealinkbacktothecompany’swebsite,whichoffers
• @dr bolajidauda: Top hub account, no longer ac- articles containing health and lifestyle advice.
tive at the time of analysis; (authority rank, hub The messages posted by the accounts @diabetesalish
rank) = (637, 7). and @DiabetesSocMed are dominated by a mix of social
interactions, banter and advocacy. They participate in
newstopics,buttoalesserdegreethantheothertop-ten
In addition to posting messages that evoke a broad authorities. Their tone is different to the others: it is
response (as authorities), these users also engage by informal and conversational rather than authoritative or
retweeting and replying to messages posted by other informational. For example:
users(ashubs). Theemptyupper-rightcornerinFig.10
@DianetesSocMed: HappyMother’s(aunts,furbaby
indicates that there are no accounts at the very top as
moms,godmoms,etc.) toallthewomeninthedia-
both hubs and authorities. betescommunity! Haveagreatday!
and public health institutions and foundations; diabetes ad-
vocates, researchers, activists, and patients; hospitals
@diabetesalish: #dblog:Dear240 #bgnow: You
and medical schools; academic and mainstream publish-
R but fleeting & temporary, I am perma-
nently fabulous. #Iwin #diabetes #doc #dsma ers, media, and personalities; companies. The most cen-
ank [55, 56] (a proxy for importance) are users with a
which links to a blog posting about the user’s experi-
broad reach and not diabetes-specific:
ence with diabetes. Two other users, @diabetesblogs
and @DiabetesAssoc, also tweet some social and inter- 1. Centers for Disease Control & Prevention (CDC),
personal messages. @CDCgov (ranked 65 as an authority in the previ-
Two accounts, @diabetesblogs and @diabetesalish oc- ous section).
casionally feature marketing or product promotion mes-
sages. Such instances of marketing are to be expected, 2. National Institutes of Health, @NIH (authority
as some bloggers generate income by advertising goods rank 111)
andservices, andsponsoringblogadvertisinginthisway
3. New York Times-Health, @NYTHealth (authority
is not regulated by governments. In this case and oth-
ers, while marketing might not be made explicit to other
users, it is still possible that ostensibly non-commercial 4. World Health Organization, @WHO (authority
accounts are also practising marketing, especially ac- rank 88)
counts owned by stockmarket-listed firms.
The topics where the highest number of top ten au- 5. CDC flu updates, @CDCFlu (authority rank 87)
thorities converge are related to advocacy and aware-
6. RecallinformationfromtheUSFoodandDrugAd-
ness. For example, a topic about Diabetes Blog Week
ministration (FDA), @FDArecalls (authority rank
in May 2013 gathered 6 of the top ten authorities: @di-
abetesalish, @diabetesblogs, @DiabetesSocMed, @Dia-
betes Sanofi, @diabetesfacts, and @EverydayHealth. In 7. News about medical research and health advice
other weeks, the top 10 authorities appear together in fromtheNewYorkTimes,@nytimeswell(authority
topics related to promotion of blogs by diabetics (using rank 412)
the hashtag #dblogs, which appears in 15,901 tweets in
thedataset),anddiabetessocialmediaawareness(using 8. National Public Radio-Health, @NPRHealth (au-
the hashtag #dsma, which is promoted by @Diabetes- thority rank 336)
SocMed and appears in 10,945 tweets).
9. USOfficeonWomen’sHealth,@womenshealth(au-
b. Analysis of the authority follower network:
thority rank 93)
Inordertounderstandhowtheuserswithhighauthority
scores interact with each other, we have mined Twitter
10. New England Journal of Medicine, @NEJM (au-
further to extract and analyse the follower network of
thority rank 67)
the top 1000 authorities by aggregate score (see Supple-
mental Spreadsheet). In this network, each of the top Thehighcentralityofaccountsrelatingtohealthresearch
1000 authorities is a node and a directed connection be- and information (@NIH, @NEJM, @CDCgov, @WHO,
tween two nodes indicates that the source node ‘follows’ @CDCFlu, @womenshealth), health-specific news media
the target node on Twitter. (@NYTHealth, @nytimeswell, @NPRHealth), health ad-
This directed network has a large weakly connected vocacy (@WHO) and commercial activities relating to
component of 880 nodes (see Fig. 11)—the rest of the foodsandmedicines(@FDArecalls)indicatesthathealth
nodesareeitherisolated(ahandfulareconnectedtoonly in general is a key concern to users in this network. Di-
onenode)orhavesincebeendeletedorblocked. Wework abetes is one health concern, but it is not isolated from
below with this network of 880 Twitter users and their others.
follower relationships. Beyond a ranking of centrality, it is important to ex-
It is important to note that, unlike the retweet net- tractinformationaboutrelevantcommunitiesinthisfol-
works studied up to this point, the follower network is lower network, so as to reveal information about who
not ‘conversation-centric’. In a retweet network, the ex- the authorities are and about their interests. A com-
istenceofaconnectionistheresultofoneuserretweeting munity in a network is usually defined as a highly co-
amessagecontainingtheterm‘diabetes’atleastonce. In hesive group of nodes, with above-expected connections
contrast,inthefollowernetworkadirectededgeindicates within the group [57]. In directed networks such as the
an interest by the ‘follower’ to receive information from followernetwork,wedefinecommunitiesintermsofflows
the ‘followed’ on a more permanent basis. This decla- of information, i.e. as groups of nodes in which inter-
ration of interest may reflect more general information est or information is retained and circulated. To extract
beyond the specific retweets about diabetes. such interest communities, we use the Markov Stability
As discussed above, the top 1000 authorities form a framework [42, 43], a dynamical framework especially
heterogeneous group of users, including, among others: well-suited to extract directed communities [1, 44]. In
Follower network of authorities Interest communities with self-description word clouds
C2: Lifestyle and well-being
C6: Humour
C5: Tesco-related
C4: Celebrities and wider public
C1: Diabetes-related
C3: Science writers and media
C0: Health and medicine
FIG. 11: A: The Twitter follower network of the top authorities. The nodes correspond to the 1000 users with the highest
aggregateauthorityscoreandthefollowernetworkwasobtainedbyminingTwitterinSeptember2015. Theusersarecoloured
according to their interest community, as obtained through the analysis of the follower network using Markov Stability. We
find 7 main communities (there are an additional six very small communities not shown). B: The authority follower network
coarse-grained by the obtained communities. Word clouds of the Twitter biographies of the users in each interest community
werecomputedaposteriori tohelpestablishthethematiccontentofeachofthesevengroups,assummarisedinthedescription.
Thedirectedarrowsreflectthedirectionofinterestbetweengroups,andthewidthofthearrowsisproportionaltothenumber
of connections between the groups.
this follower network, we found a robust partition into C3 Science writers and media: This commu-
seven main interest communities (Fig. 11B) and six ad- nity contains science writers (e.g., @bengoldacre)
ditional communities with three nodes or fewer. Each of and popular scientific publications, British media,
the seven larger communities contains a distinct group and biotech-industry related accounts (11% of the
ofuserscharacterisedbydomainofactivity,background, nodes, in orange).
interests or employer (see Supplemental Spreadsheet for
the full list): C4 Celebrity and wider public: This commu-
nity contains celebrities, men’s publications, and
C0 Health and medicine generalist accounts: celebritydoctor@DrOz(5%ofnodes,indarkblue).
This community, the largest in the network (30%
of the nodes, light blue in Fig. 11), contains many C5 Tesco-related: In this community, most accounts
accounts with high pagerank (including all the top areeitherownedbytheUKretailerTescoorbyits
10 by pagerank listed above). Most members are employees (3% of the nodes, in yellow).
related in general to health and medicine. For
example, public health bodies, hospitals, medical C6 Humour: This community contains comedians,
schools, academic publishers, the health divisions parody, novelty accounts, and others (2% of the
of mainstream media, and commercial entities. nodes, in purple).
C1 Diabetes-related users: This community (28% Through this succinct analysis of the follower network
of nodes, in green) contains the overwhelming ma- of authorities we obtain a clearer global picture of: the
jority of the diabetes-centred accounts discussed general participants in the diabetes-specific discussions
earlier, including associations, funders, advocates analysed earlier; the groups of interests that are present;
and patients, and companies. All of the top 10 au- the audiences involved in the debate; and how they re-
thorityaccountsinFig.7belongtothiscommunity. late to each other. For instance, as Fig. 11B shows, the
largestcommunity(C0),whichcontainsgeneralisthealth
C2 Lifestyle and well-being users: This commu- and medicine agencies, is clearly seen as a reference by
nity contains accounts related to lifestyle and well- all other communities, and especially by the three other
being advice, publications, natural and alterna- largecommunities: C1(Diabetes),C2(Life-style)andC3
tive remedies, detox, health and organic foods and (Sciencewritersandmedia). Thereareotherclearasym-
products (17% of the nodes, in red). metriesinthefollower-followedrelationships: C2-lifestyle
accounts strongly follow C1-diabetes accounts (but this styleovertimeastheycontinuetobepostedandshared.
followingisnotreciprocatedtothesameextent),whereas Humorous tweets, banter, jokes and social engagement
C2usersdonotstronglyfollowC3-sciencewriters/media (both supportive and stigmatising) are common in our
accounts (which largely ignore C2). The connection be- data. Tweetswithsuchcontenthaveadifferenttoneand
tween C1-diabetes and C3-science writers/media is not vocabulary than tweets containing authoritative posts,
strong in either direction. The presence of the UK re- formal health messages or news headlines. This obser-
tailerTescoasadistinctcommunity(C5)inthisnetwork vation is in line with previous reports, which have found
isalsonoteworthy;Tescoisahigh-profilesupporterofthe thatthemostretweetedtweetsareemotionallyevocative
charity Diabetes UK (@DiabetesUK, in C1) [74]. As we (either humorous or evoking anger) [46, 62, 63]. More-
have previously noted, humour is a prominent feature in over, we also find that these tweets appear on Twitter
ourdatasets,anditmakesanothersignificantappearance morepersistentlyovertimethanothertweetsinthesam-
here. Community C6, which contains many comedy and ple (Fig. 1). From a health promotion perspective, this
parody accounts. Parody and comedy communities have highlights a need to consider not only the consistency of
also been observed in other follower networks obtained slogans or lines in the messages, but also their style and
from different topical issues [1]. To provide a visual in- sentiment. The importance of sentiment in promoting
terpretation of the communities found, Figure 11B also dietary choices has also been discussed in Refs. [64–66].
contains word-clouds constructed from the Twitter bi-
The abundance of jokes and sexual innuendo about
ographies of the members in each community. The word
foods and substances that contribute to diabetes indi-
clouds are aligned with our descriptions of the interest
cate at least a basic understanding of diabetes, some of
communities. In particular the members of communi-
itscauses,anditsconnectiontobloodsugar. Theembed-
ties C0, C1, C2, C3 and C5 use consistently-themed lan-
dingofsuchfundamentalunderstandingsaboutdiabetes
guage to describe themselves. In contrast, the members
in online social media may be the result of health efforts
of the celebrity and humour communities (C4 and C6)
in nutrition over the past decades. This observation is
are heterogeneous in their self-descriptions, yet clearly
at odd with assumptions that more health education is
identifiable through examination of their usernames. As
required to help people to understand the sorts of foods
noted in [1], the word-clouds obtained from the biogra-
which might contribute to the development of diabetes.
phies can be thought of as an independent annotation or
Furthermore, such use of humour may imply a sense of
‘self-description’ of the communities. It is important to
powerlessness to make ‘healthy’ choices as users seem-
remarkthatthebiographieswerenotusedintheanalysis
inglymockhealthadvicewhenfacedwithrealitiesofthe
of the network.
food and drink products they encounter on a daily ba-
sis [67].
Whenitcomestothe‘who’ofdiabetesonTwitter,our
IV. DISCUSSION
analysis shows a clear separation between the relatively
few accounts that produce the most engaging content
Twitter is a source of information and interaction for (authorities), and the broader audiences that dissemi-
a growing section of the world’s population [58]. Hence, nate and respond to it (hubs), as seen in Fig. 10). Only
understanding online conversations around health issues about10%oftheaccountsinourdataset(approximately
on Twitter (and social media platforms more broadly) is 120,000)producetweetsthatevokesome(heterogeneous)
important, especially since such platforms are frequently response(Fig.8). Amongthetopauthorityaccounts,we
consideredaspossibletoolsinpublichealthoutreachand find a mix of stockmarket-listed firms; public, civil and
health promotion initiatives [20, 21, 59–61]. Such initia- grassrootsorganisations; andindividualswhohaveexpe-
tives are designed based on extended assumptions about rience as diabetes patients and care-givers. The engage-
the Twitter health landscape, the messages which domi- ment levels of all authorities are sustained throughout
nate it, and the interactions of users within it. However, the observation period, and it is difficult to clearly dis-
detailed data-driven research can help ascertain the va- cernbetweenthesedifferentgroupsbasedonthecontent,
lidity of such assumptions and enrich our understanding style or theme of their tweets alone. These observations
of the online landscape and its implications for popula- reflectthefactthatthehealthlandscapetodaynolonger
tion health. consists of government and citizens alone [65]. Other
Inourstudy,referencestodiabetesonTwitterfallinto entities (such as commercial agents, individual bloggers
four broad thematic groups: health information, news, and automated accounts) also exist and exert influence
social exchanges and commercial messages (Table II). on the health promotion landscape, and on the conver-
While these groups define a body of consistent themes, sations taking place around such themes. Their motives
specific messages are largely irregular and variable over aresometimeschallengingtodiscern,andsponsorshipar-
time, both in their language and content. rangements can be difficult to identify or regulate. Sim-
In contrast, there exists an additional group of highly ilar findings have been noted with respect to Facebook,
consistent messages that are propagated through popu- another social media platform used for health care and
lar culture and humour, including jokes, song lyrics or communication [31]. Such entities, which are assumed
viral‘facts’. Suchmessagesareconsistentincontentand by health authorities to be extrinsic to the healthcare
arena, need to be acknowledged and considered in suc- plex, and it cannot be assumed that people can eas-
cessful strategies for health promotion. ily discern ‘good’ and ‘bad’ information. Our observa-
Our results show that the role of hubs in disseminat- tions echo previous reports that there is more informa-
ing information is less persistent over time than the role tion available to consumers than they have the capacity
played by authorities in generating information. Hubs toprocessandunderstand[68,69]. Inthiscontext,public
are generally far less transparent about their identity. health approaches and messages that simply aim to ‘in-
Some accounts, for example, claim to have medical ex- form’ the public might be insufficient in themselves, or
pertise, but these claims cannot always be verified. As even be counterproductive as they make a complicated
a result, it is difficult for Twitter users to be ‘informed cacophony of messages even busier. This is particularly
citizens’ and discern legitimate from misleading or dis- relevant for health policy makers. For instance, infor-
credited information, or a bona-fide health expert from mation that is disseminated by bloggers, stockmarket-
a social-media expert, or a marketer with business mo- listed firms or automated accounts may be in line with
tivations from a marketer with public health ones. Es- broad health recommendations (and indeed may provide
tablishing the credibility of an account by the number of avaluableservicetousers),butwithoutcleardistinction
messages, followers or even through the published user from ‘legitimate’ health advice, such information might
profile, for example, can therefore be misleading. This equally push particular aspects of a commercial agenda
poseschallengestotheuseofTwitterasahealthpromo- thatcouldleadtoharmorgreaterhealthcostsinfuture.
tionplatform, andrequirestheuseofsophisticatedtech- In this case, public health agencies may have to develop
niques (e.g., collaboration of health professionals with novel approaches to ensure that the electronic health in-
practitioners of network and data science). Further re- formationlandscapeisonethatpromoteshealthycitizens
search and engagement with ‘real’ people, and not sim- and not only sweet profits.
ply their virtual online personae which represent them,
is necessary to elucidate the expertise and intentions of
usersgeneratingsomeofthekeydiabetes-relatedcontent
on Twitter. DECLARATIONS
This research has implications for health policy mak-
ers and health promotion practitioners. We show that
Contributions
key authorities in relation to diabetes on Twitter are
notsimplythosewithaccreditedandformally-recognised
healthexpertise,butalsobloggers(menandwomen),pa- MBD and AM researched literature and conceived the
tients, celebrities, advocacy organisations, stockmarket- study, carried out quantitative (MBD) and qualitative
listedfirms, newsmediaandautomatedaccounts. There (AM) data analysis, and prepared the first draft of the
arediversestakeholdersthatuseTwitter;evenwhenlim- manuscript. GGH and MBD collected the data. MBD,
ited to the English language, these accounts originate AM, MB, SU wrote the paper. All authors reviewed and
from a range of countries (notably, several Nigerian ac- edited the manuscript and approved the final version of
counts have prominent roles as both hubs and author- the manuscript.
ities). It may be that establishing long-term collabora-
tionswiththemostinfluentialusers,aswellasenhancing
the connections between different communities of users,
may be more effective health promotion strategies than Acknowledgements
running short-term government-led campaigns and slo-
gans aimed at informing people who have (or who are at
WethankE.Gardun˜oforusefuladviceanddiscussions
risk of developing) diabetes. In addition, it is important
on how best to gather and process the data. We thank
that policy makers understand what social media users
H.HarringtonandS.Yalirakiforfruitfuldiscussionsand
already know about health before new initiatives are in-
comments on the manuscript.
troduced: simply telling users what they already appear
to know, for example, about which foods contribute to
diabetes, may hinder health agencies’ impact and credi-
bility.
Our findings also have implications for programme
evaluation, where ‘number of tweets/followers’ is com-
monlyassumedtoequateto‘impact’. Othermetricsthat MBD acknowledges support from the James S.
leverage the structure of the network of interactions to McDonnell Foundation Postdoctoral Program in Com-
consider relative impact, or a sustained high-centrality plexity Science/Complex Systems Fellowship Award
presence over time (e.g., via centrality metrics such as (#220020349-CS/PD Fellow). MB acknowledges fund-
hub-authority scores) may more closely reflect the real- ing from the EPSRC through grants EP/I017267/1 and
ity of Twitter use for health purposes. EP/N014529/1.
The health information landscape on Twitter is com-
Data statement Conflicting interests
The IDs of the tweets used in this research and the GGH is an employee of Sinnia, a data analytics com-
Supplemental Spreadsheet can be downloaded from the pany. The remaining authors declare no conflicting in-
ReShare UK Data Service repository [70]. terests.
[1] Beguerisse-D´ıaz M, Gardun˜o-Herna´ndez G, Vangelov toTrackLevelsofDiseaseActivityandPublicConcernin
B, Yaliraki SN, Barahona M. Interest commu- the U.S. during the Influenza A H1N1 Pandemic. PLoS
Twitter network of the UK riots. Journal of doi.org/10.1371%2Fjournal.pone.0019467.
The Royal Society Interface. 2014;11(101). Avail- [12] Garc´ıa-Herranz M, Moro E, Cebria´n M, Christakis
org/content/11/101/20140940. Global-Scale Contagious Outbreaks. PLoS ONE. 2014
police–TweetingpracticesofBritishpoliceforcesduring 1371%2Fjournal.pone.0092413.
theAugust2011riots. In: ProceedingsoftheComputer- [13] Prier KW, Smith MS, Giraud-Carrier C, Hanson CL.
Human Interaction Conference. ACM; 2013. . IdentifyingHealth-relatedTopicsonTwitter: AnExplo-
[3] Gonza´lez-Bailo´n S, Borge-Holthoefer J, Rivero A, ration of Tobacco-related Tweets As a Test Topic. In:
MorenoY. Thedynamicsofprotestrecruitmentthrough Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on So-
an online network. Sci Rep. 2011;1:197. Available from: cial Computing, Behavioral-cultural Modeling and Pre-
The anatomy of protest campaigns in social me- citation.cfm?id=1964698.1964702.
dia. Social Networks. 2016;44:95 – 104. Avail- [14] Paul M, Dredze M. You Are What You Tweet: An-
[5] Morales AJ, Losada JC, Benito RM. Users struc- ICWSM11/paper/view/2880.
ture and behavior on an online social network during [15] Llorente A, Garcia-Herranz M, Cebrian M, Moro E. So-
a political protest. Physica A: Statistical Mechanics cial Media Fingerprints of Unemployment. PLoS ONE.
article/pii/S037843711200386X. [16] Scanfeld D, Scanfeld V, Larson EL. Dissemi-
[6] Tonkin E, Pfeiffer HD, Tourte G. Twitter, informa- nation of health information through social net-
tion sharing and the London riots? Bulletin of the works: Twitter and antibiotics. American Journal
American Society for Information Science and Technol- of Infection Control. 2010;38(3):182 – 188. Avail-
org/10.1002/bult.2012.1720380212. article/pii/S0196655310000349.
[7] Zhou Z, Bandari R, Kong J, Qian H, Roychowdhury V. [17] Hawn C. Take Two Aspirin And Tweet Me In The
Information resonance on Twitter: watching Iran. In: Morning: How Twitter, Facebook, And Other Social
Proceedings of the First Workshop on Social Media An- Media Are Reshaping Health Care. Health Affairs.
1145/1964858.1964875. [18] Heaivilin N, Gerbert B, Page JE, Gibbs JL. Public
[8] Kwak H, Lee C, Park H, Moon S. What is Twitter, a Health Surveillance of Dental Pain via Twitter. Jour-
Social Network or a News Media? In: Proceedings of nal of Dental Research. 2011;90(9):1047–1051. Avail-
WWW ’10. New York, NY, USA: ACM; 2010. p. 591– 1047.abstract.
1772690.1772751. Beales S, Darzi A. Twitter and the health reforms
[9] Wu S, Hofman JM, Mason WA, Watts DJ. Who says in the English National Health Service. Health
what to whom on twitter. In: Proceedings of the 20th Policy. 2013;110(2-3):291–297. Available from:
NewYork,NY,USA:ACM;2011.p.705–714. Available pii/S0168851013000456.
[10] Culotta A. Towards Detecting Influenza Epidemics by 2014 to 2017: one year on; 2015. Available from:
Workshop on Social Media Analytics. SOMA ’10. New public-health-england-marketing-strategy-2014-to-2017.
York,NY,USA:ACM;2010.p.115–122. Availablefrom: [21] Public Health England. Marketing strat-
public-health-england-marketing-strategy-2014-to-201[377.] Bowen GA. Naturalistic inquiry and the satura-
[22] Lupton D. M-health and health promotion: The tion concept: a research note. Qualitative Re-
ory & Health. 2012;10(3):229–244. Available from: sagepub.com/content/8/1/137.abstract.
v10/n3/abs/sth20126a.html. ogy. Qualitative Research in Psychology. 2006;3(2):77–
betes. Geneva: WHO Media centre. 2015;. doi/abs/10.1191/1478088706qp063oa.
[24] Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and oth- [39] Zimmer M, Proferes NJ. A topology of Twitter
ers. National diabetes statistics report: estimates of research: disciplines, methods, and ethics. Aslib
diabetes and its burden in the United States, 2014. Journal of Information Management. 2014;66(3):250–
statistics/2014statisticsreport.html. [40] Ding CHQ, Zha H, He X, Husbands P, Simon HD. Link
[25] Shaw R, Johnson C. Health Information Seeking and Analysis: Hubs and Authorities on the World Wide
Social Media Use on the Internet among People with Web.SIAMReview.2004;46(2):256–268.Availablefrom:
[26] El-GayarO,TimsinaP,NawarN,EidW.Mobileapplica- tartarus.org/texts/introduction.html.
tionsfordiabetesself-management: statusandpotential. [42] Delvenne JC, Yaliraki SN, Barahona M. Stability of
J Diabetes Sci Technol. 2013;7(1):247–262. graphcommunitiesacrosstimescales.ProcNatAcadSci
in treatment of diabetes. International Journal of Clin- //www.pnas.org/content/107/29/12755.abstract.
//dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1742-1241.2009.02277.x. The Stability of a Graph Partition: A Dynamics-Based
[28] Gough A, McCance D, Alderdice F, Harper R, Holmes Framework for Community Detection. In: Mukherjee
V. Preconception counselling resource for women with A, Choudhury M, Peruani F, Ganguly N, Mitra B, edi-
diabetes. BMJ Qual Improv Rep. 2015;4(1). Avail- tors. Dynamics On and Of Complex Networks, Volume
[29] Harris JK, Mueller NL, Snider D, Haire-Joshu D. Lo- [44] LambiotteR,DelvenneJ,BarahonaM. RandomWalks,
cal health department use of twitter to disseminate di- MarkovProcessesandtheMultiscaleModularOrganiza-
abetes information, United States. Prev Chronic Dis. tion of Complex Networks. Network Science and Engi-
5888/pcd10.120215. [45] BleiDM,NgAY,JordanMI.LatentDirichletAllocation.
[30] DesaiT,ShariffA,ShariffA,KatsM,FangX,Christiano JMachLearnRes.2003Mar;3:993–1022.Availablefrom:
of Twitter activity at Kidney Week 2011. PLoS One. [46] AmorB,VuikS,CallahanR,DarziA,YalirakiSN,Bara-
10.1371/journal.pone.0040253. directednetworks: understandingtheTwitternetworkof
[31] Greene JA, Choudhry NK, Kilabuk E, Shrank WH. the care. data debate. arXiv:150803165. 2015;Available
a qualitative evaluation of communication with Face- [47] Jeremih, Wayne L, Mosley N. All The Time; 2013. Def
book. J Gen Intern Med. 2011 Mar;26(3):287– Jam Records. Digital Download.
s11606-010-1526-3. [49] Gleeson JP, O’Sullivan KP, Ban˜os RA, Moreno Y. De-
[32] Kleinberg JM. Authoritative Sources in a Hyperlinked terminantsofMemePopularity. arXiv:150105956.2015;.
Environment.JACM.1999Sep;46(5):604–632.Available [50] Simonsen M, Skipper L, Skipper N. Price sensitivity of
[33] NewmanM. Networks: anintroduction. OxfordUniver- kink design. Journal of Applied Econometrics. 2015;p.
[34] Lancichinetti A, Sirer MI, Wang JX, Acuna D, Ko¨rding jae.2436.
K, Amaral LAN. High-Reproducibility and High- [51] Wild S, Roglic G, Green A, Sicree R, King H. Global
Accuracy Method for Automated Topic Classification. Prevalence of Diabetes: Estimates for the year 2000 and
[35] ManningCD,RaghavanP,Schu¨tzeH,etal.Introduction org/content/27/5/1047.abstract.
to information retrieval. vol. 1. Cambridge, UK: Cam- [52] Polonsky KS. The Past 200 Years in Diabetes. New
bridge University Press; 2008. England Journal of Medicine. 2012;367(14):1332–1340.
line Communities. Annual Review of Anthropology. 10.1056/NEJMra1110560.
org/10.1146/annurev.anthro.31.040402.085436. Heine RJ. Moderate Alcohol Consumption Lowers the
observational studies. Diabetes Care. 2005;28(3):719– 10.1080/10410236.2014.940675.
org/content/28/3/719.abstract. Dietary Sugars. Dietary Sugars and Health. 2014;p. 1.
[54] Sornette D, Deschaˆtres F, Gilbert T, Ageon Y. Endoge- [65] McLennan AK, Ulijaszek SJ. Political models of obe-
nous versus exogenous shocks in complex networks: An sity: Set within regulatory frameworks and ideologies.
empiricaltestusingbooksalerankings. PhysicalReview In: 22nd European Congress on Obesity 2015, Prague;
Letters. 2004;93(22):228701. 2015. .
[55] PageL,BrinS,MotwaniR,WinogradT. ThePageRank [66] UlijaszekSJ,McLennanAK. FramingobesityinUKpol-
CitationRanking: BringingOrdertotheWeb. Stanford icyfromtheBlairyears,19972015: thepersistenceofin-
InfoLab; 1999. 1999-66. Previous number = SIDL-WP- dividualistic approaches despite overwhelming evidence
edu:8090/422/. lective responsibility. Obesity Reviews. 2016;17(5):397–
doi.org/10.1137/140976649. [67] McLennan AK, Ulijaszek SJ, Beguerisse-D´ıaz M. Who
[57] PorterMA,OnnelaJP,MuchaPJ. CommunitiesinNet- talks about diabetes on Twitter, what do they say, and
works. Notices of the American Mathematical Society. why are there so many jokes? In: Schneider T, Eli K,
2009;56:1082. DolanC,SU,editors.DigitalFoodActivism.Routledge;
[58] MitchellA,BarthelM,ShearerE,GottfriedJ,MatsaKE, 2016. To appear.
Keeter S, et al. The Evolving Role of News on Twitter [68] Berg L, Gornitzka ˚A. The consumer attention deficit
and Facebook. Pew Research Center; 2015. Avail- syndrome: Consumer choices in complex markets. Acta
the-evolving-role-of-news-on-twitter-and-facebook/. //asj.sagepub.com/content/55/2/159.abstract.
[59] Shiffman DS. Twitter as a tool for conservation ed- [69] Gallotti R, Porter MA, Barthelemy M. Lost in trans-
ucation and outreach: what scientific conferences can portation: Information measures and cognitive limits
do to promote live-tweeting. Journal of Environmental in multilayer navigation. Science Advances. 2016;2(2).
[60] Radmanesh A, Duszak R, Fitzgerald RT. Social [70] Beguerisse-D´ıaz M. Diabetes tweets. UK Data Archive;.
American Journal of Neuroradiology. 2014;Available uk/852474/.
sciencemag.org/content/345/6203/1440.short. tober 8 2015.
[62] A´lvarez R, Garc´ıa D, Moreno Y, Schweitzer F. Senti-
mentcascadesinthe15Mmovement. EPJDataScience.
2015;4(1):1–13.
[63] So J, Prestin A, Lee L, Wang Y, Yen J, Chou WYS.
Appendix A: Additional tables with illustrative
What Do People Like to “Share” About Obesity? A
tweets for each thematic group
Content Analysis of Frequent Retweets About Obesity
on Twitter. Health Communication. 2015;0(0):1–14.
Links to articles,
blogs and studies Effect of imidapril versus ramipril on urinary albumin excretion in hypertensive patients with type 2 diabetes...
treatmentandcure Reverse Your Diabetes Today: Learn a little-known but 100% proven way to erase your pre-diabetes and type 2
@HealthRanger
Health chief fears diabetes to soar across Bradford district (From Bradford Telegraph and Argus)
Population health
and fears FearsRockhamptonfacingdiabetesepidemic: DiabetesQueenslandsaysmorethan10percentofthepopulationi...
Obesity and diabetes pose a serious threat to the long-term health of young people in the United States.
Diabetesisadiseasethatcanstrikewhenyoudon’ttakecareofyourbody. Checkouttheseeye-openingstatistics.
Many@Enterasysemployeesridingin@AmDiabetesAssnTourdeCurearetoofamiliarw/diabetes. Here’swhythey
outreach and Donate to @Brenda Novak’s auction for the cure for diabetes. I’m giving away 2 tix to my blog tour course #win -
awareness events
and activities
Joinusaswefightto#StopDiabetes. SignourpetitiontourgeCongresstoinvestin#diabetesprevention&acure:
Merck Animal Health Launches Global Awareness Campaign to Support Pet Diabetes
Open Question: Diabetes question i want to know if i have diabeties? i was in eye hospital today and they have...
Advice about
management and Open Question: Whart are some good ways to deal with pre-diabetes? 9I have some too but are open to yous)?
#health#diettips
Lifestyle, diet and
and links ZucchiniEscaroleSoup: FromDiabetesCookingforEveryone,byCarolGelles. Exchanges: 1/4bread,1vegetable,...
Tips For Living A Life With Diabetes: TIP! Almonds are a great way to get some additional protein into your di...
Tiny cells lift Type 1 diabetes hope: Michael Schofield gets to meet the mother of the man whose death gave hi...
Life stories and
for marketing Debby M Shared this yesterday and its outstanding!!! April 23rd 2013, I was diagnosed with diabetes type 2. My...
TheDayIwasDiagnosedwithJuvenileDiabetes: IwasdiagnosedonJuly21st1999whenIwaseightyearsold. ...
#50ThingsAboutMe38)IhavediabetessinceIwas9yearsold
Drinking one can of soda a day increases your chances of getting type 2 diabetes by 22%! Details –
Dangers of sugar, Diabeteswarningoversoftsugarydrinks: DrTimDalton,chairoftheWiganBoroughClinicalCommissioningGro...
sugar replacements
and/or soda
A soda a day keeps the doctor in pay: soft drinks and diabetes: Recent research linking soft drinks to type 2 ...
IfMountainDew: BajaBlastwassoldinthestores,diabeteswouldspreadlikewildfire,y’all.
Thanks for putting a damper on my #1 pregnancy craving. Coke and Pepsi Face Diabetes Backlash
TABLE III: Specific examples of health information tweets.
Headline links to Immune protein could stop diabetes in its tracks, discovery suggests: Researchers have identified an immune pr...
studies or
@cnnhealth
Celebrity news via@wtcommunities
SherriShepherdTalksAboutHerFightWithDiabetes! [Video]: videoplatformvideomanagementvideosolutionsvid...
Wow Trump just gave Lil John $100K toward his diabetes charity & his mom just passed away they all cheered
endlessly. #apprenticefinale
General news
Glooko’s New Diabetes Management System FDA Cleared: Glooko (Palo Alto, CA) received FDA clearance for its
News relating to
News: CytoriLicensesAsiaPacificCardiovascularRenal&DiabetesMarketstoLoremVascularforupto$531Million
AstraZenecacouldbuyBristolstakeindiabetesJV:analyst: LONDON(Reuters)-AstraZenecamayseektoincrea...
TABLE IV: Examples of news tweets.
Users joking about cakecakecakecakecakecakecakecakecakecakecakecakecakecakecakecakecakecakecakecakecakecakecake
how what they cakecakecakediabetes
have eaten is likely
2bowlsofyogurt,abowloforeos,hersheys,chips,cheeseandashitloadofmints. Mydietconsistsofdiabetes.
to give them
diabetes Bother! Burger King has arrived. Hello obesity, diabetes, poor nutrition. McD’s is bad enough. Grumble Grumble
????
Tous: candy,chocolate,nasilemak,friesToparents: diabetes,toothdecay,heartdisease,highbloodpressure.
Chatter and social IJUSTTOLDMYDADABADDIABETESJOKEANDHE’SADIABETICOMFGIMSUCHABADPERSON
interchanges MymomsaidIprobablyhavediabetes.. aaaIdidn’tknowshewenttoschooltobeadoctorlol
Screwthisdiabetesbusinesstoday. Justwannasleep.. #HeadAche#FeelHungover
My #husband going in for #surgery this morning for #amputation of his toe and partial foot due to #diabetes
#diabetesawareness#fckudiabetes
experiences of Watching belly dancers on youtube & wishing I never stopped going-No time & damn diabetes took over my life.
diabetes #killjoy#fcbd#hipsofglory
Me and diabetes aren’t getting along today. #ifeellikepoop #badmood #diabeticproblems ????
Everhaveacatchewonyourinsulinpumptubing? #diabetes#tubing#insulinpump
Isittoomuchtoaskthatmediaclearlydifferentiatebetweentype1andtype2diabetes? Lapbandsurgerywillnot
cureT1diabetes#fedup
“I’mworkingonsomething”“Theonlythingyou’reworkingonisdiabetesyoufatfuck”#Projectxisjokes:L
WhydoyouthinkyourbeautifulyoulooklikeafuckingfrogwithdiabetesOMFGahahahahahahahah
Tothecuntinworkthatsmearedshitonthefloorinthetoilets. Ihopeyougettype2diabetesandaids.
Stigmatising Ihopey’allfuckingfuturekidsgetfatandgetdiabetestalkingshitboutMsDumas
I seriously miss my doctor in touness, this one told me today that he thinks diabetes is gonna be the cause of my
death. Howrude):
‘Anationofporkers’: Diabetesexpertcomplainsonnationalradiothatwe’reeatingourselvesintoanearlygrave
Excuse me sir..Just leave the gym with ur diabetes-lookin, wheezin self.. Puffing ur chest doesnt hide ur huge beer
belly??? #idontplayatgym
’Niall’ssosweet,i’dbetyou’dgetdiabetesbyswallowinghiscum’OMFGHAHAAHAHAAHILOVETHIS
Sexual innuendo HARRYYOULJTTLECUTIEPATOOTIEITHINKIJUSTRECIEVEDDIABETESFROMLOOKIGNATTHIS
relating to
I’dlickyoursweetpussytillIgetdiabetes.
sweetness and
diabetes Domebaby. Uhoh,didyousayDEWME?! *MountainDewgushesfromhispenisandgiveshersexuallytransmitted
woah woah stop giving girls diabetes Ahh EYE CANDYMAN – EH I don’t even know what’s going on now! What
eyecandy...
#ABCReportsTheBlackerTheBerry,TheSweetertheJuiceIsWesleySnipesownsweatgivinghimDiabetes???More
Jokes, sarcasm and Justsawacommercialfordiabetesmedicine. Sideeffects: LowBloodSugar. Letthatsinkin.
humorous tweets Ididn’tevenknowwhatthegdpancreasdiduntilVioletwasdiagnosedwithType1Diabetes. Fuckyou,youshitty
non-workingpancreas.
AmarwadiopensaSweetsShop... PutsanAdvertisement: HelperNeeded... Qualification: ShouldhaveDiabetes
Pray for the rain forest. Pray for that gay NBA player. Pray for the o-zone layer. Pray for stray animals. Pray for
ThecocacolaChristmasadvert,becausenothingsaysChristmasquitelikediabetesandcapitalism. LOL
TABLE V: Social interaction and humorous tweets.
Advertisements for
#Jobs#SiouxCityJobs
jobs in the
pharmaceutical #jobs4u #jobs #ABQ Pharmaceutical Representative - Diabetes Products - Albuquerque, NM
Start a new #career at American Diabetes Association in Rocky Hill, CT. Associate Director - Fundr...
Marketing for a Caffeine stimulates elevated of Cortisol = arthritis, obesity, diabetes, and depression. Try healthy coffee: -
app, treatment,
event or service
FREE Kindle eBook: Apple Cider Vinegar Natural Cures for Diabetes, Cancer, and MORE!...
drugs, diets or
TABLE VI: Commercial tweets.
Lyrics of ‘All the Ifitssweetthenimaeatit,tilIgetsugardiabetes. Imabloodnsheanemic. Weperfect.
AndIfIt’sSweetThenImaEatItTillIGetSugarDiabetesImaBloodAndSheANemick!!!!
Jeremih [47]
Andifit”ssweetthenimmasmokeittillIgetsugardiabetes-wayne
Pusssssyforbreakfast. Yo’pussybetta. Imaeattilligetsugardiabetes. #AllTheTime#Jermiah
Lyrics of ‘Mind of Use to hold my head down.. not no more diabetes n my body police kickin in my door.. but I’m still happyyyy...
a maniac’, by #boosie
Boosie Badazz [48] USED TO HOLD MY HEAD DOWN NOT NOMO DIABETES IN MY BODY POLICE KICKING IN MY
DOE!!!BUTIMSTILLHAPPY!!!!!!
diabetesinmybodypolicekickininmydoor,butimstillhappy.
“One Alcoholic drink a day can reduce your risk of type 2 diabetes by up to 30 percent.” See I’m not an alcy I’m
Alcohol reduces keepinhelthy
diabetes risk
“OneAlcoholicdrinkadaycanreduceyourriskoftype2diabetesbyupto30percent.” Let’sdrinkmore
“OneAlcoholicdrinkadaycanreduceyourriskoftype2diabetesbyupto30percent.” #tequila
Viral fact about “Doctors used to taste urine to determine if someone had diabetes because their urine would taste sweet.”
detecting diabetes HAHAHAHA
by tasting urine “Doctorsusedtotasteurinetodetermineifsomeonehaddiabetesbecausetheirurinewouldtastesweet.” #nasty
Ammmewwww“Doctorsusedtotasteurinetodetermineifsomeonehaddiabetes”
Elementarymathproblemsareweird. ’Ihad10chocolatebarsandate9. WhatdoIhavenow?’ Oh,Idon’tknow,
The mathematics DIABETESMAYBE.:—
Louishas40chocolatebars. Heeats35. WhatdoesLouishavenow? Diabetes. Louishasdiabetes.
Here’s a question. Juan has 40 choco bars. He eats 35. What does Juan hve now? Diabetes. Juan has diabetes.
*Mathematics+Logic=Sarcasm
TABLE VII: Recurrent tweets