International Journal on Cryptography and Information Security (IJCIS), Vol. 8, No.1, March 2018
HE AME F HISHING
Joseph Kilcullen
Moylurg, Foxford Road, Ballina, Co. Mayo, F26 D9D2, Ireland.
The current implementation of TLS involves your browser displaying a padlock, and a green bar, after
successfully verifying the digital signature on the TLS certificate. Proposed is a solution where your
browser's response to successful verification of a TLS certificate is to display a login window. That login
window displays the identity credentials from the TLS certificate, to allow the user to authenticate Bob. It
also displays a 'user-browser' shared secret i.e. a specific picture from your hard disk. This is not SiteKey,
the image is shared between the computer user and their browser. It is never transmitted over the internet.
Since sandboxed websites cannot access your hard disk this image cannot be counterfeited by phishing
websites. Basically if you view the installed software component of your browser as an actor in the
cryptography protocol, then the solution to phishing attacks is classic cryptography, as documented in any
cryptography textbook.
Game theory, phishing, authentication, cryptography
1. INTRODUCTION
Originally it was game theory research, seeking screening strategies, or signalling strategies, to
prevent the counterfeiting of websites i.e. phishing attacks. Since your web browser is installed
software, it is more capable
e than the websites creating the counterfeit e.g. it can access the hard disk. Hence, various ways
for websites to counterfeit installed software behaviour were studied. In full screen mode, it was
found that, browsers can counterfeit almost anything, including blue screens of death and
formatting the hard drive.
From an academic point of view, full screen counterfeiting eliminates several categories of
installed software behaviour, as possible anti-counterfeiting solutions. One category of installed
software behaviour was resistant to counterfeiting. Every solution, in that category, was found to
be a user-browser shared secret. Basically Mallory cannot counterfeit what Mallory does not
know. The user-browser shared secret is not known by either Bob or Mallory. Furthermore, such
a simple solution prompted the following hypothesis. Web browsers are virtual machines. They
execute each website inside a sandbox. Hence any given web browser has N + 1 personalities, at
any given time. Where N is the number of webpages open i.e. one personality for each webpage,
plus one for the installed software, of the browser itself. Once you view the installed software
component of your browser as an actor in the cryptography protocol, the solution to phishing
attacks becomes classic cryptography i.e. the installed software component, of your browser,
must authenticate itself. It does this in the same way that cryptography actors have been
authenticating themselves for thousands of years i.e. by presenting a previously shared secret.
With that, game theory research was transformed into cryptography research.
International Journal on Cryptography and Information Security (IJCIS), Vol. 8, No.1, March 2018
2. CONCERNING THE CAPACITY OF BROWSERS TO COUNTERFEIT
INSTALLED SOFTWARE BEHAVIOUR
The idea is that a phishing attack is a game of incomplete information. That the user does not
even know that a phishing attack is taking place. It is the successful counterfeiting of the website
that does this. If we can devise a signalling strategy which cannot be counterfeited then the
computer user will know when a phishing attack is taking place. They will back away from the
phishing website causing the phishing attack to fail.
The idea was to add information, specifically an anti-counterfeiting signalling strategy which
would be triggered after the browser has verified the digital signature on Bob's TLS certificate. I
listed behaviour that installed software is capable of but websites are not capable of. The idea
was: Your browser is installed software so it has this advantage over websites trying to
counterfeit its behaviour. The following categories were proposed for research:
1. Drawing outside the browser canvas area.
2. Creation of Modal Windows.
3. File manipulation e.g. file creation, copying, renaming etc. this includes the possibility of
formatting the hard disk, though we can't use that as evidence either.
4. Access to local data and operating system identifiers e.g. your username, your account
login picture or whether or not you have accessed this website before.
5. Microsoft, User Account Control behaviour.
6. Existing best practice i.e. inspection of the TLS Certificate being used by your browser.
This is the original list with the exception of category 6 which was added after I had developed
the solution. The quality of this list is irrelevant. I believed I could add to the list later, if
necessary. Since the final solution is hidden within this list it was not necessary to add to it.
In my original research I dismissed or counterfeited every category except number 4. Every
solution in Category 4 is actually a secret shared between the computer user and their web
browser. With the exception of item number 6 this is the list from my original research. It has not
been polished or edited. Item number 6 was added because this is current best practice. It is by
accident that item number 4 just happened to contain the solution. Hence username, or account
login picture, make good shared secrets, while previous access to this website is a bad shared
secret. Previous access can be communicated via a darker colour hyperlink, or via browser
dialogues such as the 'More Information' dialogue from the Firefox TLS window (Version
53.0.3). The darker colour hyperlink is easily counterfeited by any webpage. The browser
dialogue can easily be counterfeited via full screen counterfeiting, documented below. Though
the actual number of times you have accessed a website would be incorrect because Mallory does
not have this information. It's still a bad signalling strategy because users don't track the number
of times they have accessed a website.
Note, counterfeiting a browser dialogue with an undecorated window does not work anymore, see
Figure 1. However, a floating DIV within a webpage can counterfeit a dialogue window i.e. on a
webpage show a picture of a window, border and all. It's up to the user to notice that no window
icon exists for this new window.
International Journal on Cryptography and Information Security (IJCIS), Vol. 8, No.1, March 2018
Figure 1. Attempt to create an undecorated window with JavaScript function ‘window.open()’.
The arrow indicates an address bar added to prevent counterfeiting of browser controls.
Originally I dismissed Category 3 believing it to be unworkable. However references [3] and
SiteKey [5] both use cookies to trigger their solutions. Cookies actually fit Category 3. These are
'cookie as a password' solutions. 'Cookie as a password' solutions fail because Alice-Human
cannot successfully authenticate Bob, either at the regular login page or at the cookie creation
page.
A key component of this research was the study of screening strategies. The actual path that I
followed was to study the categories listed above. There is no point in me documenting that
research here because it was straight forward and quite similar to discussions of screening
strategies found in [1] and [2].
One phishing attack website that I stumbled upon requested a username and password. Even
though the genuine website was open access. This type of phishing is more social engineering
than counterfeiting. During my research I devised a versatile social engineering attack which
allows the entire computer screen to be counterfeited, discussed next.
As stated, item number 6 was actually added after I had the solution. When I realised that even
inspection of the TLS certificate could be counterfeited, in full screen mode.
2.1. Full Screen Counterfeiting
Full screen counterfeiting is easily achieved with a small amount of JavaScript and a set of
bitmaps to fake the user's browser controls and desktop. Figure 2 shows six bitmaps set on a grey
background. These images are deliberately drawn to appear fake, like crayon drawings.
Figure 4 shows a computer desktop, and browser, before a full screen counterfeiting attack. The
'Switch to Fullscreen!' button executes JavaScript. Figure 3 shows sample JavaScript code which
implements the switch to full screen.
Description of Figure 2: Six bitmap pictures are shown on a grey background. The grey
background is to help the reader see the size and shape of the bitmaps. The top three are to
counterfeit browser controls while the bottom three show a counterfeit 'Windows start button',
counterfeit taskbar with an application icon and clock. They are deliberately made to look fake,
like crayon drawings. This is to help the reader see the difference between Figure 4 and Figure 6.
The centre bitmaps will be tiled horizontally to help adjust the fake to any desktop resolution. The
crayon like fake is made to look like the original NCSA Mosaic browser. An actual
implementation would use ‘navigator.userAgent’ to ensure appropriate counterfeit images are
presented.
International Journal on Cryptography and Information Security (IJCIS), Vol. 8, No.1, March 2018
Figure 2. Six bitmaps used to create fake desktop. See text for description.
Figure 3. Example of JavaScript code to switch browser to full screen mode.
International Journal on Cryptography and Information Security (IJCIS), Vol. 8, No.1, March 2018
Figure 4. Screenshot of desktop before full screen counterfeiting attempt.
Basically a JavaScript function ‘request Full screen ()’ forces the browser into full screen mode.
The same JavaScript code moves a HTML DIV to the front and makes it visible. That DIV
'crayon_browser' has the images from Figure 2 positioned in the corners or tiled to fit different
desktop resolutions. It also contains the same webpage that was visible before the move to full
screen.
Each web browser responds differently to the function ‘request Full screen ()’. Figure 5 shows the
warnings shown by three browsers. Microsoft Edge is both the best and worst. The warning
shown in Figure 5 is shown the first time you switch to full screen. It stays on screen till the user
dismisses it. This forces the user to explicitly acknowledge full screen mode. Unfortunately
subsequent changes to full screen, on that website, do not warn the user at all i.e. Figure 4 is
transformed directly to Figure 6 without any warnings. Firefox and Chrome show a warning
every time. However these warnings dismiss themselves after a few seconds. Aside from the
different transition warnings, shown in Figure 5, all three browsers transform Figure 4 into Figure
6.
If the bitmaps used in Figure 2 were realistic then Figure 4 and Figure 6 would be almost
identical. Furthermore the transition warnings shown in Figure 5 would only appear odd/unusual
because they appeared outside of the perceived canvas area. These are very weak indicators of
counterfeiting.
From a researcher's point of view many types of installed software behaviour can be
counterfeited. Including browser addons, inspection of TLS certificates, and Microsoft User
Account Control behaviour. As such categories 5 and 6 must be eliminated as suitable anti-
counterfeiting solutions. Furthermore we now need to be concerned with counterfeiting of blue
screens of death, hackers/criminals blackmailing people with the threat of formatting their hard
drives etc.
International Journal on Cryptography and Information Security (IJCIS), Vol. 8, No.1, March 2018
Figure 5. Shown are the warnings presented by three browsers after the JavaScript function
‘requestFullscreen()’ is called.
Figure 6. Screenshot after full screen counterfeiting attack, compare with Figure 4. Also see the bitmaps in
Figure 2, used to counterfeit the desktop.
International Journal on Cryptography and Information Security (IJCIS), Vol. 8, No.1, March 2018
The purpose here is to demonstrate these mechanisms. No user testing has been performed. There
is anecdotal evidence in [6] that these tactics will work. The academic exercise of demonstrating
that this is possible is sufficient to eliminate categories 5 and 6. What is of interest is the inability
of this mechanism to counterfeit category 4 solutions. It is this fact which suggests the hypothesis
proposed in this paper.
3. PROPOSED HYPOTHESIS
Figure 7 shows a login dialogue which embodies the solution. The only behaviour which cannot
be counterfeited by full screen counterfeiting is the presentation of previously shared secrets i.e. a
cryptography authentication mechanism since the time of antiquity. The sections which follow
document various aspects of the proposed hypothesis.
Figure 7. Window for user to authenticate (1) their own browser, via picture (2) Bob, (3) Bob’s website,
(4) Trent, via browser confirmation of the digital signature and finally login fields. The use of which
indicates acceptance of the various credentials presented.
Description of Figure 7: This is not SiteKey. This is not a webpage. This is a browser created
dialogue. Created with a user-browser shared secret, obtained from the hard disk, and identity
credentials from the TLS certificate. For Mallory to carry out a MITM attack she must stand
between you and your computer monitor. Either that or hack into your computer to steal the
shared secret. Hacking into thousands of computers to steal shared secrets is an entirely different
endeavour to creating a counterfeit website. Furthermore having hacked into your computer why
bother with a phishing attack?
In a nutshell: Your browser is a virtual machine. Each webpage executes inside its own sandbox.
Once your view the installed software component, of your browser, as an actor in the
International Journal on Cryptography and Information Security (IJCIS), Vol. 8, No.1, March 2018
cryptography protocol, everything else is classic cryptography i.e. your browser seeks
authentication of Bob from Alice-Human. This act is vulnerable to counterfeiting. As such your
browser utilises a signalling strategy to communicate that it is the correct actor i.e. it reads a
shared secret from the hard disk and presents it to Alice-Human. Sandboxed processes, websites,
cannot do this. Hence Alice-Human can interpret the correct shared secret as proof that the
browser created the window, rather than a sandboxed website a.k.a. a phishing website.
Figure 7 should be displayed as a modal window, positioned in the middle of the screen. If the
rest of the screen can be greyed, like Microsoft User Account Control, then even better. Arguably
in Figure 7 putting the login fields into a dialogue with the browser signals, TLS identity, is more
important than the shared secret i.e. it forces Alice-Human to look at the Padlock, or green bar
from extended validation TLS. I just happened to use the TLS identity rather than a padlock, or
green bar. Furthermore, the shared secret prevents the phishers from making their next move i.e.
to counterfeit Figure 7.
4. TWO ACTORS OR THREE?
Figure 8. Two actors: The browser is a virtual machine with each website sandboxed inside it.
The figure represents the current situation where TLS is implemented by two actors i.e. Alice-
Browser and either Bob or Mallory. Alice-Human plays a passive role. By default she accepts the
TLS identity without being forced to examine it. She must remember to look for the passive
signals from the browser.
In the current system Alice-Human's participation in TLS is optional. The sandboxed websites
look the same. See Figure 8. The signals from the browser are passive and displayed away from
the main event, the webpage. In Figure 9 the response to successful authentication of the TLS
certificate is not to display a padlock, or a green bar, rather to display Figure 7. The green bar can
be ignored by Alice-Human. Figure 7 cannot be ignored. Alice-Human must enter her login
credentials into it. Or, into a counterfeit of it. It’s an active process rather than passive. Part of this
solution is that regular webpages will no longer provide login fields i.e. you will only enter your
username and password into the dialogue in Figure 7. Request of login credentials, on a regular
webpage, should be viewed as suspicious by users.
International Journal on Cryptography and Information Security (IJCIS), Vol. 8, No.1, March 2018
Figure 9. Three actors: The virtual machine itself must participate in TLS, not a sandboxed
process. The current implementation of TLS shows a padlock, or green bar, on successful
verification of a TLS certificate. With this solution the browser shows Figure 7 on successful
verification of a TLS certificate. Only after Alice-Human enters her login credentials will the
browser proceed to create the website inside its own sandbox. Your browser can access the hard
disk, so it can place the correct shared secret on the dialogue. Sandboxed websites cannot access
the hard disk. Hence they cannot counterfeit Figure 7.
In the existing system, Figure 8, your browser fulfils the role of Alice. In the proposed solution
Alice is the human being sitting at the computer. To aid discussion I have used the names Alice-
Human, Alice-Browser and HAL-Browser. Alice-Browser refers to the current situation where
your browser fulfils the role of Alice within TLS. The human is present but her role is, at best,
passive. In the proposed solution Alice-Human plays an active role, authenticating both her
browser window and the TLS identity.
In the existing system Alice-Browser verifies the digital signature on Bob's TLS certificate. On
success Alice-Browser and Bob proceed to implement TLS i.e. two actors. In the new model,
Figure 9, HAL-Browser verifies the digital signature on Bob's TLS certificate. On success HAL-
Browser turns to Alice-Human and invites her to further authenticate Bob. He does this by
displaying Figure 7. The problem is: this act is vulnerable to counterfeiting. In this context
counterfeiting is referred to as a phishing attack.
Shown in Figure 7 is a picture of a turtle which is a shared secret between Alice-Human and
HAL-Browser. Neither Bob nor Mallory know this secret. As such Mallory cannot counterfeit
Figure 7 without hacking into HAL-Browser to steal the secret. Hacking into thousands of
computers to steal these secrets is an entirely different endeavour to tricking people into going to
a fake website.
Once you correctly model the system as a three actor system. Cryptographers know how to
appropriately authenticate the three participants. As such Figure 7 is a relatively obvious step for
cryptographers. Dhamija et al also use a user-display shared secret. They use it to protect a
dedicated login window from counterfeiting. They do not appear to go beyond that and use it to
present Bob's identity credentials [4]. With my solution, by entering her login credentials Alice-
Human is accepting Bob's identity credentials and her browser's shared secret. She is
authenticating both Bob and her web browser. HAL-Browser then proceeds to implement TLS.
International Journal on Cryptography and Information Security (IJCIS), Vol. 8, No.1, March 2018
Hence Figure 7 extends TLS by forcing Alice-Human to carry out these additional authentication
steps.
Alice-Human now knows she is looking at a dialogue created by her web browser i.e. it is not a
counterfeit, a phishing attack. She can now examine the identity credentials presented and
complete Bob's authentication.
TLS would need to be modified to implement the solution e.g. websites should be able to choose
'no login dialogue', 'no set password tab', among other possibilities. I was approaching this as a
game theorist seeking screening strategies to prevent counterfeiting. Here follows an outline of
the game theory interpretation.
4.1. Shared Secret Authentication as a Screening Strategy
Anti-counterfeiting technologies and the screening strategy that accompany them go together like
a lock and key pair. The research involved the study of each category, from section 2, to find
screening strategies which would prevent phishing attacks.
The definition of a screening strategy, from [2] is given since its language is used to frame the
discussion that follows. From [2]: ‘A screening strategy is a strategy used by a less informed
player to elicit information from a more informed player’.
Human Interactive Proofs (e.g. CAPTCHA), Turing tests and anti-counterfeiting technologies are
all specific types of screening strategy. Here too authentication, through the confirmation of a
shared secret, constitutes a screening strategy. The less informed player is eliciting the identity of
the more informed player. They are not eliciting the secret because they already know it. They
want to know 'do you know what the secret is?' This is why it's just a point of view that this is
cryptography. As a game theorist I see a screening strategy. It elicits their identity, as the
individual who knows the secret or someone else.
Furthermore, the fact that this works while other approaches fail indicates phishing attacks
involve the counterfeiting of an identity, not a website. This is significant because it allows us to
prevent any type of counterfeiting. It recasts counterfeiting as theft of intellectual property,
patents, copyright, trademarks, designs etc. accompanied by identity theft. The purpose of the
identity theft is to undermine law enforcement attempts which would otherwise prevent the
intellectual property theft. This means authentication based solutions can be developed for any
type of counterfeiting including manufactured goods like pharmaceutical drugs and currencies.
5. ADDITIONAL SOLUTION DETAILS
The proposed solution is to display Figure 7 on successful verification of a TLS certificate's
digital signature. The key points are:
1. It's the installed software component of your browser which does this. Not a sandboxed
website. Nor is this a webpage hosted somewhere on the internet. That would be SiteKey.
This is not SiteKey.
2. Alice-Human elicits the identity of whoever created Figure 7 through a screening strategy
i.e. sandboxed websites cannot access the hard disk whereas the virtual machine, your
browser, can.
3. With the current situation it's up to Alice-Human to remember to check for a padlock
and/or green bar. The default is for Alice-Human to accept or reject Bob/Mallory based
upon the website's contents. With the proposed solution Alice-Human cannot ignore the
two identities being presented in Figure 7. She must examine Figure 7 in order to enter
International Journal on Cryptography and Information Security (IJCIS), Vol. 8, No.1, March 2018
her login credentials. She does not have to remember to check these identities nor is the
default, automatic acceptance, when she forgets to check for a padlock symbol.
4. Microsoft user account control behaviour can be used to further enhance the solution. If
Figure 7 is displayed as a modal dialogue with the rest of the screen blanked. This will
undermine even more attacks e.g. to counterfeit a modal window a phishing website need
only create an image of a dialogue window. Then position that image on their phishing
webpage as if it's a real dialogue. Real windows would create a window icon, in the
operating system. Users who don't notice the absence of a window icon may be tricked
into using that dialogue. Such fake login screens would have an incorrect authentication
image (the turtle in Figure 7).
5. Where Mallory buys/obtains a TLS certificate Figure 7 will be displayed with the correct
authentication image and whatever data is stored inside the certificate. If this solution is
adopted then a large number of issues with TLS certificates and certificate authorities will
need to be resolved.
6. In Figure 9 the genuine website is absent. This is because the installed software
component of your browser will only create the sandboxed website after a secure TLS
connection has been created. Hence Figure 9 shows the point just before Alice-Human
has entered her login credentials and clicked 'Login'.
7. Central Banks as Trent: When users are looking at Figure 7 it will become apparent that
the public have never heard of any of the Certificate Authority companies. And who will
trust a Trent they have never heard of? One solution is for central banks to fulfil the role
of Trent within their regulatory area. Hence the Federal Reserve, the European Central
Bank etc. should fulfil the role of Trent. The actual task of creating TLS certificates can
be outsourced to a Certificate Authority. The name for Trent in Figure 7 should be a
name the public know and trust.
8. While a patent application was filed [7] this application has now lapsed. Specifically all
patent deadlines have now lapsed including USA, Canada etc. where applications can be
made up to one year after publication of an idea. The solution is now prior art everywhere
in the world.
6. RELEVANT METAPHORS AND ANALOGIES
2.2. April fool's day at a TV Station
Consider the following: its April fool's day and someone in a television station decides to play a
joke on their viewers. They pick a popular brand of television, counterfeit it's setup menu and
then superimpose that image over the live television broadcast. Viewers who own a different
brand of television will be like a Bank of Ireland customer receiving a Bank of America phishing
email i.e. they will know immediately that it's a scam. However, viewers with the correct brand of
television will think their television is malfunctioning as it is presenting the setup menu no matter
what they do. To prevent this trick from working, viewers must customise their setup menu.
Doing so is creating a secret known by their television and themselves, but not known by the
television station. This is identical to the solution to phishing attacks i.e. Mallory cannot
counterfeit what Mallory does not know. It's a viewer-television secret just like our browser-user
secret.
2.2. HAL, friend or foe?
In 2001, a Space Odyssey HAL had two personalities, one friend one foe. Imagine that we give
the friend personality an Identity Card which he should present when we're talking to him, to help
us distinguish friend from foe. Effectively that is the solution presented i.e. when the installed
software is acting on our behalf it has access to the shared secret. When a remote website is
counterfeiting a website it cannot present a fake TLS certificate nor can it fake the shared secret.
International Journal on Cryptography and Information Security (IJCIS), Vol. 8, No.1, March 2018
Computer users must authenticate both their web browser and the identity presented in the TLS
certificate. This is where the name HAL-Browser came from. Our web browsers have split
personalities one friend one foe. The user-browser shared secret is an identity card for our friend.
7. CONCLUSIONS
Once the installed software component, of your browser, is recognised as an actor in the
cryptography protocol everything else is classic cryptography i.e. it must authenticate itself by
presenting a previously shared secret. Otherwise a sandboxed website will counterfeit it i.e. a
phishing attack. Sandboxed websites cannot access the hard disk, hence they cannot counterfeit
Figure 7. After that your browser's participation in the TLS protocol is textbook three actor
interaction. On successful authentication of a TLS certificate's digital signature. HAL-Browser
seeks further authentication from Alice-Human. This step involves HAL-Browser authenticating
himself with Alice-Human through the presentation of a previously shared secret. This step also
involves HAL-Browser presenting Bob's identity credentials from the TLS certificate. Alice-
Human can accept these two identities and enter her login credentials or she can reject either of
the identities presented and back away, refusing to enter her login credentials.