184 book reviews
As the audience changed, so did forms and modes of discourse. In the
end, the author remarks that the 1640s was a time in history when it was “both
possible and to their [the authors’] mind, desirable, to make a difference to
society though the writing and dissemination of utopian literature” (162).
Houston leaves the reader with the impression that the love story between
utopia and social reform rose to its zenith a little more than a century after
the publication of More’s Utopia. This is the most significant message of this
meticulously researched and beautifully argued book—that there was a time
when utopias were considered relevant for the improvement of society; when
they were taken seriously and not considered naive flights of fancy. And who is
to say that such a time might not come back?
cristina perissinotto
University of Ottawa
Kahn, Victoria.
The Future of Illusion: Political Theology and Early Modern Texts.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2014. Pp. xiii, 246. ISBN 978-0-226-
08387-2 (hardcover) US$45.
Victoria Kahn’s The Future of Illusion: Political Theology and Early Modern Texts
examines modern readings of works from the early modern period, showing
that the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries’ turn away from essentialist
validations for authority, transcendental justifications of the state, in favour of
poiesis (“making”) as a new form of knowledge, served as a point of contention
for twentieth-century intellectuals. Faced with the failure of liberal secularism
to offer a defense of its values when challenged by totalitarianism, authors such
as Carl Schmitt, Ernst Kantorowicz, Leo Strauss, Hannah Arendt, and Sigmund
Freud all critically engaged with the point in history they understood as a decisive
break from older forms of political legitimation. Certain figures, such as Schmitt,
viewed this secular demarcation as catastrophic; others, such as Kantorowicz
and Freud, saw this break as a productive moment in the relationship between
human creativity and political activity. Every author examined by Kahn uses
early-modern poiesis to construct an argument about modernity.
Renaissance and Reformation / Renaissance et Réforme 39.1, Winter / hiver 2016
comptes rendus 185
Casting the structure of The Future of Illusion as a “typology of the modes
of poiesis,” chapter 1 begins with an interrogation of Carl Schmitt’s readings of
Thomas Hobbes’s Leviathan and William Shakespeare’s Hamlet. Kahn notes that,
for Schmitt, the early modern period is “at once the paradigm of the genuinely
political and the locus of its demise” (20). Schmitt attempts to read Hobbes
as divided between an emerging liberalism and a receding idea of political
justification, with the authority of Hobbes’s sovereign trapped in a no man’s land
between myth and representation. Schmitt’s preference for personalism over
representation, however, causes him to underestimate the knowing fictionality
of Hobbes’s concept of legitimation, what Kahn refers to as “the self-conscious
theatricality of Hobbesian representation” (35). In part as a response to the
unsuitability of Hobbes for his project, the later Schmitt uses Hamlet to counter
Leviathan’s myth of early modern politics, interpreting the play as dramatizing
the conflicts of the Reformation just at the moment before these conflicts are
resolved by the emergence of the nation-state. Hamlet, according to Schmitt,
integrates history into drama in order to represent a state of emergency requiring
a decision from the play’s protagonist. Yet, as in his earlier use of Hobbes, Schmitt
bases his interpretation on a misreading, a distinction between aesthetics and
politics, performance and praxis, that Hamlet repeatedly undermines: “Hamlet
learns that acting and playacting are not necessarily opposed, as Schmitt seems
to think they are” (46). Ultimately, Kahn interprets Hamlet or Hecuba as an
attempt to make Shakespeare’s tragedy into an allegory for Schmitt’s own “tragic”
decisions and his involvement with the Nazi party.
Continuing with modern exegeses of Shakespeare, chapter 2 focuses on
Ernst Kantorowicz’s famous analysis of Richard II in The King’s Two Bodies. Kahn
shows that Kantorowicz reads political and legal theory as a form of fiction, a
poiesis that historically leads toward the separation between the person and
office of monarch, and eventually even toward constitutionalism. In examining
political theology as a fiction, Kantorowicz articulates a powerful vision of
literature’s capacity “for ideological critique and for enabling fictions of human
community” (60). Chapter 3 glosses the relationship of Schmitt and Strauss
to Machiavelli. Whereas Schmitt admires Machiavelli for his decisionism and
anti-liberalism, Strauss condemns the author of the Prince for breaking with
medieval theology in favour of historicism and relativism. In this regard, Kahn
broadly agrees with Strauss in reading the Florentine as a modern, but unlike
the conservative theorist she stresses the continuing relevance of Machiavelli’s
Renaissance and Reformation / Renaissance et Réforme 39.1, Winter / hiver 2016
186 book reviews
concept of virtue and its relation to man’s “creative and poetic powers to make
or shape his own experience” (85). In particular, Kahn views Machiavelli’s
pragmatic description of the uses and abuses of religion in shaping communities
as a possible solution to the problem of the neutrality of value in liberalism.
The rest of Kahn’s book concentrates on readings of Benedict de Spinoza.
Pushing against Strauss, Schmitt, and their descendents in the recent “return
to religion,” chapter 4 picks up on interpretations from Hannah Arendt, Louis
Althusser, and Pierre Macherey, showing that Spinoza’s critique of scripture
unites historical contextualization and textuality; his invitation to rationally
evaluate scripture and culture as humanly constructed artifacts resembles a
“dialectical mode of interpretation” more in line with literary analysis than
instrumental reason (142). Chapter 5 likewise considers Spinoza’s influence,
presenting Sigmund Freud as an important successor to the seventeenth-
century philosopher. Faced with an increasingly precarious political situation
and deeply invested in responding to the so-called “Jewish Question,” the late
Freud contributes to what Yirmiyahu Yovel terms the “dark enlightenment”
through a Spinozist reading of Jewish history in Moses and Monotheism,
one that both builds and departs from an earlier interest in the Moses of the
Italian Renaissance. At the same time, like Spinoza before him, the founder
of psychoanalysis consistently distinguishes between the illusions offered by
religion (delusionary fantasy-work related to neurosis) and art (salutary and
productive manifestations of imagination and desire).
The Future of Illusion intervenes in the crisis in liberalism and forcefully
critiques the current debate over the grounding of modern politics: a tendency in
recent scholarship to accept functionalist narratives that view apparently secular
justifications as replacements for theological explanations, a conversation that
overlooks aesthetic modes of reasoning from early modernity in favour of the
less radical enlightenment of the eighteenth century. Kahn makes a decisive
case for the role of art in the discussion of political value while assuming from
her reader an investment in the project of a secular liberal culture. Given that
Kahn’s subjects are responding to the failures of the Enlightenment, I would have
appreciated further engagement with the anti-liberal left (Kahn’s too sporadic
references to Walter Benjamin, Arendt, Althusser, Macherey, even Theodor
Adorno, invariably illuminate). Still, The Future of Illusion does excellent work
in multiple fields. While this monograph will be productively read by early
modernists, its greatest contribution could be in directing scholars of political
Renaissance and Reformation / Renaissance et Réforme 39.1, Winter / hiver 2016
comptes rendus 187
theology and twentieth-century thought toward important but frequently
neglected sites for future exploration.
david katz
University of Massachusetts, Amherst
Kyd, Thomas.
The Spanish Tragedy: Authoritative Text, Sources and Context, Criticism. Ed.
Michael Neill.
A Norton Critical Edition. New York: W. W. Norton & Company, 2014. Pp. xl,
289 + 5 ill. ISBN 978-0-393-93400-7 (paperback) US$13.12.
Michael Neill’s edition of The Spanish Tragedy provides an opportunity to re-
think the play’s canonical significance and to appreciate the difficult choices
facing editors who work with the space restrictions of print editions.
It’s clear from Neill’s introduction that he wants us to pay careful attention
to the details of language, style, metre, and literary devices, and to note Kyd’s
“frequent uses of stichomythia” (xii) and plenty of “carefully balanced figures
of antithesis and chiasmus” (xiv). Stylistic shifts, too, “mimic” Hieronimo’s
conflicted psyche. Neill speaks of Kyd’s “ceremonious style” (xvi) being
disrupted by—and sometimes mirroring—larger rhetorical and political shifts
in action and plot. Thus, the play’s minutiae are inextricably connected to its
theme, which, says Neill, is “the administration of law […] [that] was often
haphazard and sometimes corrupt” (xxix).
For Neill, the play “established the set of conventions” defining the whole
revenge tragedy subgenre (xxvii). The persistence of the play’s many printings
and stagings testifies to its rightful place in the early modern canon. The same
sentiment was expressed earlier by J. R. Mulryne (Th. Kyd, The Spanish Tragedy,
1989, rpt. 2000), who was also enraptured by “the play’s enormous and long-
lived popularity” (xxxiv). While I concur with Neill’s and Mulryne’s assessment,
I wonder how many students (and academics) are drawn to the play more by
the force of its ancestral affinity to Hamlet than by the attractiveness of its
literary merits.
The Spanish Tragedy’s problematic textual history emerges from
discrepancies between Abel Jeffe’s and Edward White’s 1592 octavo-in-fours
Renaissance and Reformation / Renaissance et Réforme 39.1, Winter / hiver 2016