]hp-tsih.scisyhp[
1v9575.7011:viXra
“Oxford IX” International Symposium on Archaeoastronomy
Proceedings IAU Symposium No. 278, 2011 (cid:13)c 2011International AstronomicalUnion
The Tom´arˆaho conception of the sky
Guillermo Sequera1 and Alejandro Gangui2,3
1Secretar´ıa Nacional deCultura de Paraguay
2Institutode Astronom´ıa y F´ısica delEspacio (CONICET–UBA),
Ciudad Universitaria, 1428 Buenos Aires, Argentina
3Centro de Formaci´on e Investigacio´n en la Ensen˜anza de las Ciencias,
FCEyN, Universidad deBuenos Aires, Argentina
email: gangui@df.uba.ar
Abstract.
The small community of the Toma´rˆaho, an ethnic group culturally derived from the Zamu-
cos, have become known in the South American and world anthropological scenario in recent
times.Thisgroup,farfromthebanksoftheParaguayriver,remainedconcealedfromorganized
modern societies for many years. Like any other groups of people in close contact with nature,
the Toma´rˆaho developed a profound and rich world-view which parallels other more widely re-
searched aboriginal cultures as well as showing distinctive features of their own. This is also
apparent in their imagery of the sky and of the characters that are closely connected with the
celestial sphere.
This paper is based on the lengthy anthropological studies of G. Sequera. We have recently
undertaken a project to carry out a detailed analysis of the different astronomical elements
present in the imagined sky of the Toma´rˆaho and other Chamacoco ethnic groups. We will
brieflyreviewsomeaspectsofthisaboriginalculture:placeswheretheylive,regionsofinfluence
in the past, their linguistic family, their living habits and how the advancement of civilization
affected their culture and survival. We will later mention the fieldwork carried out for decades
and some of the existing studies and publications. We will also make a brief description of the
methodologyofthisworkandspecialanthropologicalpractices.Lastbutnotleast,wewillfocus
on the Toma´rˆaho conception of the sky and describe the research work we have been doing in
recent times.
Keywords. ethnoastronomy,anthropology, Chamacoco, UpperParaguay
1. Tom´arˆaho culture
The act of living in a certainculture may be displayedin many different ways.One of
these is creativity, at stake when observing the changing phenomena of the surrounding
natural world: giving names to things; naming people, animals and plants; in short,
buildinguptheknowledgeandsymbolstoenablethemtoacquireanidentityandsurvive
as a society. The present-day groups aspire to this, completely paralleling the cultures
in the past, for whom this was a strong motivation—both of the more technologically
developed groups as well as the ones who did not follow the frantic development of
‘civilization’ and remained in closer contact with nature. The small community of the
Toma´rˆaho is an example of the latter.
A first contact with members of this ethnic group took place in 1986 when one of the
authors (Sequera) was able to see for himself the situation of near slavery and strong
dependence the membersofthis peoplehadtoputupwithintheir relationshipwiththe
Carlos Casado company, which was industrializing the region. This Anglo-Argentinian
enterprise, in complicity with the Paraguayan government since the end of the 19th
century (a few years after the end of the War of the Triple Alliance which weakened the
66 Guillermo Sequera & Alejandro Gangui
nation considerably), had illegally taken the lands of the Toma´rˆaho and exploited the
quebracho woods extensively in order to obtain timber for railway sleepers and to stock
their tanning plants. With no recognized rights of any kind, the natives were made to
work as axemen under hard labour conditions and to be, in their turn, witnesses to the
plunderoftheChacowoods.Inthiswaytheybecamehelplessvictimsofthesubjugation
of the environment that was vital to them (Sequera 2006).
Given the importance of carrying out an anthropological study of this ethnic minor-
ity, comparative studies were undertaken of ethnographic sources in different libraries
and research centres. These have helped to clarify our view of the possible origin of the
Toma´rˆaho and uncovered mentions of them in Jesuits’ letters (cartas annuas) and old
chronicles. Sequera, moreover,lived among the natives for several periods between 1987
and 1992, which enabled him to carry out a methodical programme of recognition and
transcription of the Toma´rˆaho language, to compile a detailed inventory of the social
representation of their flora and fauna, and to gather and register an immense mythi-
cal corpus that reveals the rich world-view of this small group. The ethnological work
combined the most pertinent qualitative techniques from anthropology with scientific
rigour in observations.It also stressed the importance of fieldwork based on the method
of participant observation, in line with the works of the PolishanthropologistBronisl aw
Malinowski (Malinowski 1922).
The Toma´rˆaho (or Tomara´xo) form a small ethnic group, which together with the
Ybyto´so (or Ebido´so), makes up a larger group, the Ishir, known in Paraguay as the
Chamacoco.The Chamacoco,traditionally hunter-gatherers,arerelatedlinguisticallyto
the Zamuco family. Another indigenous group, the Ayoreo, also belongs to the Zamuco
linguistic family. We do not proposeto discuss the etymologyofthese wordsandnames:
disparate proposals abound, based mainly upon the writings of European chroniclers,
goingbackas far asViaje al R´ıo de la Plata, 1534–1554 by harquebusierUlrico Schmidl
(1510–1580).Indifferentcataloguesoflanguagesanddialects,foundwithincompilations
of chronicles and other European texts, terms such as Timinabas, later Timinaha, and
variants crop up, always in the Zamuco category. It is mentioned that the peoples who
spoketheselanguageslivedintheChacowoods,inland,farfromtheParaguayriver.Itis
alsosaidthatthesenativeshadnotyetbeen‘subdued bythe JesuitMission’.We gather
then that they are referring to the Toma´rˆaho, those natives whose descendants Sequera
visited in the neighbouring area of San Carlos in 1986 and who, due to their ancient
customs and their own idiosyncrasies, remained alienated from Paraguayan society for
many years.
Shamanism is just as relevant among the Chamacoco as it is in other indigenous
cultures. Vocal music is closely related to rituals carried out by both male and female
shamans. These prominent members of the tribe, known as konsaha or ahanak, create
their own repertoires based on dreams, called chykˆera, which stimulate the creation of
their poems, melodies and rhythms. The Chamacoco shamans try to dominate their
dreams by turning them into a chant called teichu. The production of these songs is
highly personal. While they can be transmitted to other members of the community,
they are generally performed in groups where several songs mix together and a very
distinctive musical atmosphere is created, together with rattles (sonajas) and whistles
as instrumental accompaniment. Rattles called osecha or paˆıkˆara by the Chamacoco are
made from gourds (calabazas of the species Lagenaria siceraria) or with tortoise shells
called enermitak (Geochelone carbonaria). Dry seeds or pebbles are put inside so as to
produce sound. These rattles represent the sky and the shamans identify their upper
part with the centre of the sky, porr hos´ypyte. Painted on the body of the instrument
are‘visualnarratives’intheshapeofrhomboids,andinsidethesegeometricalfiguresare
The Tom´araˆho conception of the sky 67
representationsofthestars,porrebija(Sequera2006).Studiessuggestacloserelationship
between the various Chamacoco vocal and instrumental techniques—especially among
theToma´rˆaho,whereshamanismhaslastedlongerandmoreintensively—andtheirvision
of the world, a bond between musical expression and the natives’ view of the universe
that still needs to be researchedin detail (see also Cordeu 1994).
Chamacoco shamanic practices are very similar to those of other South American
indigenouscultures,andevento those ofother continents:visionarydreams,personality
split,tranceachievedthroughchants,etc.aresituationstoberepeatedintimeandspace.
It is through these dreams that the konsaha discover for the rest of the members of the
tribe the true ‘topography’ of the indigenous universe and the way it interrelates with
the mythical tales inherited from their ancestors.†
2. Astronomical elements of the Ybyto´so and Tom´arˆaho sky
The Chamacoco imagine the world to be a disk-shaped flat surface which they call
hn˜ymich. Located on this immense earth disk are their familiar landscapes, their vil-
lages, rivers and woods, and also the neighbouring villages they have contact with. The
hn˜ymich stands on the waters of an aquatic world called niogorot urr. As with other
ancient peoples, the presence of a subterranean water world fits the Chamacoco world-
viewbecauseofthe importancethey assigntowaterinspringsandrivers(moreover,the
mythical beings called ahnapsuˆro are aquatic beings, as we shall see). The niogorot urr
is subdivided into various strata at different depths. Above the earth disk are situated
severaltransparentskies,genericallycalledporrioho.Theyareimmensehalfspheresthat
surround men and which they imagine resting on the sides of the hn˜ymich disk.
The Chamacoco conception of the sky also includes many representations related to
the stars, individually as well as in groups. We find the Milky Way, called iomyny and
meaning,perhaps,thewayofthesouls(Gim´enezBen´ıtezetal.2002),andother‘nebulae’
clearly seen from the greatParaguayanChaco, such as the Great (kajywysta) and Small
(kajywyhyrtˆa) Magellanic Clouds. The Sun, called Deich, and the Moon, Xekulku, both
male characters, feature as protagonists in several stories that are very precious to the
culture (Cordeu 1990–1991). There are also certain stories that mention Venus—which
they call Iohdle and also mother of the stars, porrebe bahlohta—which are related to the
othercelestialbodiesandtothegentiles.Protectorsareassignedtomanyelementsofthe
Chamacococosmos:thusinsectsareprotectedbyN˜ˆıogogo,the frogBufo granulosus,and
certain local birds are protected by Wohoˆra (for the Toma´rˆaho) and by Pˆeeta yrˆahata
(for the Ybyto´so)—‘spirits’ of the wilderness or of the forest. In the same way, stars
are protected by Abich, the star son of Venus, while the n˜andu´ or local ostrich (Rhea
Americana), called Pemme-Kamytˆerehe by the Chamacoco, is in charge of Deich, the
Sun. The kululteor chˆaro has also been representedin Chamacoco stories and drawings.
It is the ‘cosmic tree’ or world support, which, as in many other cultures, functions as a
link between the porrioho and the niogorot urr. As we will see later, the chˆaro plays a
privileged role in stories concerning shamanic travels.
3. The axis mundi
The centre exists as a symbol in many cultures and has been thoroughly studied by
historians of religion. According to Eliade, the existence of a cosmic centre is a natural
consequenceofthedivisionofrealityintothesacred(whereallthevalueisconcentrated)
andthe profane,whose spacegivesno orientationto man (Eliade1998[1957]).Thus the
† Adetailed anthropological analysis ofthecaseoftheQom,orTobas, from theArgentinian
Chaco can be consulted in Wright (2005).
68 Guillermo Sequera & Alejandro Gangui
world acquires meaning only through hierophanies.‡ These intrusions of the sacred into
the profane establish a unique place, a centre, which connects beyond the homogeneous
spaceunrelatedtoanymythicalinheritance.Itcanalsobeinterpretedassomethingthat
linksseveralexistentiallevels;amongthem,ofcourse,isordinarylife,buttheotherlevels
are inaccessible to men, or at least to most men.
The spatial arrangement of these different levels is oriented orthogonally to the flat
space of the earth, although the borders of the habitable earth also have special con-
notations. Moving between these levels takes place vertically, either towards the upper
partor,contrariwise,penetratingthe bowelsofthe earth.The typicalpicture thatarises
in the imagery of people from different cultures is that of a prominent mountain, which
stands out in the landscape; or a ‘cosmic tree’ distinguished by its height or old age; or
else someother type of‘pillar’thatfunctions asa link betweenthe sky andthe earth,as
well as with the lower regions.
Generallyspeaking,this objectiscalledanaxis mundi,andhistoryisfullofexamples.
We will see that there exists a strong parallel between these beliefs and the cosmos as
imaginedbytheYbyto´soandtheToma´rˆahofromthenorthernParaguayanChaco,where
the pillar will be represented by the chˆaro.
The mountain or cosmic pillar was not only located in the centre of the organized
spaceofancientcommunitiesbutitspeakveryoftenrepresentedthehighestpointinthe
world, an area that had not been reached even by the greatest floods ever. Such places
wereimagined,intheirturn,tobeakindofnaveloftheearth,anembryo.TheCreation
of the worldtook place there and then expandedtowardsthe periphery in all directions.
And of course, man had been born (had had his origin) in that centre of the world; it
was a centre of Creation.
4. The Ybyto´so and Tom´arˆaho axis mundi
As we have said, in the Chamacoco view of the universe the world is supported by a
tree called kululte or chˆaro. This tree, which belongs to the species Chorisia insignis, is
endemic to Paraguay and bordering countries and is known in Spanish as palo borracho
among other names. As in many other cultures, this cosmic tree represents the link
between the sky and the earth. It is said that in the roots of this mythological tree link
together all graves.
The Chamacoco’s upper universe is imagined to be a juxtaposition of transparent
skies called porrioho, opposite to the dwelling of the dead on earth where the chˆaro
sinks its roots. According to the Chamacoco origin myth, the earth and the sky were
linked together by the cosmic tree in ancient times. While the two kingdoms were, so
to speak, fused together, the inhabitants of the earth could move around without any
barriers or impediments. The earliest of these inhabitants, called yxyro poruwuhle, fed
themselves without effort, hunting animals and gathering fruits easily. This situation is
reminiscent of similar mythological eras in other cultures and it may very well be seen
as a sortof Chamacocoparadiseor gardenof abundance.However,as allthe informants
who collaboratedwith this ethnographic investigationstated, history changed its course
on the day when a widow called Dagylta and her children asked to be helped with food.
No-one would give her any assistance. On seeing her neighbours’ idleness and lack of
concern, Dagylta turned into a beetle and slowly began to gnaw the wood of the mighty
chˆaro. At that moment a bird appears in the story: dichikˆıor of the species Polyborus
plancus or Caracara plancus, known in Spanish as carancho. He attempted to stop the
‡ from Greek, hieros, meaning sacred, and phainein, revelation, so that hierophany could be
translated as ‘[where] thesacred is revealed’.
The Tom´araˆho conception of the sky 69
widow from carrying out her plan, but he failed and the cosmic tree finally fell down.
(AmongtheMocov´ı ofthe ArgentinianChacothereexistsaverysimilarstory,wherethe
widowisturnedinto acapybaraorcarpincho. Thisisdocumentedina1764chronicleby
the Jesuit father Guevara (Guevara 1969).)
ThetwoimagesshowninFig.1representtheconceptionofthecosmictreeasportrayed
graphically by Ogwa Flores Balbuena, a member of the Ybyto´so community (Sequera
2005).The upper drawing,made in 1991,representsthe Ybyto´so originmyth andshows
the central place occupied by the chˆaro. A variety of local birds and animals, together
withafewpeople,aretravellingbetweentheearthandthesky.Thelowerdrawing,made
in 1988, shows the tree Ebyta (another name for chˆaro) as the pillar and support of the
world, also during the time before its fall due to Dagylta’s intervention. This drawing
also shows the two kingdoms united by the mighty tree and some characters around it.
Figure 1. Drawings byOgwa Flores Balbuena, a member of the Ybyto´so
community,1991 (top) and 1988 (bottom).
70 Guillermo Sequera & Alejandro Gangui
When Dagylta, in the shape of a beetle, began gnawing and weakening the trunk of
the cosmic tree, many of the people who until then had moved freely between the sky
andtheearthforesawwhatmighthappenanddecidedtoclimbdown.Others,moreidle,
were left behind and once the tree had fallen, remained forever in the upper kingdom,
clingingtothesky.Theyturnedintotheporrebija,thestarsthatinhabittheChamacoco
sky. (Note that the Bushmen (Bosquimanos) of the Kalahari desert, South Africa, say
thatthe starsarethe veryfirstpeoples andthatthey arelikethem:nomadsandhunter-
gatherers (Krupp 1996). According to the Qom of the Argentinian Chaco, some people
became stars following a cataclysm that altered the structure of earth and sky (Wright
The Chamacoco say that when the bridge that joined the two kingdoms was cut off,
the universe expanded and the sky and the earth never came together again. In Ogwa
Flores’ representations, the sky is inhabited by beings that move about, interact and
cohabit with animals and plants of the upper region—a regionthat is located just a few
metres above the tops of the highest trees in the terrestrial woods. Moreover,we gather
from the stories that the colour of this same sky is reflected in the highest leaves of the
woods. When chˆaro collapsed, the two kingdoms became separated, transforming the
sky, which was seen as a thick layer, hard and grey, into a stratified region divided into
several levels. The Chamacoco imagery, through this foundational event of the collapse,
disconnects the universe into two opposing worlds: the upper kingdom, which resembles
a hemispherical sky, and the lower region, set on the original waters, which is imagined
to be like a wrecked world (Sequera 2006).
This heaven-earth-netherworld separation has been extensively recorded both by an-
thropologists and historians of religions. Eliade (1974 [1955]) mentions the case of the
Semangpygmiesinthe MalacaorMalayanpeninsula.Inthe centreofthe Semangworld
there is an enormous rock (or perhaps a limestone hill; see Evans 1968 [1937]), called
Batu Ribn or Batu ’Rem, which covers the lower regions and, in ancient times, was the
baseonwhichstoodatreetrunkthatreacheduptothesky.Thenetherworld,thecentre
of the earth and the entrance to heaven were joined by the same axis. This axis formed,
in turn, the way to take if you wished to move from one region to another. As the story
goes, communication with God and heaven was simple and natural for Semang people
in the past, but after a ritual blunder this relationship was ruptured. What had been
naturalfor allthe members ofthe Semang worldwasthen left as a privilegeonly for the
shamans.
5. The organization of space in the Chamacoco world
After the collapse of mythological chˆaro, a catastrophic event that took place early
in the history of the Ybyto´so and the Toma´rˆaho, the universe acquired a particular
architecturewheretheupperworldisseparatedfromtheundergroundworld.Theformer
is located above ground and it includes six strata, starting with the normal habitat of
plants and animals. This layer,solid and dry, is also the dwelling place of men and rises
to an altitude equal to the height of the highest palm tree. This region is called porr
iut, which in the Chamacoco language means lower sky. Next is a layer located above
the ground, which is characterized by its humidity. It is called porr pehet, which in the
indigenouslanguagesignifies‘halfwayuptoheaven’(pehetmeansspace).Itiswithinthis
layer that clouds are located and rain develops. Storms, brought about by beings called
osaˆsero (spirits of the storms), also develop here. It is the dwelling place of the wren-
like rushbirds (Phleocryptes melanops; pajaritos junqueros in Spanish or petˆıis chyperme
in the indigenous language), who fly low in swamps, and it is also where some of the
The Tom´araˆho conception of the sky 71
shamans dwell. Members of the Toma´rˆaho community affirm that this region is peopled
by strange spirits called osˆıoro kynaha, evil beings that transmit deceases: microbial
or contagious diseases are widespread in many regions of Northern Chaco. Nehmurt, a
mythical malevolent being, is also found in porr pehet.
The nextstratumofthe upper worldis calledporr pixt (true sky)andthe Chamacoco
representitasalayerofthickfog,thedomainofacharactercalledLapyxe,therainmaker.
Many characters act as guardians of certain things, both phenomena and animate and
inanimate objects, and Lapyxe is the guardian of the waters. It is in this region that
both the Moon and the Sun can be found but, according to some qualified informants,
with the latter located beneath the former. In fact, the outline of the Moon marks the
upper edge of the porr pixt. This edge constitutes the gate to heaven; it is difficult to
pass through as its guardians are strange spirits (osˆıoro kynaha). These are the main
obstacles the shamans (ahanak) have to overcomein order to travel throughthe skies of
the upper world during their shamanic flights.
The fourth sky, porr yhyr (high sky), is a wide area where the stars (porrebija) are
found, as wellas groupsofstars thatmake up asterismsandconstellations.Let us recall
thatinthe Chamacocoworld-viewthe starscameinto existenceasa resultofthe beings
left behind in the upper realm at the moment when the chˆaro, the cosmic tree that had
joinedthe skyandthe earthsincetime immemorial,collapsed.Themostluminous ‘star’
in the night sky after the Moon—the planet Venus, or Iohdle for the natives—is also
found in this clear sky, together with other kinds of celestial objects. For example, the
Milky Way, iomyny, which appears in the crystal-clear skies of the Chaco Paraguayoas
an outstanding whitish stripe across the sky, is also located in the porr yhyr. With the
exception of a few particularly visionary shamans, nobody has the power to enter this
distant and profound sky.
The two last strata of the upper world are called porr uhur (‘horizon’ sky) and porr
nahnyk (cold sky), respectively. The former is the threshold to the end of the firmament
andtheregionoftheunknown.Thelatterisseenasanindefinitespacewhichgoesbeyond
the inner skies, the region where the universe extends and the unknown predominates.
It is a profound, airless sky.†
Let us travel now in the opposite vertical direction, i.e. towards the kingdom of the
profound. The underground world, which, according to Chamacoco imagery, appeared
afterthefallofthecosmictree,isdividedintothreemainstrata.Itisahiddenworldthat
extends towardsthe bowelsof the earthand has a viscoseconstitution. It is supposedto
bearegionwheredestructionreigns.Thefirstregion,nˆıogoro urr,isawetlandzonewith
superficial water courses. This fluid medium is inhabited by the mythical eel dyhylygyta
and also the uriche, the present otter (of the species Lontra longicaudis). These animals
coexist with spirits that take the shape of fishes. It is these fishes who give the shamans
powers to fight against strange spirits (osˆıoro kynaha).
The second subterranean layer is imagined to be an area of deep waters mixed with
thick viscous mud. It is known as hn˜ymich yhyrt, literally ‘earth of the high hill’, and it
is the dwelling place of monsters similar to eels. The most fabulous among them, both
in terms of its size and its giant red head, is what the natives call pˆeeta. This monster
eelgrantsto certainshamansthe powerto movequicklythroughthis subterraneanlayer
and to emerge from the water underworld at great speed at any point on the earth.
Finally, the third subterranean layer is called hn˜ymich urruo, which means ‘under the
ground’.This is the regionof the dark and rottenworldof corpsesand that of the being
† Cordeu (1994) has provided a different stratification of the upper world, more related to
thechromatic and atmospheric properties of the sky.
72 Guillermo Sequera & Alejandro Gangui
called amyrmy lata, which resembles a giantarmadillo (Priodontes maximus) and which
is connected with initiated shamans.
Although these different strata of the wrecked world cause destruction, death, and
finallyputrefactionofeverythingalive,they cannonethelessliberatecertainforcesofas-
cension such as those that propel the shamans through the second layer (Sequera 2006)
and also those that characterize the ahnapsuˆro (or axn´absero), the mythical beings of
the Chamacoco world. Having been described for the first time by Guido Boggiani in
1900(Baldus 1932;Suˇsnik 1995[1969]),the ahnapsuˆro are recollectedby allChamacoco
natives,althoughonlytheToma´rˆahomaintaintheirritualpracticesofmythicalrepresen-
tation today (in the originmyths called emuhno). These powerful aquatic beings, whose
bodiesarecoveredwithscalesandfeathers,arebelievedtobethefoundersofChamacoco
culture.Intimeslongago,theylivedtogetherwiththeearliestinhabitants,yxyro,infull
harmony; they even taught the first peoples to search for food and organize themselves.
Butifthey appearnowadaysintheToma´rˆahocampthiswillcauseshockandterror.For
this reason, rituals are organized regularly that will reduce the danger of their possible
presence.
6. Final discussion and future projects
Inthis articlewe havegivena briefsketchofthe immense richnessofChamacococon-
ceptions of their relationship with nature and the sky. Painstaking ethnographic work
has brought to light the most remarkable features of this aboriginal group as a whole,
and particularly the characteristics of the Toma´rˆaho and Ybyt´oso. Through this work
increasing numbers of people have become familiar with their culture and come to de-
velopa greatrespectfor their traditions andcultural identity. The transcriptionof their
language, and their slow social improvement and education, are some of the elements
that will help others to build upon this work in the future.
In the course of this vital ethnographic work, however, astronomical knowledge and
practices have not been treated as thoroughly as the other aspects. Among the things
that remain to be done are a detailed analysis of the recognition and identification of
outstanding aspects of the Chamacoco sky, and an in-depth study of the true meaning
of the chˆaro, the cosmic tree that once united the sky and the earth and which remains,
even now, central to rituals concerning the origin of the world. Other aspects needing
greaterattentionarethenamesof,andthestoriesthatwerealmostcertainlytoldabout,
prominent stars visible at different times of the year, such as Sirius, and prominent
asterisms such as Orion’s belt; imagery concerning the presence and characteristics of
the Milky Way; and their interpretation of certain exceptional and sudden phenomena,
such as total solar eclipses, and of objects that make prolonged appearances in the sky,
such as comets, or sporadic ones such as meteors.
The story of Iodhle (Venus), who long ago married a young Toma´rˆaho, is just one
of many stories with astronomical elements that old people used to tell. Many of these
storiesarestillrememberedbyoldermembersofthisgroup.Itisnecessaryandurgentto
try to incorporateaspects of this culture into the intangible heritage of humanity before
it is lost forever.Another project being planned is to try to understand the relationship
between the vocal and instrumental techniques of the Chamacoco and their view of the
universesurroundingthem, especiallyin the use they makeofrattles(paˆıkˆara) which,as
we have seen, represent the starry sky.
As part of our project we intend to work together with members of the present
Toma´rˆaho community to gather data on the recognition of stars and constellations and
their distribution, dark zones in the sky, nebulae etc. These data would be presented as
The Tom´araˆho conception of the sky 73
annotatedmapsthat wouldconveythe symbolic significanceofthe Toma´rˆahoskyof the
Upper Chaco region at different times of the year. This could tell us a great deal about
aboriginal imagery and also about many aspects of their everyday life that they project
into the dark depths of the sky. In short, we consider that the Toma´rˆaho conception of
the sky has not been sufficiently explored as a study in itself, and that more fieldwork
would be welcome in the area of ethnoastronomy as an interdisciplinary activity that
includes both anthropologists and astronomers.
Acknowledgements
We wish to thank Beatriz Tosso, whose key input benefitted the final shape of this
article. A. G. acknowledges support from CONICET and from the University of Buenos
Aires. Both authors would like to thank their colleagues participating in the Paran´a
Ra’angaproject(AECID),wherethiscollaborationstarted,formanyfruitfuldiscussions.