1v5643.2031:viXra
THE THIRD LIFE OF QUANTUM LOGIC:
QUANTUM LOGIC INSPIRED BY QUANTUM COMPUTING
J. MICHAEL DUNN, LAWRENCE S. MOSS, AND ZHENGHAN WANG
Abstract. Webeginbydiscussingthehistoryofquantumlogic,dividingitinto
three eras or “lives.” The first life has to do with Birkhoff and von Neumann’s
algebraic approach in the 1930’s. The second life has to do with attempt to
understand quantum logic as logic that began in the late 1950’s and blossomed
inthe1970’s. Andthethirdlifehastodowithrecentdevelopmentsinquantum
logiccomingfromitsconnectionstoquantumcomputation. Wediscussourown
workconnectingquantumlogictoquantumcomputation(viewingquantumlogic
as the logic of quantum registers storing qubits), and make some speculations
about mathematics based on quantum principles.
1. History
Modern classical logic began with Boole (1847), who had two interpretations of
the elements in his algebra of logic. The first interpretation was that they were
classes; the second was that they were propositions. He connected the two, saying
that for purposes of inference a proposition could be regarded as a class.1
We see in Boole a prescient anticipation of the contemporary mathematization
of propositions as sets (of “cases,” “occasions,” “times,” “possible worlds,” “sit-
uations,” “set-ups,” “states,” whatever), sometimes called “UCLA propositions.”
Conjunction is interpreted as intersection, disjunction as union, and negation as
complement (relative to a given underlying set of possible ). This way of looking
at propositions can be generalized to include other non-classical logics, including
quantum logic, though we will see that only conjunction remains in its original
form.
1.1. Thefirst life ofquantum logic: Birkhoff and vonNeumann. Quantum
logic began with Birkhoff and von Neumann (1936) when they published their
pioneering paper titled “The Logic of Quantum Mechanics.” 2
Boole (1847)spoke somewhat abstractly of classes of “conceivable cases and conjunctures of
circumstances,”whereasBoole(1854)tookamoreconcretetemporalinterpretation,speakingof
classes of “times” (calling these “durations”). See Kneale (1956).
That paper was anticipated by von Neumann’s 1932 book on the mathematical foundations
of quantum mechanics. There in section 5, chapter 3, he observed that the projections defined
on a Hilbert space could be regarded as representing experimental propositions concerning the
properties of a quantum mechanical system. Projections correspond to closed subspaces.
2 J. MICHAEL DUNN,LAWRENCES. MOSS,AND ZHENGHANWANG
They point out that in classical dynamics, the state of a single particle can be
described as a sextuple hr ,...,r i of real numbers, where the first 3 components
specify its position and the second 3 components specify its momentum. The
“phase space” for n particles can thus by thought of as the product set R6n. Any
subset of R6n can be thought of as an event, or proposition. And conjunction,
disjunction, and negation can be understood as Boole’s operations on sets.
But anyone who knows anything about quantum mechanics has heard of the
Heisenberg Uncertainty principle, which says that one cannot simultaneously de-
termine both the position and momentum of a particle. Birkhoff and von Neu-
mann accordingly move to the more complicated phase-space on which they build
their quantum logic. There is a correspondence with classical dynamics and Boole,
except not every set of states determines a proposition – only the closed subspaces.
The conjunction ∧ of two subspaces is their set intersection, but their disjunction
∨ is the closure of their span.3 And the negation of a subspace is the set of states
that are “orthogonal” (α ⊥ β) to every state in the subspace, where α ⊥ β means
that the “inner product” α•β = 0.
1.2. Boolean algebras and their generalizations. In this section we quickly
review some algebraicstructures that have naturally ariseninthestudy ofclassical
logic and quantum logic.
A Boolean algebra is a special kind of bounded distributive lattice where every
element x has a complement ∼ x. Let us go through this a step at a time. A
lattice can be defined as a partially ordered set (L,≤) where for any x, y ∈ L,
there exists a greatest lower bound x∧y ∈ L and a least upper bound x∨y ∈ L.
(There are several additional laws which we omit.) Think of x,y as propositions,
≤ as entailment, ∧ as conjunction, and ∨ as disjunction.
The lattice is bounded if it has both a least element 0 and a greatest element
1. It is complemented if for every element x there is an element x′ such that
x∧x′ = 0. Complements are unique in a Boolean algebra, so we can introduce a
unary operation ∼ that takes x to its complement. It can then be shown that ∼
is order inverting (if x ≤ y then ∼y ≤∼x) and of period two (∼∼x = x). In
the context of a lattice these are equivalent to the De Morgan Laws: ∼(x∧y) =
∼x∨ ∼y and∼ (x∨y) =∼x∧ ∼y.InaBooleanalgebrathenwehavex∨ ∼x = 1.
A lattice is distributive if x∧(y ∨z) ≤ (x∧y)∨(x∧z). (The converse is true in
any lattice.)
A unary operation ∼ on an arbitrary lattice is an orthocomplement if it is of
period two, order inverting, and ∼x is the complement of x. Orthocomplements
are not necessarily unique outside of the context of a distributive lattice. An
ortholattice is a structure (L,≤,∼) where (L,≤) is a lattice and ∼ is an ortho-
complement.
3This enlarges the union in two distinct ways. First by adding all linear combinations (the
“span”), and secondly by adding all limit points (the “closure”).
THIRD LIFE 3
An ortholattice is a generalization of a Boolean algebra in that it does not need
to be distributive.
Let us first consider three critical laws. There are various equivalent ways to
state the modular law, and we choose:
(Modularity) if z ≤ x,then x∧(y ∨z) ≤ (x∧y)∨z.
The modular law holds in classical logic, and in fact it holds without any condi-
tions, since in the context of a lattice the consequent (x∧(y ∨z) ≤ (x∧y)∨z)
comes unconditionally from distribution (and is in fact equivalent). Modularity
can also be stated unconditionally as:
(Unconditional Modularity) x∧(y ∨[x∧z]) ≤ (x∧y)∨z.
This is not strictly an equation but we can treat all weak inequalities as equations
in virtue of the general lattice equivalence s ≤ t iff s∧t = s. This means that the
class of modular lattices is equationally definable.
Birkhoff andvonNeumannnotedthatthedistributive lawfailsintheir quantum
logic, but somewhat surprisingly they also note that the modular law also fails.
Instead there is a weaker “orthomodular law”:
(Orthomodularity) if z ≤ x,then x∧(∼x∨z) ≤ z.4
An orthomodular lattice is an ortholattice in which the orthomodular law holds.
This leads to a linguistically confusing but important distinction between an or-
thomodular lattice and a modular ortholattice. Modular ortholattices are special
kinds of orthomodular lattices. It is interesting that Birkhoff and von Neumann
(1936) took the former and not the latter as part of their logic of quantum me-
chanics. R´edei points out that the they prefer the modular law because of its fit
with a generalization of classical probability theory.5
Our reason for liking the modular law was different and had to do with wanting
a generalization of the register of bits in a classical computer, so as to have a
quantum register of qubits. We focused on finite registers and it is well-known
that finite dimensional orthomodular lattices are modular.
There is an absraction under which one can fit both probability and dimension.
A standard (Kolmgorov) requirement on a probability function
4This has the philosophically memorable equivalent: x ∧ (∼ x ∨ (x ∧ y)) ≤ y,
which has led to regarding ∼x∨(x∧y) as a conditional – the so-called “Sasakai hook,” named
after its discoverer.
5R´edei (2007) contains an interesting discussion of this, as do other publications by R´edei.
See particularly R´edei (2005) regarding the background correspondence from von Neumann to
Birkhoff.
4 J. MICHAEL DUNN,LAWRENCES. MOSS,AND ZHENGHANWANG
can trivially be restated and generalized (putting a general function f for p) as
Birkhoff (1940) calls such a real-valued function a “valuation” and shows that
the existence of a strictly monotonic valuation on a lattice implies implies that
the lattice is modular. Birkhoff observes that both probability and dimension
are valuations, and both are monotonic. Dimension is obviously also strictly
monotonic (a < b implies d(a) < d(b)), and so it seems is probability when it is
taken in its logical interpretation.6
1.3. The second life of quantum logic: quantum logic as logic. From the
late 1950’s, and especially in the 1970’s and 80’s, quantum logic had a second life.
AsissaidbyDallaChiaraandGiuntiniafterdiscussing BirkhoffandvonNeumann
(1937): “Only twenty years later, after the appearance of George Mackey’s book
MathematicalFoundationsofQuantum Theory [Mackey, 1957],onehaswitnesseda
‘renaissance period’ for the logico-algebraic approach to QT. This has been mainly
stimulated by thecontributions ofJauch, Piron, Varadarajan, Suppes, Finkelstein,
Foulis, Randall, Geechie, Gudder, Beltrametti, Cassinelli, Mittelstaedt and many
others.”Themaintopicofinterest regardingquantumlogicregardedthenovelty of
yet another non-classical logic, and how it compared with intuitionistic logic (the
main alternative to non-classical logic at that point). There was also relatively
great interest (compared to Birkhoff and von Neumann, and now) about how it
should best be conceived (orthomodular lattice, many-valued logic, etc.), and fol-
lowing this in the standard logical issues of semantics, proof-theory, completeness,
and decidability. There was a strong preference for the orthomodular approach,
and that gave a proof-theory and a semantics (the closed subspaces of a Hilbert
space), but connecting the two has proved impossible. It turns out that the lattice
of closed subspaces of a Hilbert space satisfies additional laws, even those that can
be stated as equations such as the “Orthoarguesian law”7. Another problem is
that the axiom system can be given in so-called “Hilbert-style” by translating the
axioms for orthomodular lattices into a more standard logical formalism, but to
our knowledge no one has yet succeeded in giving an equivalent cut-free Gentzen
version (which many people think is the gold-standard approach to proof-theory)
of orthomodular logic or modular orthologic.8
6VonNeumannseemstohavegonebackandforthonhowheinterpretedprobability(frequency
or logical), but about this time seemed to favor logical probability. See Redei (2005).
7This apparently was an unpublished idea of Alan Day, and the proof was first presented by
Greechie (1983). See Dalla Chiara, Giuntini, and Greechie (2004)
8See Nishimura (2009) for presentation and history of cut-free Gentzen systems for “minimal
quantum logic” (what we are calling orthologic) and its history. See also Egly and Tompits
(1999). Chiara and Giuntini (2002) in sec. 17 (by G. Battilotti and C Faggian) discuss a
Gentzen system for orthologic developed by Sambin, Battilotti, and Faggian that has a cut-free
formulation, but they do not address orthomodular logic or modular orthologic.
THIRD LIFE 5
1.4. The third life of quantum logic: quantum logic based on quantum
computation. Dalla Chiara and Giuntini speak of a “Renaissance,” which of
course literally means “rebirth,” i.e., a second life. We believe that quantum logic
now has a “third life,” inspired by quantum computing. And subtly different
algebraic structures arise (with some of the same open questions, but new chances
at solving them).
Although Richard Feynman had first suggested the idea of a quantum computer
to simulate quantum processes faster than might be done by a classical computer,
it was not until 1985 that David Deutsch published a paper describing a general
purpose (universal) quantum computer. Deutsch modified the classical Turing
machines to make equivalents among other differences put qubits in place of the
standardbinarydigitsthatappearonthetapeofaTuringmachine. Theequivalent
use of quantum gates has become the much more customary way of characterizing
quantum computation. This work was once purely theoretical, but after 1994,
when Peter Shor gave his famous algorithm for efficiently factoring numbers into
prime, theidea ofa quantum computer begantotake onreal practical significance.
This is because of the widely used RSA encryption scheme that depends on the
difficulty of factoring large numbers into their prime components.
From its early years logic has been linked to computation. Leibniz’s great
achievement was to combine the idea of a “lingua universalis” with a “calculus
raciocinator”. The two together facilitate “blind thinking,” as Leibniz termed it,
since reasoning is reduced to arithmetic calculation.”The link between classical
computing and classical logic is often taken for granted. Many standard classical
textbooks contain both, e.g. Kleene’s (1950) Introduction to Metamathematics.
But the use of classical logic to describe and design circuits is not even mentioned,
whereas thishasbecomealmost thestandardapproachtothinking aboutquantum
logics.
Inaclassical computer, dataisstoredasa“string”ofbitsinaregister. Registers
come in various sizes, thus a 64-bit register contains strings of length 64. The
“register space” can be viewed as the direct product of the 2-element Boolean
algebra, i.e., the set of n-element sequences of 0s and 1s. This can be viewed
as a Boolean algebra itself by the direct product construction, defining ∧,∨,−
component wise, e.g., −hb ,...,b i = h−b ,...,−b i.
What is the logic of the classical n-bit register? Is it the same as the logic of the
1-bit register (classical logic) or not? This is answerable in two steps. We first
take classical propositional calculus, and form its “Lindenbaum Algebra” by the
“Method of Abstraction.” We thus put two provably equivalent formulas ϕ and ϕ′
into the same equivalence class [ϕ] = [ϕ′], and we then define operations on these
equivalence classes using the sentential operators, e.g., −[ϕ] = [−ϕ]. For classical
propositional calculus this gives a Boolean algebra in which the equivalence class
of the theorems = 1. The second step is to invoke a form of the Representation
Theorem for Boolean algebras (Stone 1935): Every Boolean algebra is isomorphic
6 J. MICHAEL DUNN,LAWRENCES. MOSS,AND ZHENGHANWANG
to a subdirect product of the 2-element Boolean algebra (1-bit register). Combin-
ing these ideas, classical propositional logic can easily be shown to be the logic of
the n-bit register (not just the 2-bit one).
The qubit is a “quantum bit”. Unlike the classical bit, 0 and 1 are just two of
infinitely many possible states of the qubit. The state of a qubit is the “superposi-
tion”(linearcombination) α0i+β1i(whereα,β arecomplex numbers representing
“amplitudes”–amplitudes squared give probabilities).9 The state of a qubit can be
described as a vector (α,β) in the two-dimensional complex vector space C2. The
special states 0 and 1 are known as the computational basis states, and form an
orthonormal basis for this vector space. According to quantum theory, when we
try to measure the qubit in this basis in order to determine its state, we get either
0 with probability |α|2 or 1 with probability |β|2. This motivates requiring that
|α|2+|β|2 = 1. (This is a Probability Sum Rule for disjoint events).
Quantum registers contain qubits (quantum bits). The 2-dimensional space of
the complex numbers C2 = C⊕C can be thought as a quantum register containing
a single qubit, and all the pairs of complex numbers in it are then thought of as
states of that qubit. The n-qubit register C2n can then be defined inductively
as C2 ⊗ C2n−1 , i.e., C2 ⊗ C2 ⊗ ··· ⊗ C2 (n-times). It turns out that unlike the
analogous case with classical logic, the logic of the n-qubit register is generally
different that the logic of the 1-bit quantum register, and indeed the logic of the
n-qubit register is always different from the logic of the m-bit quantum register
when m 6= n. This was shown in Dunn, Hagge, Moss, and Wang (2005), and the
result was improved by Hagge (2007) who showed for all m 6= n, the logics of Cm
and Cn differ. (Note that the superscript here is n and not 2n.) This leads us to
wonder whether every subdirectly irreducible modular lattice is isomorphic to the
lattice of subspaces of some Cn. If it were, then by Birkhoff’s Subdirect Product
Theorem, every modular ortholattice would be isomorphic to a subdirect product
of such lattices.
We titled the conference “Quantum Logic Inspired by Quantum Computing”
(QLIQC, pronounced “click”), but it turns out it might just as well have been
“Quantum Logic Inspired by Quantum Categories” in terms of the talks given
(and the subsequent papers published in this volume).
2. Quantum logic inspired by quantum computing
The BB84 private key protocol (Bennett and Brassard 1984), Shor’s algorithm
(Shor 1994), and Hastings’ additivity counterexamples (Hastings 2009) are all
pieces of evidence that quantum information theory is strictly richer than classical
information theory. The attempt to build a useful quantum computer has begun
9This is usually written in the Dirac notation as α|0i+β|1i, but we will not be so fussy in
our motivating explanations here.
THIRD LIFE 7
and rekindled interest in quantum mechanics at all levels: philosophical, mathe-
matical and physical. Unlike the construction of the classical computer, to build
a quantum computer might require new physics such as non-abelian topological
order (Freedman et al 2003).
Ever since its appearance, quantum mechanics presents great conceptual diffi-
culty, even for the most brilliant minds. In quantum mechanics, the wave function
of a state is a complete description of the physical state, and the Schrodinger equa-
tion is a deterministic evolution of the state. When the measuring apparatus is
included into the system, the measurement of a quantum system is a deterministic
process for the composite system with complete description. Yet our best inter-
pretation for the measurement result is still probabilistic. Probability is usually
related to insufficient knowledge. The mismatch of a complete description of a
quantum system with the probabilistic interpretation lies at the heart of the de-
bate. Maybe humans are innately not able to apprehend a quantum state. But the
emergence of numbers seems to suggest otherwise. Children’s counting ability is
arguably primitive and dormant, and only through education is the number fully
developed into counting with numbers. Historically tally seems to come first, then
counting, and finally abstract numbers. An important step in the emergence of
numbers is the separation of things to be counted from their associated symbols.
Quantum information is taking this step right now. The qubit is the abstraction of
2-level quantum systems, therefore it is not an electron spin; similarly, the number
one is not an apple. Hence the qubit likely will play an important role in the
evolution of numbers.
2.1. Quantum logic of qubits. Qubitsarethecurrencyforquantumcomputing.
Their states are represented by non-zero vectors of the Hilbert space (C2)⊗n. In
this section, we will examine the quantum logic of qubits following the ideas of
G. Birkhoff and J. von Neumann (1936).
2.1.1. Quantum logic determines dimension. Given a Hilbert space H, let L (H)
be the lattice of closed subspaces of H. Closed subspaces are quantum events, so
they are quantum analogues of propositions. We will use 0,1 to denote the 0-
subspace and H, respectively. The meet ∧ of two subspaces is the set intersection,
and the join ∨ the closure of their span. For any closed subspace p, its negation
p⊥ is the orthogonal complement. It is well-known that L (H) is an orthomodular
lattice and modular if and only if H is finite dimensional. Propositional formulas
consist ofalphabetsymbols, parenthesis, andconnectives ∧,∨and ¯. Let{u }bea
collection of alphabet symbols, and {p } be a collection of closed subspaces. Given
a well-formed formula (wff) φ(u ), the evaluation φ(p ) is the subspace resulting
from substituting each p into u and performing the corresponding operations. A
wff φ(u ) is a tautology of L (H) if for all evaluations φ(u ) = 1. We will also call
any equation of terms s = t in which for all evaluations s = t a tautology.
8 J. MICHAEL DUNN,LAWRENCES. MOSS,AND ZHENGHANWANG
Definition 2.1. Given a Hilbert space H, the quantum logic QL(H) is the set of
all tautologies of L (H).
Theorem 2.2. Quantum logic QL(H) determines the dimension of H.
Note that the modular law separates infinite dimensional Hilbert spaces from
finite dimensional ones. Then the dimension of a finite dimensional Hilbert space
is determined by its quantum logic (Dunn, Hagge, Moss, and Wang 2005, Hagge
2007).
For notational ease, we will denote QL((C2)⊗n) by QL(2n),n = 0,1,···. To
understand the differences between these logics better, we will exhibit tautologies
that distinguish them. For n = 0, the quantum logic QL(1) is just the clas-
sical propositional logic. The distributive law holds in QL(1), but fails in any
QL(2n),n ≥ 1. Therefore, the distributive law is a salient feature of classical
logic. We will explore the failure of distributive law in QL(2n),n ≥ 1 systemati-
cally to arrive at increasingly weakened tautologies. The first such tautology was
the m-distributive law:
i=0 i i=0 j6=i j
Itisproven(Huhn1972)thatthem-distributivelawholdsifandonlyifdim(H) ≤
m. Dunn, Hagge, Moss, and Wang (2005), and Hagge (2007) found another se-
quence of such tautologies. For simplicity, we will consider only the qubits here.
As a bonus of our new tautologies, we will see that QL(2n) has no finite universal
test sets when n ≥ 1.
Two closed subspaces a,b are equal if and only if (a∨b)∧(a¯∨ ¯ b) = 0. To see this,
if a = b, obviously (a∨b)∧(a¯∨ ¯ b) = 0. If a 6= b, then either a∧b 6= a or a∧b 6= b.
Without loss of generality, we assume a ∧b 6= a. Then the complement of a∧ b
in a, denoted as a∧b a , is not 0. But a∧b a ⊂ a∧b = a¯ ∨ ¯ b and a∧b a ⊂ a∨ b.
Given three subspaces p,q,r, let a = p∨(q ∧r) and b = (p∨q)∧(p∨r), and
then define
The distributive law holds if and only if α is always 0. Therefore, if α does not
vanish for some choice of p,q,r in a Hilbert space H, then the distributive law is
not in QL(H). Therefore, we will call α(p,q,r) the distribution test formula.
From α(p,q,r) ⊂ p¯, we deduce dim(α(p,q,r)) ≤ dim(H) − dim(p). In Dunn,
Hagge, Moss, and Wang (2005), a direct computation shows dim(α(p,q,r)) ≤
dim(p). Hence dim(α(p,q,r)) ≤
dim(H).
To define our tautology, we define the restriction of a wff φ(u ) to a term β,
denoted by φ| : first using the De Morgan law, we assume that all negations ¯
are applied to single variables. Next, each variable u and its complement u¯ are
THIRD LIFE 9
replaced by u ∧β and u ∧β ∧β, respectively. Inductively, we define
αm(p ,q ,r ) = α| (p ,q ,r ),
m m m αm−1 m m m
and α1(p ,q ,r ) = α(p ,q ,r ),αm−1 = αm−1(p ,q ,r ). Therefore,
1 1 1 1 1 1 m−1 m−1 m−1
m m m 2 2m
In QL(2n), dim(αn+1) ≤ 2n < 1, so αn+1 = 0 which gives a tautology in
QL(2n), which is also true for any i ≤ n. To show it is not true for C2n+1 , we
notice that if p,q,r are different subspaces of dimension m of Cm and each pair
has trivial intersection in Cm, then dim(α(p,q,r)) = m if m is even. By choosing
subspaces in C2n+1 this way, we have dim(αn+1) = 2n+1 = 1.
Definition 2.3. A set of closed subspaces in Cm is called a universal test set
for QL(Cm) if the truth of any tautology is determined by the evaluations of the
subspaces in this set.
Proposition 2.4. There are no finite universal test sets for QL(Cm),m ≥ 2.
To see this, consider the distribution testing formula α(p,q,r). For simplic-
ity, we will only give the details for m = 2. In order for the distribution test-
ing formula α(p,q,r) to fail, p,q,r must be three distinct lines. In order for
α(α(α(α(p,q,r),p,s),q,s),r,s) to fail, p,q,r,s must be distinct lines. Continuing
in this manner, we can build a complicated formula γ, the failure of which means
that the k subspaces p,q,··· are distinct lines. Since k is arbitrary, no finite set of
lines will falsify every invalid formula. This argument works for any Cm,m ≥ 2.
For each n-qubit, we have found two tautologies which are not in any qubits
m such that m < n: the 2n-distributive law and the iterated distribution test
formula. If each law is added to the modular lattice axioms, are the resulting
axioms sets equivalent? We leave this as an open problem.
2.1.2. Decidability. Quantumlogicforgeneralmodularortholatticeisundecidable.
Dunn, Hagge, Moss, and Wang (2005) observed that the quantum logic of a finite
dimensional Hilbert space is decidable. The decidability QL(Cm) is reduced to
the decidability of R. The idea is to associate a matrix M to each subspace p so
that the kernel of M is p. Then new matrix variables are introduced to construct
a formula M so that a wff φ is a tautology if and only if M = 0. This procedure
is illustrated for the join in Dunn, Hagge, Moss, and Wang (2005). The easy cases
of meet and negation can be done as follows:
r = p∧q,∀u(M u = 0∧M u = 0 ⇔ M u = 0).
Taking all these observations together, we conclude:
Theorem 2.5. The first-order theories of QL(Cm) are uniformly decidable.
10 J. MICHAEL DUNN,LAWRENCES. MOSS,AND ZHENGHANWANG
Since decidability of QL(Cm) implies its axiomatizability, can QL(Cm) be ax-
iomatized with finitely many schemas? Is it sound? Is it complete? Are modular
ortholattice axioms plus n-distributivity or the iterated distribution test formula
sufficient to axiomatize QL(Cm)? We believe that these are all interesting open
problems.
We might also speculate on a connection between quantum logic and quan-
tum computational complexity. For example, if we choose a finite collection of
subspaces of C2 including 0,1 that generate a sublattice, then what is the com-
putational complexity for the satisfiability? In particular, if we add one p whose
normalized dimension is 1 to 0,1, does the computational complexity depend on
the choice of p? Does quantum computer have any advantage over classical com-
puters for those problems?
2.2. Qubit continuous geometry. Birkhoff and von Neumann proposed contin-
uous geometry as quantum propositional logic. In this section, we will focus on a
particular continuous geometry—qubit continuous geometry. This turns out to be
the famous type Π hyperfinite factor R in von Neumann algebra theory. Through
the study of type Π factors, V. Jones discovered his famous representation of the
braid groups and polynomial invariants of knots. Jones’ representation of braid
groups are used to describe new particle statistics and are therefore playing a
pivotal role in the topological approach to quantum computing.
Let V,W be two Hilbert spaces. Note that neither V nor W is canonically a
subspace of V ⊗W. But the lattices L (V) and L (W) are canonical sublattices
of L (V ⊗W) by including p ⊆ V or W into V ⊗W as p⊗W or V ⊗p, respec-
tively. It follows that QL(V) and QL(W) are canonically subsets of QL(V⊗W).
Therefore, quantum logics of qubits form a compatible decreasing sequence:
How to describe their intersection QL(∞)? As remarked in Dunn, Hagge, Moss,
and Wang (2005), the intersection QL(∞) is not the quantum logic of any infinite
dimensional Hilbert space because it contains the modular law.
2.2.1. Limit of
). Thenormalizeddimensionofasubspacep ⊆ V isd (p) =
dim(p) : L (V) → [0,1]. The lattice L (2n) with the normalized dimension
dim(V) c c
is a metric space compatible with the inclusion L (2n) ⊂ L (2n+1). Let L (∞)
be their direct limit. The ranges of dimensions are all rational numbers with
power 2 denominators. Let CG be its metric completion, then CG is a continuous
geometry: an irreducible complemented continuous modular lattice. A continuous
geometry is a projective geometry whose dimensions cover the unit interval [0,1].
THIRD LIFE 11
To relate this continuous geometry to the hyperfinite Π factor R, we consider
the sequence of matrix algebras:
withinclusiongivenbyA → A⊗Id. The∗-algebralimitisthehyperfinite Π factor
R. Let L (R) be the set of projectors in R: p = p†,p2 = p. Using the identification
of a subspace with a projection, we see that L (R) = CG. The factor R can be
realized as a subalgebra of the bounded operators of a Hilbert space H. With
this realization, a projector can be identified with the closed subspace pH ⊂ H—
invariant vectors of p in H. We define the partial order, meet and join of two
projectors p,q by p ≤ q if and only if pH ⊆ qH, p∧q =orthogonal projection onto
pH∧qH, p∨q =orthogonal projection onto pH∨qH. The negation of a projector
p is p¯= 1−p. Let QL(R) be the tautologies over L (R) or equivalently over the
sublattice of L (H) consisting of invariant subspaces of a projector in L (R).
Theorem 2.6. (1) QL(∞) = QL(R).
(2) QL(R) is decidable.
It is shown by J. Harding that QL(CG) = QL(∞). Since L (R) = CG, there-
foreQL(R) = QL(∞). ItfollowsthatL (R)isamodularlattice. Asalsoprovedin
this issue by J. Harding, QL(R) is decidable. Therefore, the intersection QL(∞)
is decidable, positively answering a question in Dunn, Hagge, Moss, and Wang
(2005). The lattice of projectors L (R) is a natural generalization of qubit quan-
tum logic agreeing with Hankel’s principle of the preservation of formal laws. The
decidability of quantum logics of general continuous geometries seems to be open.
2.2.2. Temperley-Lieb algebra and Jones-Wenzl projector. It is clear from the last
subsection how to obtain a projector in L (R) with its normalized dimension to be
any rational number in the interval [0,1]. In this section, we construct projectors
with irrational algebraic normalized dimensions. It is hard to imagine projectors
with non-computable normalized dimensions. For example, let ω be a Chaitin
number in [0,1] which encodes the halting problem for Turing machines. Do the
projectors with normalized dimensions ω have any relevance to reality?
To construct such projectors, we introduce the Temperley-Lieb (TL) algebras.
The TL algebra TL n (A) at A =
,r ≥ 3 is a unital algebra with generators
1,e ,e ,··· ,e and relations:
(2.7) e e = e e , if |i−j| ≥ 2,
(2.8) e e e = e ,
(2.9) e2 = e ,
where d = −A2 −A−2.
12 J. MICHAEL DUNN,LAWRENCES. MOSS,AND ZHENGHANWANG
TL (A) is also defined by the same presentation when A is a variable. In
this case, they are matrix algebras over a function field and contain some magic
projectors, called Jones-Wenzl projectors: each TL (A) contains a unique element
p characterized by: p2 = p 6= 0 and e p = p e = 0 for all 1 ≤ i ≤ n − 1.
n n n i n n i
Furthermore p can be written as p = 1+U where U = Pc h , h a product of
e ’s, 1 ≤ i ≤ n−1 and c ∈ C.
TL (A) can be naturally included into TL (A), hence p ,i ≤ n can be consid-
ered as elements of TL (A). When A is chosen as the complex numbers above,
the Jones-Wenzl projectors are defined consecutively only for n = 1,··· ,r − 1.
Moreover, the TL algebra is not a matrix algebra. For a fixed r, their quotients
by p considered as an element in each TL (A),n ≥ r −1 are matrix algebras.
We will call those matrix algebras, denoted by J (A), the Jones algebras. The
matrix summands of the decomposition of J (A) are indexed by natural num-
bers m = n mod 2. Define the nth Chebyshev polynomial ∆ (x) inductively by
∆ = 1,∆ = x, and ∆ (x) = x∆ (x) − ∆ (x). Then the Markov trace on
0 1 n+1 n n−1
J (A) is the weighted matrix trace trMark(u) = P ∆ tr(u), where tr(u) is the
usual matrix trace for u. The Jones algebra J (A) is included into J (A) natu-
rally. The limit of them is the hyperfinite Π factor R. The Markov trace is the
limit of the normalized dimensions. In the Jones algebras J (A), the TL elements
e ’s are Hermitian, i.e. e† = e , hence e ∈ L (R). The same is true for each Jones-
Wenzl projector p ,i = 0,1,··· ,p . Therefore, e ’s and p ’s are projectors. The
TL relations tell us that the images of e and e are orthogonal if |i−j| ≥ 2, and
the angle between the ith and (i+1)th is determined by d. Their trace are given by
tr(e ) = 1 = 1sec2(π),i = 1,2,··· , and tr(p ) = ∆j(d) ,j = 1,2,··· ,r −2 for any
i d2 4 r j dj
r ≥ 3. Hence the subspaces e H and p H have normalized dimensions {1sec2(π)}
} for any r ≥ 3 and j = 1,2,··· ,r −2.
Do the projectors {p ,e ,j = 1,2,··· ,r −2,i = 1,2,···} and the subspaces of
normalized dimensions with power 2 denominators form a universal test set for
QL(R)?
2.3. Topological quantum computation. Classical physics is the theoretical
foundation for the construction of classical computers. The failure of C. Babbage
to complete his analytical engine in 1850s was not due to some missing physics,
but rather for engineering reasons. The same might occur for some current pro-
posals to build a quantum computer. But one approach is different in this regard:
topological quantum computation (Freedman et al 2003). The success of topo-
logical quantum computation hinges on the discovery of completely new particles:
non-abelian anyons. The defining feature of such hypothetical particles are their
groundstatedegeneracy intheplane: suppose several non-abeliananyons arefixed
in the plane, well-separated, their lowest energy states are still not unique. There
THIRD LIFE 13
are different internal states of the system which cannot be determined by their
positions and other local properties.
2.3.1. Non-abelian Anyons. The mathematical models of non-abelian anyons are
unitary modular tensor categories, or the closely related unitary topological quan-
tum field theories. An anyon is a simple object in the modeling unitary modular
category (Wang 2010).
The Jones algebras can be easily generalized to tensor categories, which are
unitary modular tensor categories. The Jones-Wenzl projectors are the simple
objects of the resulting unitary modular tensor categories, hence anyons. When
r ≥ 4, the projector p is a non-abelian anyon. Suppose there are m of them in
a plane at some fixed locations, well-separated, how do we describe their states?
Their Hilbert space decomposes into subspaces of different energies. The lowest
energy states are called the ground states. They are not unique and form a Hilbert
space of dimension exponential in m. Therefore, we need exponential many states
to describe the differences of m non-abelian anyons.
In topological quantum computation, information is encoded into this vast de-
generate groundstate manifold of non-abelian anyons and processed by braiding
them around each other. Anyons can be brought together to fuse, and the com-
putational answer, encoded in the resulting anyon types, is an approximation of
the Jones polynomial at q =
.
JonestheoriesarepredictedtoberealizedinthefractionalquantumHallliquids.
For example, when r = 4, the anyon p is predicted to exist in the ν = 5/2
fractional quantum Hall liquid. The ground states will be 2-fold degenerate if a
boundary condition is fixed for 4 non-abelain anyons p . Therefore, to “count”
the ground states of 4 non-abelian anyons p when r = 4, two independent wave
functions are required.
2.3.2. Intrinsic entanglement. The many-anyon state is a state with topological
order. Topological order is an internal, dynamical, non-local pattern of many-
anyon systems characterized by intrinsic entanglement. In quantum mechanics,
entanglement is defined with respect to a tensor decomposition of the relevant
Hilbertspace, which amountstoameasurement. Inatopologicalstate, theground
state manifold has no natural tensor decompositions. Therefore entanglement of
topological states is intrinsic—a salient feature of topological order.
3. Speculative Remarks on Quantum Analogues of Classical
The term quantum mathematics is ambiguous. One sense concerns the mathe-
matics needed to explain and work with quantum physics. The other sense is more
radical and has to do with an alternative to classical mathematics that is somehow
founded on quantum principles. We shall briefly discuss several such approaches.
14 J. MICHAEL DUNN,LAWRENCES. MOSS,AND ZHENGHANWANG
3.1. Quantum Cantor set. Von Neumann algebra theory is an axiomatization
of quantum mechanics and can be regarded as a non-commutative measure theory.
A von Neumann algebra M with a normalized, normal trace ρ is called a noncom-
mutative probability space. An Hermitian operator X, a physical measurement,
is a noncommutative random variable. Its eigenvalues Spec(X) = {λ } ⊂ R are in
one-one correspondence with projections P to the eigenspaces. The values ρ(P )
of the projections {P } under ρ define a probability distribution on Spec(X).
Therefore, a type Π factor is a natural noncommutative probability space.
In the classical world, logic, measure theory, and probability fit together via the
Stone representation theorem. For bit strings, their limit is the Cantor set. In this
analogy, hyperfinite II factor R with the normalized trace is a probability theory
for a quantum Cantor set. What is a quantum Cantor set? What is a quantum
Boolean algebra? How to logicize type Π factors?
3.2. Quantum numbers. Classical computers process bit strings, which can be
regarded as numbers denoted by binary notation. Numbers seem to be rooted in
a human’s need to record the differences between say one sheep and a herd. To
understand the physical properties of many quantum particle systems potentially
leads us to new numbers. The states of quantum particles cannot be easily de-
scribed by numbers as they are given by wave functions. Quantum computers are
wave function processors. Therefore, we argue that wave functions are quantum
numbers.
A real number in base 2 expansion can be considered as an array of bits {0,1}
on a bi-infinite Turing tape with a marked square for the separation of integral
and fractional parts. The squares are digit holders. If the squares in the Turing
tape correspond to basis elements of a Hilbert space, then a wave function can
be thought as a generalization of numbers in two aspects: the bases of a Hilbert
space is not necessarily an array and the digits {0,1} are replaced by any complex
number. There are axiomatizations of both natural numbers—Peano axioms and
real numbers—Dedekind cuts. Are there axiomatizations of wave functions—our
proposed quantum numbers? For caution, we mention a work of Dunn: if the first
order Peano arithmetic is formulated with orthomodular quantum logic, then it
has the same theorems as the first order Peano arithmetic (Dunn 1980). Quantum
mathematics is slippery business as Dunn showed that if one tries to formulate
second order orthomodular quantum logic with a certain minimal principle of
extensionality, one is doomed to failure in the sense that the resultant system
collapses to its classical counterpart (Dunn 1988).10
10Wealsonoteaquiteopposingviewpoint,discussedinDunn(1980),whichhearsayattributes
to a lecture Saul Kripke gaveat the University of Pittsburghin 1974(see Stairs (forthcoming)).
Kripkeapparently arguedthat givena logicist or set-theoretic understanding of numbers, it can
be shown using Putnam’s views that 2+2>4 since the cartesian product of a 2-membered set
with itself has more than 4 ordered pairs.
THIRD LIFE 15
In Dedekind’s treatise on abstract structure of numbers, he asked “what are
numbers and what should they be?”, then answered:“numbers are free creations
of the human mind. They serve as a means of apprehending more easily and more
sharply the difference of things.” Wave functions are creations of the human mind.
However, as a means of apprehending things, they are neither easier nor more
sharply distinguished than numbers. All’s fair in love and quantum theory.