]NG.nif-q[
2v45420.2151:viXra
The Double Role of GDP in Shaping the Structure of the International Trade Network
Assaf Almog
Instituut-Lorentz for Theoretical Physics,Leiden Institute of Physics,
University of Leiden, Niels Bohrweg 2, 2333 CA Leiden (The Netherlands)
Tiziano Squartini
IMT Institute for Advanced Studies, P.zza S. Ponziano 6, 55100 Lucca (Italy)
Diego Garlaschelli
Instituut-Lorentz for Theoretical Physics, Leiden Institute of Physics,
University of Leiden, Niels Bohrweg 2, 2333 CA Leiden (The Netherlands)
(Dated: December 10, 2015)
The International Trade Network (ITN) is the network formed by trade relationships between
world countries. The complex structure of the ITN impacts important economic processes such as
globalization, competitiveness, and the propagation of instabilities. Modeling the structure of the
ITN in terms of simple macroeconomic quantities is therefore of paramount importance. While
traditional macroeconomics has mainly used the Gravity Model to characterize the magnitude of
tradevolumes, modern networktheory haspredominantlyfocused on modeling thetopology of the
ITN. Combining these two complementary approaches is still an open problem. Here we review
these approaches and emphasize the double role played by GDP in empirically determining both
the existence and the volume of trade linkages. Moreover, we discuss a unified model that exploits
these patterns and uses only the GDP as the relevant macroeconomic factor for reproducing both
thetopology and thelink weights of theITN.
I. INTRODUCTION
The bilateral trade relationships existing between world countries form a complex network known as the Interna-
tionalTradeNetwork(ITN). Theobservedcomplexstructureofthe networkisatthe sametimethe outcomeandthe
determinant of a variety of underlying economic processes, including economic growth, integrationand globalization.
Moreover, recent events such as the financia l crisis clearly pointed out that the interdependencies between financial
markets can lead to cascading effects which, in turn, can severely affect the real economy. International trade plays
a major role among the possible channels of interaction among countries [1–4], thereby possibly further propagating
these cascading effects worldwide and adding one more layer of contagion. Characterizing the networked worldwide
economy is therefore an important open problem and modelling the ITN is a crucial step in this challenge, and has
been studied extensively [5, 9, 11, 14, 15, 22, 23].
Historically, macroeconomic models have mainly focused on modelling the trade volumes between countries. The
Gravity Model, which was introduced in the early 60’s by Jan Tinbergen [29], serves as a powerful empirical model
that aims at inferring the volume of trade between any two (trading) countries from the knowledge of their Gross
Domestic Product (GDP) and mutual geographic distance. Over the years, the model has been upgraded to include
other possible factors of macroeconomic relevance, like common language and trade agreements, nevertheless GDP
and distance remain the two factors with biggest explanatory power. The gravity model can reproduce the observed
trade volume between trading countries satisfactorily. However, at least in its simplest and most popular imple-
mentation, the model does not generate zero volumes and therefore predicts a fully connected trade network. This
outcome is totally inconsistent with the heterogeneous observed topology of the ITN, which serves as the backbone
on which trades are made. More sophisticated implementations of the gravity model that do a llow for zero trade
flows succeed only in reproducing the number of missing links, but not their position in the trade network, thereby
producing sparser but still non-realistic topologies [12, 13].
In conjunction with the traditional macroeconomic approach, in recent years the modelling of the ITN has also
beenapproachedusingtoolsfromnetworktheory[6,7,10,21,24],amongwhichmaximum-entropytechniques[16–18]
have been particularly successful. Maximum-entropy models aim at reproducing higher-order structural properties
of a real-world network from low-order, generally local information, which is taken as a fixed constraint [25–28].
Important examples of local properties that can be chosen as constraints are the degree, i.e. the number of links,
of a node (for the ITN, this is the number of trade partners of a country) and the strength, i.e. the total weight of
the links, of a node (for the ITN, this is the total trade volume of a country). Examples of higher-order properties
that the method aims at reproducing are clustering, which refers to the fraction of realised triangles around a node,
and assortativity, which is a measure of the correlation between the degree of a node and the average degree of its
neighbours.
These studies have focused on both binary and weighted representations of the ITN, i.e. the two representations
defined by the existence and by the magnitude of trade exchanges among countries, respec tively. In principle,
depending on which localproperties are chosenas constraints,maximum-entropymodels caneither fail or succeed in
replicatingthehigher-orderpropertiesoftheITN.Asanexample,ithasbeenshownthatinferringanetworktopology
only from purely weighted properties such as the strengthof allnodes (i.e. the trade volumes of allcountries) results
inatrivial,uniformstructure(almostfully connectedand,thus,unrealistic)[20]. Thislimitationissimilartothe one
discussed above for the gravity models, which aim at reproducing the pair-specific traded volumes exclusively, while
completely ignoring the underlying network topology. By contrast, the knowledge of purely topological properties
such as the degrees of all nodes (i.e. the number of trade partners of all countries), which are usually neglected in
traditional macroeconomic models, turns out to be essential for reproducing the heterogeneous topology observed
in the ITN [19]. A combination of weighed and topological local properties allows to reconstruct the higher-order
properties of the ITN with extremely high accuracy [32].
Despite the ability of the appropriate maximum-entropy models to provide a better agreement with the data with
respect to gravity models, they do not in principle provide any hint on the underlying (macro)economic factors
shapingthe structure ofthe networkunder consideration. These models,infact, assign“hiddenvariables”or“fitness
parameters”toeachcountry. ThesequantitiesariseasLagrangemultipliersinvolvedinthe constrainedmaximisation
of the entropy and control the probability that a link is established and/or has a given weight. These parameters
have, a priori, no economic interpretation. However, here we show that one can indeed find a macroeconomic iden
tificatio n for the underlying variables defining the maximum-entropy models. This interpretation is supported by
previousstudiesshowingthatbothtopologicalandweightedpropertiesoftheITNarestronglyconnectedwithpurely
macroeconomic quantities, in particular the GDP.
Inthis paperwe firstfocus onvariousempiricalrelationsexisting betweenthe GDPandarangeofcountry-specific
properties. These propertiesconvey basic but importantlocal informationfroma network perspective. We also show
that these relations are robust and very stable throughout different decades. We then illustrate how the GDP affects
differently the binary and weighted representations of the ITN, revealing alternative aspects of the structure of this
network. These results suggest a justification for the use of GDP as an empirical fitness to be used in maximum-
entropy models, thus providing a macroeconomic interpretation for the abstract mathematical parameters defining
the model t hemselves . Reversing the perspective, this resultenables us to introduce a novelGDP-drivenmodel [30]
that successfully reproduces the binary and the weighted properties of the ITN simultaneously. The mathematical
structureofthemodelexplainstheaforementionedpuzzlingasymmetryintheinformativenessofbinaryandweighted
constraints(degreeandstrength)[30]. Theseresultsrepresentapromisingstepforwardintheformulationofaunified
model for modelling the structure of the ITN.
In this study we have used data from the Gleditsch database which spans the years1950-2000[8], focusing only on
the first year of each decade, i.e. six years in total. The data sets are available in the form of weighted matrices of
bilateral trade flows w , the associated adjacency matrices a and vectors of GDPs. There are approximately 200
countries in the data set covering the considered 51 years; the GDP is measured in U.S. dollars.
We have analysed this data set precisely because it has been the subject of many studies so far, focusing both
on the binary and on the weighted representation of the ITN. This will allow us to compare the performance of our
GDP-driven (two-steps) method with other reconstruction algorithms already present in the literature [31].
Trade exchangesbetween countries play a crucialrole in many macroeconomicphenomena. As a consequence,it is
fundamentaltobeabletocharacterizetheobservedstructureoftheITNanditsproperties. Morespecifically,theITN
can be represented in two different ways, depending on the kind of information used to analyse the system: the first
one concerns only the existence of trade relations and gives origin to the ITN binary representation; the second one
alsotakes into accountthe volume of the trade exchangesand givesoriginto the ITN weighted representation. While
the binaryrepresentationdescribesthe skeletonoftheITN,relatingexclusivelytothe presenceoftraderelations,the
weighted representation also accounts for the volume of trade occurring “over” the links, i.e. the weight of the link
once it is formed. The two representationsconveyvery important informationregardingthe “tradepatterns” of each
country and, most importantly, correspond to different trade mechanisms.
Traditionally,macroeconomicmodelshavemainlyfocusedontheweightedrepresentation,becauseeconomictheory
perceivesthelatterasbeinggenuinelymoreinformativethanthepurelybinaryrepresentation: suchmodelsmakeuse
of countries gross domestic product (GDP), their geographic distance and any other possible quantity of (supposed)
macroeconomic relevance to infer trading volumes between countries. The GDP is the most popular measure in the
economic literature. Although it is generally used as a proxy to infer the evolution of many macroeconomic prop-
erties describing the weighted representation of the ITN (as the countries trade exchanges), here we will show that
theGDPplaysakeyrolenotonlytoexplaintheITNweightedstructure,butalsotheemergenceofitsbinarystructure.
Let us start with an empirical analysis of the GDP. We first define new rescaled quantities of the GDP: g and g˜
g , i g˜ , i, (1)
≡ GDP ∀ ≡ GDP ∀
where GDP mean ≡
i is the average GDP for an observed year. The two quantities adjust the values of the
countriesGDPs for both the size ofthe networkandthe growth,and areaconnected bya simple relationg˜ =N g .
We use the two quantities of the rescaled GDP throughout our analysis, mainly using g for the reason that the
quantity is bounded 0 g 1 which coincides with our model.
In Fig. 1 we plot the cumulative distribution of the rescaledGDP g˜ with i indexing the countries for the different
decades collected into our data set. What emerges is that the distributions of the rescaled GDPs can be described
by log-normal distribution characterized by similar values of the parameters. The log-normal curve is fitted to all
the values (from the different decades). This suggests that the rescaledGDPs are quantities which do not vary much
with the evolution of the system, thus potentially representing the (constant) hidden macroeconomic fitness ruling
the entire evolution of the system itself. This, in turn, implies understanding the functional dependence of the key
FIG.1. EmpiricalcumulativedistributionsP>(g˜)oftheGDPrescaledtothemean,fordifferentyears. Thecurveislog-normal
distribution fitted tothe data.
topological quantities on the countries rescaled GDP.
Asalreadypointedoutbyanumberofresults[17],thetopologicalquantitieswhichplayamajorroleindetermining
the ITN structure are the countries degrees (i.e. the number of their trading partners) and the countries strengths
(i.e. the total volume of their trading activity). Thus, the first step to understand the role of the rescaled GDP in
shaping the ITN structure is quantifying the dependence of degrees and strengths on it. Since we will now analyse
eachsnapshot at a time (correctionfor size is not needed), here we will use the bounded rescaledGDP g . Moreover,
this form of the rescaled GDP coincides with a bounded macroeconomic fitness value, which is consistent with the
models presented in the next sections. To this aim, let us explicitly plot k versus g and s versus g for a particular
decade, as shown in Fig. 2. The red points represent the relations between the two pairs of observed quantities for
the 2000 snapshot. Interestingly, the rescaled GDP is directly proportional to the strength (in a log-log scale), thus
indicating that the wealth of countries is strongly correlated to the total volume of trade they partecipate in. Such an
evidence provides the empirical basis for the definition of the gravity model, stating that the trade between any two
countries is directly proportional to the (product of the) countries GDP.
On the other hand, the functional dependence of the degrees on the g values is less simple to decipher. Generally
speaking, the relation is monotonically increasing and this means that countries with high GDP have also an high
degree, i.e. are strongly connected with the others; coherently, countries characterized by a low value of the GDP
have also a low degree, i.e. are less connected to the rest of the world. Moreover, while for low values of the GDP
there seems to exist a linear relation (in a log-log scale) between k and g , as the latter rises a saturation effect is
observed(incorrespondenceofthevaluek =N 1),due tothefinite sizeofthe networkunderanalysis. Roughly
speaking, richest countries lie on the vertical trait of the plot, while poorest countries lie on the linear trait of the
same plot: in other words, the degree of countries represents a purely topological indicator of the countries wealth.
To sum up, Fig. 2 shows that countries GDP plays a double role in shaping the ITN structure: first, it controls
for the number of trading channels each country establishes; second, it controls for the volume of trade each country
participates in, via the established connections.
The blue points in Fig. 2, instead, represent the relation between k versus g and s versus g , where the
quantities in brackets are the predicted values for degrees and strengths generated by our model, which we will
discuss later.
FIG. 2. Comparison between observed (red points) degrees and strengths for theaggregated ITN in the2000 snapshot. Right
panel: degreeki versusnormalized GDPgi andexpecteddegreehkiiversusnormalizedGDPgi. Leftpanel: strengthsi versus
normalized GDPgi and expected strength hsii versus normalized GDPgi.
100 101 102 103 104 105 106 107
S K N DMA 10−5
100 101 102
Real Data Real Data
Predicted Predicted USA
III. NULL MODELS
In order to formalize the evidences highlighted in the previous section, a theoretical framework is needed. To this
aim, we can make use of the exponential random graph formalism (ERG in what follows). Under this formalism, one
“generates” a ensemble of random networks by maximizing the entropy of the ensemble. However,the maximization
is done under certain “constraints” which enforce certain properties of the random ensemble (expectations) to be
equal specific observables that are measured in the real system. Different maximum-entropy models enforce different
constraints, different properties of the real network, and this corresponds to different probabilities and expectations
of the models.
Here, we use the formulas defining the so-called enhanced configuration model (ECM in what follows) which has
been recently proposed as an improved model for the ITN reconstruction [32]. The ECM aims at reconstructing
weighted networks, by enforcing the degree and the strength sequences simultaneously [32]. Degrees and strengths,
respectively defined as k (W) = N a = N Θ[w ], i and s (W) = N w , i, can be simultaneously
i Pj6=i ij Pj6=i ij ∀ i Pj6=i ij ∀
constrained within into the ERG framework [32]. From the perspective of network theory, specifying the countries
degrees amounts to reproduce the binary structure of the ITN or, as previously said, its skeleton; on the other hand,
specifying the countries strengths amounts to reconstruct the weight of each link. In economic terms, this amounts
to retain two different kinds of information: the number of trading partners of each country and the total volume of
trade of each country.
Notice that previous attempts to infer the binary structure of the ITN from the information encoded into the
strength sequence alone have led to the prediction of a largely homogeneous and very dense (sometimes fully con-
nected) network,not compatible with the observedone. In other words,predicting the number of partnersof a given
country from the total volume of its trade leads to “dilute” the total trade of each country by distributing it to
almost all other countries, dramatically overestimating the number of trading partners [17]. This failure in correctly
replicatingthe purely topologicalprojectionofthe realnetworkisatthe rootofthe badagreementbetweenexpected
and observed higher-order properties and makes it necessary to explicitly constrain the degree of each country. This
evidence should lead us to reconsider the quantities traditionally used in economic models and the actual role played
by them in explaining a given network structure. Particularly, one must add additional information regarding the
topology of the network in order to reproduce the complex structure of the ITN.
As a result of constraining both degrees and strengths, the ECM predicts that a trade relation between countries i
and j exists with a probability p equal to
a (x,y) p (x,y)= i j i j (2)
h i ≡ 1 y y +x x y y
i j i j i j
and involves an expected volume of trade amounting to
p (x,y) x x y y
w (x,y)= ij = i j i j . (3)
h i 1 y y (1 y y +x x y y )(1 y y )
i j i j i j i j i j
The unknown vectors x and y can be estimated according to the maximum-of-the-likelihood prescription [31], by
solving the system of 2N coupled equations
i X ij ∀ i Xh ij i ∀
whereW∗ indicatestheparticularweightednetworkunderanalysisandx∗ andy∗ indicatethevaluesoftheLagrange
multipliers satisfying eqs.(4). These parameters can be treated as fitness parameters, respectively controlling for the
probability that a link exists and that its expected weight assumes a given value.
The application of the ECM to various real-world networks shows that the model can accurately reproduce the
higher-order empirical properties of these networks [31]. When applied to the ITN in particular, the ECM replicates
both binary and weighted empirical properties, for different levels of disaggregation,and for several years [32].
IV. A GDP-DRIVEN MODEL OF THE ITN
Let us now make a step forwardand check whether the hidden variables x and y , which effectively reproduce the
observed ITN [32], can be thought of as parameters having a clear (macro)economic interpretation. Let us start our
analysis by first inspecting the relationship between the ECM statistics k and s and the hidden variables extracted
from the model.
AsFig. 3shows,nodesdegreesk seemstoberelatedtothequantitiesx andg throughaverysimilarrelationship;
on the other hand, the functional relation between s and y appears to be less straightforward,showing a saturation
effect in correspondence of the value y = 1. In order to discover the mathematical form of these relations, let us
repeat the analysis which led to Fig. 3, by plotting x and y versus g .
In Fig. 4 we show the relationship between the two ECM parameters x and y and the rescaled GDP for each
country of the ITN in the 2000 snapshot. Such quantities are strongly correlated, confirming the linear dependence
between x and g and y /(1 y ) and g respectively. The latter, in particular, is the simplest functional form
guaranteeing the presence of the vertical asymptote emerging from the plot as s versus y .
A. The GDP as a macroeconomic fitness
Fig. 4seemstosuggestthatthefitnessparameterx satisfiesaapproximatelylinearrelationwiththerelativeGDP
g , fitted by the curve
where √a is a parameter and g i = P i GDP i i .
By contrast, since the GDP is an unbounded quantity, while the fitness parameter y is bounded between 0 and 1
(this is a mathematicalpropertyofthe model [31,33]), the relationbetween y andg mustbe necessarilynon-linear.
A simple functional form for such a relationship is given by
Indeed, Fig. 4 confirms that the above expression provides a very good fit to the data.
FIG. 3. Comparison between observed relations of the degrees and strengths for the aggregated ITN in the 2000 snapshot.
Rightpanel: degreekiversusnormalizedGDPgi(redpoints)anddegreekiversuscalculatedfitnessparameterxi(bluepoints).
Left panel: strength si versus normalized GDP gi (red points) and strength si versus calculated fitness parameter yi (blue
points).
100 101 102
100 101 102 103 104 105 106 107
FIG.4. Comparison between thecalculated xi and therescaled GDPgi (left panel) andfor thecalculated yi/(1−yi) andthe
relative GDP gi (right panel), for theaggregated ITN in the 2000 snapshot, together with a linear fit (black line).
0−4 10−3 10−2 10−1 100 101 102 103
100 101 102 103 104 105 106
Thesefindingshavetwoimportantconsequences: first,theyconfirmthattheGDPofworldcountriesplaysadouble
role,contributingto determine boththe topologicalstructureofthe ITNandthe amountoftradeexchanges;second,
since the relationships summed up by eqs.(5) and (6) hold true for eachsnapshotof the ITN in our data set, for each
year we can insert eqs.(5) and (6) into eqs.(2) and (3) to obtain a GDP-driven model of the ITN structure for that
year. While this was already expected on the basis of the results obtained by implementing simpler null models -
constrainingeither the degree sequence alone (the binary configuration model, or BCM [17]) or the strength sequence
alone (the weighted configuration model, or WCM [17]) - finding the appropriate way to explicitly combine these
results into a unified description of the ITN has remained impossible so far.
B. Reformulating the ECM as a “two-step” model
It shouldbe notedthateqs.(5)and (6) canbe thoughtofas a particularcaseofa popular model amongphysicists,
the so-calledfitness model [34], which prescribesto write the connectionprobability p betweenany two nodes i and
j as a function of some intrinsic “fitness” characterizing each vertex. This observation leads to the identification of
the fitness parameterwith the GDP of countries,thus suggestingthat, froma purely economic point ofview, GDP is
the onlyrelevantquantitythat mustbe takeninto accountin orderto explainthe observedstructuralpatterns. Such
aprocedure,firstadoptedin[6]tostudythepurelybinarystructureoftheITN1 -andithasbeenshownthatthereis
a very good agreement between the hidden variables z which control solely for the degree sequence and the rescaled
GDP-notonlyallowsonetomakepredictionsofthequantitiesofinterestbasedonpurely(country-specific)macroe-
conomic properties but also provides an algorithm to test the effectiveness of the chosen quantities in reproducing
such observations. In fact, eqs.(5) and (6) could be, in principle, refined by further inserting any supposedly relevant
macroeconomic quantity (as the geographic distances); however, their actual (macro)economic relevance would then
be tested upon quantifying the actual fitting improvement.
At this point, it should be noted that we arearrivedat two seemingly conflicting results. In fact we have explicitly
statedthatboth theBCMand the ECMgiveaverygoodpredictionforthe binarytopologyofthe ITN.However,the
equationswhichspecifytheconnectionprobabilityp inthetwomodelsaresignificantlydifferent. Thus,thesefindings
make us expect that the values of the probabilities of connection for each single pair of nodes become comparable in
these two models, despite the different mathematical expressions. [30] shows the comparison of the two probability
matrices pBCM and pECM are in fact very similar. This in turn, enables us to greatly simplify the equations
defining theECM,byreplacingthe expressionforthe p coefficientsprovidedbythe ECMwiththatprovidedbythe
BCM. If we denote the new probability coefficients with pts, “ts” standing for “two-step” (the reasonwill be clear in
a moment), eqs.(2) and (3) can be naturally rewritten as
a ts(z) pts(z)= i j , (7)
h ij i ≡ ij 1+z z
w ts(z,y)= ij . (8)
where, now, the unknown vector z, and therefore the pts coefficients, can be determined by solving a system of
equations formally analogue to the one defining the BCM, i.e. k (W∗) = N pts(z∗), i. In this simplified model
i Pj6=i ij ∀
the connection probabilities no longer depend on the strengths as in the original ECM, while the weights still do. In
other words, we have decoupled the structural part of the system of equations defining the ECM from the remaining
one, providing a simpler set of equations to solve. This, in turn, implies that we can specify the model via a “two-
step”procedureaccordingtowhich1)wefirstsolvetheN equationsdeterminingthepts,uponconstrainingthenodes
degrees only and 2) then evaluate the remaining parameters determining w ts through the ECM. For this reason,
we denote the model as the “two-step” model (TS hereafter).
The TS model inherits the functional form of the link-specific distribution of weights from the ECM:
)wij−aij(1
ij ij 1+z z
Itisinstructivetorewriteeq.(9)asaproductoftwodifferentfactors,i.e. asq
)wij−aij(1
)aij to highlight the random processes behind the formation of each link. As a first step, one implements a
Bernoulli trial with probability pts in order to determine whether a link connecting i and j is created or not. The
secondpartofouralgorithmcanbe interpretedas adrawingfroma geometricdistribution, with parametery y : if a
link(or,equivalently,aunitaryweight)isindeedestablished,asecondrandomprocessdetermineswhethertheweight
of the same link is increased by another unit (with probability y y ) or whether the process stops (with probability
1 y y ). Iteratingthisproceduretodeterminethe probabilityofobtainingweightsofhighervaluesleadspreciselyto
eq − .(9). As a consistency check, one can explicitly calculate the expected weight w ts for the nodes pair i-j through
the formula +∞ w qts(w), which correctly leads to eq.(8).
Inmoreeconomicterms,theanalysisoftheITNclearlyprovesthatasubstantialdifferenceexistsbetweenestablish-
inganewtraderelationandreinforcinganexistingonebyrisingtheexchangedamountofgoodsofe.g. “oneunit”of
trade. These two processes are described, respectively, by the coefficients pts and y y . In order to understand which
one is more probable, we can study the behavior of the ratio pts/(y y ) for each pair of countries. In fact, whenever
1 IntheBCM,theprobabilitythat anytwonodes iandj areconnected has theexpressionpBCM = zizj . Theunknown parameters
zcanbenumericallyevaluated uponsolvingthesystemofN equations ki(W∗)=PN
CM(z∗),∀i.
pts/(y y ) > 1 countries i and j would probably establish a new trade relation quite easily, however experiencing a
certain resistance to reinforce it. On the other hand, whenever pts/(y y ) < 1 countries i and j would experience a
certain resistance to start trading; however,in the case such a relationwere established, it would representa channel
with relatively low “friction”, inducing the involved parteners to strengthen it.
Before analysing the case pts/(y y )=1 let us rewrite it as zizj(1 y y )=1. The expressionat the first member
ij i j yiyj − i j
appears also in eq.(9) which, in fact, can be restated in the following way: qts(w ) = zizj(1 y y ) aij (yiyj)wij .
ij ij hyiyj − i j i 1+zizj
Imposing the first factor to be equal to 1 implies reducing eq.(9) to q
), i.e. to the WCM
probability distribution. This model does not discriminate between the first link and the subsequent ones, reducing
tout court qts(w ) to a simple geometric distribution: thus, the failure of the WCM in reproducing the observed
properties of the ITN lies precisely in its incapability to give the rightimportance to the very first link, treating it as
a simple unit of weight and not as the channel making the trade exchanges possible.
C. A GDP-driven model of the ITN
Eqs.(7) and (8) provide the expressions into which we can input the vector of fitness parameters g , i, according
tothe prescriptionsofeqs.(5)and(6). As aresult,weobtainthe followingformulasthatmathematicallycharacterize
our GDP-driven specification of the TS model:
a ts(a) pts(a)= · i j , (10)
h ij i ≡ ij 1+a g g
w ts(a,b,c)=pts · i · j . (11)
h ij i ij (1+b gc+b gc)
Eqs.(11) can be used to reverse the approach used so far: rather than determining the 2N free parameters either
of the ECM (x and y) or of the TS model (z and y), upon constraining degrees and strengths to their observed
values, we can now use the knowledge of the GDP of all countries to obtain a model that only depends on the three
parameters a, b, c. Since the model consists of two subsequent steps, we can first assign a value to the parameter a
and, only once a is set, fit the remaining parameters b and c.
Parameter a can be determined quite easily. In fact, following [6, 35], the value of a can be chosen as the one
ensuring that the density of connections is reproduced, i.e.
such a prescription overcomes the limitation of econometric models (as the gravity model) in failing to predict the
rightdensity of connections, allowing us to fix it from the very beginning. Notice that satisfying eq.(12) is equivalent
to maximizing the likelihood function of the fitness model, as shown in [7].
Fixing the values of b and c is slightly more complicated. In fact, we could imagine to impose a similar condition,
asconstrainingthetotalweightW ofthenetwork. However,sincetheTSmodelusesapproximateexpressions,rather
than those of the ECM, maximizing the likelihood function in the second step of the model no longer coincides with
the desired condition W =W. Similarly, extracting the parameters from the fit shown in Fig. 3 does not preserve
the total weight of the network. However, in absence of any a priori preference, we chose the latter procedure, due
to its relative numerical simplicity with respect to the former one.
InFig. 4weshowacomparisonbetweenthehigher-orderobservedpropertiesoftheITNin2000andtheirexpected
counterpartspredictedbytheGDP-drivenTSmodel(themathematicalexpressionsofthesepropertiesareprovidedin
Appendix). As a baseline comparison,we also show the predictions of the GDP-driven WCM model with continuous
weights proposed in [21], which coincides with a simplified version of the gravity model.
Naturally, as expected, the predictions in Fig. 4 are more noisy than the ECM predicted values (the TS model
makes use of three parametersonly, while the ECM is defined by 2N parameters): this is due to the fact that eqs.(5)
(and the corresponding BCM equation) and (6) describe fitting curves rather than exact relationships. However,
as a general comment, the GDP-driven TS model reproduces the empirical trends very well; most importantly, our
model performs significantly better than the GDP-driven WCM in replicating both binary and weighted properties.
Again, the drawback of these models lies in the fact that they predict a fully connected topology and a relatively
FIG. 5. Comparison between the observed properties (red points), the corresponding ensemble averages of the GDP-driven
“two-step” model (bluepoints) of theaggregated ITN in the2000 snapshot. Left panel: average nearest neighborsdegree knn
versusdegree ki. Right panel: average nearest neighbors strength sn
n versusstrength si.
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180
100 101 102 103 104 105 106 107
Predicted Predicted
Real Data Real Data
homogeneous network. More specifically, the plot of the average nearest neighbor strengths, snn, predicted by our
model is slightly shifted with respect to the observedpoints. This effect is due to the fact that, as we mentioned, the
total weight of the network W (hence the average trend of snn) is only approximately reproduced by our model, as
a consequence of the simplification leading from the ECM to the TS model. Our findings are also robust over the
entire time spanof ourdata set. We canthereforeconclude that the ECMmodel, as wellas its simplified TSvariant,
can be successfully turned into a fully GDP-driven model that simultaneously reproduces both the topology and the
weighted structure of the ITN.
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper we have demonstrated the capabilities of a novel GDP-driven model which successfully reproduces
both the binary and weighted properties of the ITN. The model uses the GDP of world countries as a sort of
macroeconomic fitness that in turns determine the probabilities for the formation of the network links. The use of
the GDP as a macroeconomic fitness parameter is motivated in the first section, where we show the extent to which
this quantity is entangled with the first order, country-specific, properties of the network. The model also represent
an improvement in the reconstruction ability of a network, by extending it to both the binary ant the weighted
representations.
ThesuccessoftheTSmodelhasanimportantinterpretation. Werecallthattheeffectoftheapproximationleading
from the ECM to the TS model lies in the fact that the connection probability pts can be estimated separately from
the weights w ts, using either the knowledge of the degree sequence - if eq.(7) is used - or that of the GDPs and
total number of links - if eq.(11) is used. By contrast, the estimation of the expected weights cannot be carried out
separately, as it requires the evaluation of the connection probability pts. This asymmetry implies that the topology
of the ITN can be successfully inferred without any information about the weighted properties, while the weighted
structure cannot be inferred without any topological information. This effect is thus the origin of the limitation of
“purelyweighted’models,suchastheGravityModel,whichfocusontradevolumeswhiledisregardingtheconnectivity
of countries. The TS model provides a mathematical explanation for this otherwise puzzling effect observed in the
ITN.
Empirical properties Expected properties under the ECM Expected properties under the TS
aij haiji=pij =
aij hkii=P
pij =ki hkiits=P
knn = Pj6=iaijkj hknni= Pj6=ipijkj hknnits= Pj6=ipt ij shkjits
i ki i ki i hkiits
ci = Pj6=iP
jajkaki hcii= P
ki hciits= P
wij hwiji=
wij hsii=P
hwiji hsiits=P
snn = Pj6=iaijsj hsnni= Pj6=ipijsj hsnnits = Pj6=ipt ij shsjits
i ki i ki i hkiits
TABLE I. Mathematical expressions for theempirical and expected properties of theundirected representation of theITN.
Appendix: higher-order properties of the undirected representation of the ITN
Table I gives a summarized description of the binary and weighted network quantities analysed in this paper.
Specifically, it both shows their analytical definition and the corresponding expected value under the ECM and the
GDP-driven TS model.
LetusrecallthataweightedundirectednetworkcanberepresentedthroughasquarematrixW,wherethespecific
entry w represents the edge weight between country i and country j. The binary representation of the network,
encoded into the matrix A, is straightforwardly obtained upon defining a Θ[w ].
The degree and the strength of a given node, respectively defined as k (W) = N a = N Θ[w ], i and
i Pj6=i ij Pj6=i ij ∀
s (W)= N w , i, are first-order properties, describing the neighborhood of the node itself and, specifically, the
i Pj6=i ij ∀
number of its first neighbors (i.e. the other nodes sharing a direct connection with it) and its total volume.
Exploringthe topologicalproperties of more distantnodes (i.e. the neighborsof the neighbors)implies considering
longer pathways starting from node i. The simpler second-order properties that can be defined are the average
nearest neighbors degree, knn, i.e. the arithmetic mean of the degrees of the neighbors of node i and the average
nearest neighbors strength, snn, i.e. the arithmetic mean of the strengths of the neighbors of node i. Once plotted
versusthecorrespondingnodedegree(strength),theknn (snn)providesinformationonthetendencyofnodesdegrees
(strengths) to be either positively or negatively correlated. In economic terms, the knn quantifies the tendency of
strongly connected countries to trade with strongly connected partners as well.
Another important feature of complex networks concerns the tendency of nodes to cluster together. It can be
quantified through the clustering coefficient, c , which measures the percentage of closed triangles node i is part of.
In economic terms, the clustering coefficient quantifies the tendency of countries to form small communities and, at
a more general level, the hierarchical character of the ITN structure.
The measured properties of the real network need to be compared with the different models predictions. The
expected values can be obtained by simply replacing a with the probability coefficients a predicted by the
different models (e.g. a = zizj =pts for the TS, a = xixjyiyj for the ECM, et h c.) i and w with w
h ij i 1+zizj ij h ij i 1−yiyj+xixjyiyj ij h ij i
(e.g. w = ij fortheTS,etc.). WheneverconsideringtheGDP-drivenTSmodel,themathematicalexpressions
h ij i 1−yiyj
for a and w are the ones illustrated by eqs.(9) and (11).
[1] R. Kali, J. Reyes (2007) ’The architecture of globalization: a network approach to international economic integration’, J.
Int. Bus. Stud. , Vol. 38, pp.595
[2] R.Kali, J. Reyes(2010) ’Financial contagion on theinternational trade networ’, Economic Inquiry , Vol.48, pp.1072
[3] S. Schiavo, J. Reyes, G. Fagiolo, (2010) ’International trade and financial integration: a weighted network analysis’,
Quantitative Finance , Vol. 10, pp.389
[4] F.Saracco, R.DiClemente, A.Gabrielli, T. Squartini,(2015) ’Detecting thebipartite World Trade Webevolution across
2007: a motifs-based analysis’, arXiv:1508.03533 .
[5] A.Serrano, M. Boguna, (2003) ’Topology of the world trade web’, Phys. Rev. Lett. , Vol. 68, pp.015101
[6] D.Garlaschelli, M.I.Loffredo,(2004) ’Fitness-dependenttopological propertiesoftheWorldTradeWeb’,Phys. Rev. Lett.
, Vol.355, pp.188701
[7] D.Garlaschelli, M.I. Loffredo, (2005) ’Structureand Evolution of theWorld Trade Network’, Physica A , Vol.10, pp.138
[8] K.S.Gleditsch, (2002) ’Expanded Trade and GDP Data’, Journal of Conflict Resolution , Vol. 46, pp.712
[9] A. Serrano, M. Boguna, A. Vespignani, (2007) ’Patterns of dominant flows in the world trade web’, J. Econ. Interact.
Coord., Vol. 2, pp.111
[10] D. Garlaschelli, T. Di Matteo, T. Aste, G. Caldarelli, and M. Loffredo, (2007) ’Interplay between topology and dynamics
in the World Trade Web’, Eur. Phys. J. B, Vol. 57, pp.1434.
[11] G.Fagiolo,J.Reyes,S.Schiavo,(2008)‘Onthetopologicalpropertiesoftheworldtradeweb: Aweightednetworkanalysis’,
Physica A, Vol. 387, pp.3868-3873
[12] G. Fagiolo, J. Reyes, S. Schiavo, (2009) ‘World-trade web: Topological properties, dynamics, and evolution’, Phys. Rev.
E, Vol.79, pp.036115
[13] G. Fagiolo, (2010) ‘The international-trade network: gravity equations and topological properties’, J. Econ. Interact.
Coord., Vol. 5, No. 5, pp.1-25
[14] M. Barigozzi, G. Fagiolo, D. Garlaschelli, (2010) ‘Multinetwork of international trade: A commodity-specific analysis’,
Phys. Rev. E, Vol. 81, pp.046104
[15] L. DeBenedictis, L. Tajoli, (2011) ‘The world tradenetwork’, The World Economy, Vol. 34, pp.1417
[16] T. Squartini,D.Garlaschelli, (2011) ‘Analytical maximum-likelihood method todetect patternsin real networks’, New J.
Phys. , Vol. 13, pp.083001
[17] G.Fagiolo, T.Squartini,D.Garlaschelli, (2013) ‘NullModels ofEconomic Networks: TheCaseof theWorldTradeWeb’,
J. Econ. Interac. Coord., Vol. 8, No.1, pp.75
[18] T. Squartini, R.Mastrandrea, D. Garlaschelli, (2015) ‘Unbiased sampling of network ensembles’, New J. Phys. , Vol. 17,
[19] T. Squartini, G. Fagiolo, D. Garlaschelli, (2011) ‘Randomizing world trade. I. A binary network analysis’, Phys. Rev. ,
Vol. 84, pp.046117
[20] T.Squartini,G.Fagiolo, D.Garlaschelli, (2011) ‘Randomizingworld trade.II.Aweighted network analysis’, Phys. Rev. ,
Vol. 84, pp.046118
[21] A.Fronczak,P.Fronczak,J.A.Holyst,(2012)‘Statisticalmechanicsoftheinternationaltradenetwork’,Phys.Rev. E,Vol.
85, pp.056113
[22] M. Cristelli, A. Gabrielli, A. Tacchella, G. Caldarelli, L. Pietronero, (2013) ‘Measuring theIntangibles: A Metrics for the
Economic Complexity of Countries and Products’, PLoS ONE, Vol. 8, pp.0070726
[23] S. Sinha, A. Chatterjee, A. Chakraborti, B.K. Chakrabarti, (2010) ‘Econophysics: An Introduction’, Wiley-VCH, Wein-
heim .
[24] K. Bhattacharya, G. Mukherjee, J. Saramaki, K. Kaski, S.S. Manna, (2008) ‘The International Trade Network: weighted
network analysis and modeling’, J. Stat. Mech., pp.P02002
[25] Wells, S., (2004) ‘Financial interlinkages in the United Kingdoms interbank market and the risk of contagion’, Bank of
England Working Paper, No. 230/2004
[26] L.Bargigli,M.Gallegati,(2011)‘Randomdigraphswithgivenexpecteddegreesequences: Amodelforeconomicnetworks’,
J. Econ. Behav. & Organ., Vol. 78, pp.396
[27] N.Musmeci,S.Battiston,G.Caldarelli,M.Puliga,A.Gabrielli,(2013)‘Bootstrappingtopologicalpropertiesandsystemic
risk of complex networksusing the fitnessmodel’, J. Stat. Mech., Vol. 151, pp.720
[28] G.Caldarelli, A. Chessa, F. Pammolli, A.Gabrielli, M. Puliga, (2013) ‘Reconstructing a credit network’, Nat. Phys., Vol.
[29] T. Squartini, D. Garlaschelli, (2014) ‘an Tinbergen’s legacy for economic networks: from the gravity model to quantum
statistics’, Econophysics of Agent-Based Models, Springer, pp.161-186
[30] A. Almog, T. Squartini, D. Garlaschelli, (2015) ‘A GDP-driven model for the binary and weighted structure of the
International Trade Network’, New J. Phys., Vol. 17, pp.013009
[31] R. Mastrandrea, T. Squartini, G. Fagiolo, D. Garlaschelli, (2014) ‘Enhanced reconstruction of weighted networks from
strengths and degrees’, New J. Phys., Vol. 16, pp.043022
[32] R. Mastrandrea, T. Squartini, G. Fagiolo, D. Garlaschelli, (2014) ‘Reconstructing the world trade multiplex: the role of
intensiveand extensivebiases’, Phys. Rev. E, Vol. 90, pp.062804
[33] D.Garlaschelli,M.I.Loffredo,(2009)‘GeneralizedBose-FermiStatisticsandStructuralCorrelationsinWeightedNetworks’,
Phys. Rev. Lett., Vol. 102, pp.038701
[34] G. Caldarelli, A. Capocci, P.De Los Rios, M.A. Mun˜oz, (2002) ‘Scale-free networks from varying vertexintrinsic fitness’,
Phys. Rev. Lett., Vol. 89, pp.258702
[35] D. Garlaschelli, M.I. Loffredo, (2008) ‘Maximum likelihood: Extracting unbiased information from complex networks’,
Phys. Rev. E, Vol. 78, No.1, pp.015101