The concept «altruism» for sociological research: from
conceptualization to operationalization
Oleg V. Pavenkova, Vladimir G. Pavenkovb, Mariia V. Rubtcovac1
a. SPBGUKIT, 13, ul.Pravda, St.Petersburg, 191119, Russia
b. SPBGUKIT, 13, ul.Pravda, St.Petersburg, 191119, Russia
c. SPBGU, 7-9, Universitetskaya nab., St.Petersburg, 199034, Russia
Abstract:
This article addresses the question of the relevant conceptualization of «altruism» in Russian
from the perspective sociological research operationalization. It investigates the spheres of
social application of the word «altruism», include Russian equivalent «vzaimopomoshh`»
(mutual help). The data for the study comes from Russian National Corpus (Russian). The
theoretical framework consists of Paul F. Lazarsfeld`s Theory of Sociological Research
Methodology and the Natural Semantic Metalanguage (NSM). Quantitative analysis shows
features in the representation of altruism in Russian that sociologists need to know in the
preparation of questionnaires, interview guides and analysis of transcripts.
Key words: Altruism, social categories, Natural Semantic Metalanguage (NSM),
sociological operationalization, corpus linguistics
Resumen:
En este artículo se aborda la cuestión de la conceptualización correspondiente de «altruismo» en
ruso desde la perspectiva sociológica operacionalización investigación. Investiga las esferas de la
aplicación social de la palabra «altruismo», incluye equivalente ruso «vzaimopomoshh`» (ayuda
mutua). Los datos para el estudio proviene de Rusia National Corpus (en ruso). El marco teórico
consta de Paul F. Lazarsfeld`s Teoría de Investigaciones Sociológicas Metodología y la
semántica metalenguaje Natural (NSM). El análisis cuantitativo muestra características en la
representación del altruismo en ruso que los sociólogos tienen que saber en la preparación de
cuestionarios, guías de entrevistas y análisis de las transcripciones.
Palabras clave: Altruismo, categorías sociales, Natural Semantic metalenguaje (NSM),
operacionalización sociológica, lingüística de corpus
1*Corresponding author. Tel.: +78122720003.
E-mail address:m.rubtsova@spbu.ru
1. Introduction
This article presents a study of the conceptualization of «altruism» from the
sociological operationalization perspective and includes small-scale study which
analyzes how the concept of altruism and its Russian equivalent
«vzaimopomoshh`» (mutual help) is used in Russian language. Operationalization
is part of the empirical research process (Shields, Rangarjan 2013).
To translate the concept on "the language of the questionnaire", the
development of in-depth semi-structured interview guide and to work with the
transcript should be made operationalization - empirical interpretation of the
concept, i.e. the procedure for describing concepts through a system of indicators,
having the properties: a) measurable, b) the validity, c) repeatability. (Iliassov
The problem of definition of the spheres of application concepts is one of the
main for sociological operationalization in empirical research. However it gained
less development in application to Russian. Our research relies on researches of a
Natural Semantic Metalanguage (NSM) (Wierzbicka 1972, 1992, 1997, 2002;
Gladkova 2010, 2013). In opinion on this conception, linguist can compare
different languages (and different terms into one language) objectively, if he (she)
uses the semantic universals. However we are guided by discussions include the
criticism of Natural Semantic Metalanguage (NSM) (Blumczyński 2013). In
previous work, we have noted that the boundaries of social categories in the
Russian language have difficulty in clear determining (Volchkova, Pavenkova,
2002; Rubtsova. 2007, 2011; Pavenkov 2014).
In our view, the study of the concept should include the study of synonyms,
as sociologists and respondents are often used them. It can be said that the theme
of the use of synonyms in sociological studies rarely studied. In Russian concepts
altruism and «vzaimopomoshh`» (mutual help) are regarded as synonyms in many
Russian theoretical concepts of Social Sciences. At the same time, they can be
listed through a comma (Kropotkin 1988).
Therefore, our main research questions are following:
1) Are the concepts «altruism» and «vzaimopomoshh`» (mutual help)
interchangeable?
2) Has the use of these words in oral and written speech essential differences?
Using the Russian National Corpus, we can establish similarities and
differences in the use of word «altruism» in the context of «vzaimopomoshh`»
(mutual help) as Russian equivalent and try to find answer on our research
questions.
For this aim we can formulate and check folowing hypothesises:
Hypothesis 1. The using of these words has not statistically significant differences.
Hypothesis 2. The using of these words in oral and written speech has not
statistically significant differences.
To confirm or disprove the hypotheses we describe the spheres of
application these words. So we analyze seven contexts of using words «altruism»
and «vzaimopomoshh`». They are people`s actions, human himself, relations`
quality, state, social institutes, organisations, conseptions-ideology.
3. Data and Methodology
Based on the fact that the Russian language has two concepts denoting the
closest social phenomena – «altruism» and «vzaimopomoshh`» (mutual help)
which consider as synonymous we give a characterization of their most frequent
usage as a main, newspaper and spoken Russian National Corpus.
A corpus is a reference system based on an electronic collection of texts
composed in a certain language. A national corpus represents that language at a
stage (or several stages) of its development in all the variety of genres, styles,
territorial and social variants of usage, etc. A national corpus is created by linguists
for academic research and language teaching. A national corpus is distinguished by
two features. Firstly, it is characterized by representative and well-balanced
collections of texts. This means that such a corpus contains, if possible, all the
types of written and oral texts present in the language (various genres of fiction,
journalistic, academic, and business, as well as dialectal and sociolectal, texts). The
proportion of text types in the corpus is based on their share in real-life usage at the
time of composition. Secondly, a corpus contains additional information on the
properties of texts that are included. This is achieved by means of annotation. The
annotation is a principal feature of the corpus, distinguishing the corpus from
simple collections (also known as 'libraries') of texts on the Internet. Such libraries
are not well suited to academic work on the nature of language; they tend to focus
on the content of texts rather than their language properties, while the creators of
the Corpus recognize the importance of literary or scientific value of the texts, but
see them as a secondary feature. Unlike an electronic library, the National Corpus
is not a collection of texts which are deemed 'interesting' or 'useful' of themselves;
the texts in the Corpus are interesting and useful for the study of language. Such
texts might include not only great works of literature, but also works of a
'secondary' writer, or a transcription of an ordinary conversation2.
Total Main newspaper Spoken
Total documents, sentences and words in 85996 332720 3525 documents,
Corpus documents, documents, 1 623625
19362746 12920590 sentences,
sentences, sentences, 10 754 403
229968798 173518 798 Words
words words
Word «altruism» in Corpus, including 775 446 284 25
Word «vzaimopomoshh`» (mutual help) in 778 481 269 28
Corpus, including wordforms
Total words «altruism» and 1533 927 553 53
«vzaimopomoshh`» (mutual help) in Corpus,
including wordforms
Fig 1. Details of the words «altruism» and «vzaimopomoshh`» (mutual help) in Russian National Corpus
The Russian National Corpus consists of (1533) relevant words, between
(775) for altruism and (778) for «vzaimopomoshh`» (mutual help). The numbers
of the words «altruism» and «vzaimopomoshh`» (mutual help) almost equally. At
the same time distribution of the words is not equable. Main and spoken corpus of
«vzaimopomoshh`» (mutual help) a little bit more than «altruism». Altruism is
presented in newspaper lexis 5% more (Fig. 1). We have carried out check test in
SPSS and confirmed that the two concepts are presented without statistical
differences.
Al'truizm Altruism Altruist Vzaimopomoshh'
Al'truist Altruists
vzaimopomoshhi
Al'truisty altruistically
Al'truistichnyj Altruistic
Al'truisticheskaja altruists
Al'truistom altruistka
Al'truistka altruistically
Al'truistichnoj altruistic
Al'truisticheskom Altruism
Al'truizma
Fig 2. Wordforms for concepts «altruism» and «vzaimopomoshh`-mutual help» in the Russian national
Also altruism and «vzaimopomoshh`» have the different wordforms in the
Russian corpus (see Fig.2.)
4. Results and Analysis
4. 1. The spheres of application «altruism» and «vzaimopomoshh`» (mutual
In order to show the differences in the spheres of application (context) of
«altruism» and «vzaimopomoshh`-mutual help» (concepts) we will consider Figure
(3) and Figure (4). As we can see the spheres of application of «altruism» and
«vzaimopomoshh`-mutual help» have very big differences.
The spheres of application – context
people`s Human relations` social organisation conceptions
actions himself quality state institutes s and ideology Total
Concepts "vzaimopomoshh`"
65 0 106 79 57 313 158 778
mutual help
Altruism 180 98 188 14 10 15 250 755
Total 245 98 294 93 67 328 408 1533
Fig 3. The spheres of application (context) of «altruism» and «vzaimopomoshh`-mutual help» (concepts)
s)Fig 4. The spheres of application (context) of «altruism» and «vzaimopomoshh`-mutual help»
For statistical check we use Chi-Square Tests. Chi-Square Tests shows the
significance of differences between the use of the word «altruism» and
«vzaimopomoshh`-mutual help». (p < 0,001).Also, we confirmed the high level of
significance of the differences in the use of the two words in a more rigorous test
Cramer's V. (p < 0,001).
4. 2. The using of «altruism» and «vzaimopomoshh`» (mutual help) in oral
and written speech: quantitative analyses
At the first step we have to find out is there a statistically significant
difference between the use of concepts in oral and writing speech. We do not have
a separate Russian written corpus. As the written corpus, we can assume the
newspaper and the main corpuses, because they consist of written sources.
To check oral or written influence on the using of «altruism» and
«vzaimopomoshh`» (mutual help) we have used ANOVA-test. It allows us to
identify the factors influencing the use of concepts. The result is in the Fig 5.
Tests of Between-Subjects Effects
Dependent Variable:concept
Type III Sum of
Source Squares df Mean Square F Sig.
Intercept Hypothesis 364,731 1 364,731 1,470E3,000
Error 1,770 7,132,248a
Context Hypothesis 44,377 6 7,396 20,216 ,000
Error 8,432 23,047 ,366b
Corpora Hypothesis 1,024 2 ,512 ,892 ,432
Error 8,175 14,236,574c
context * Hypothesis 9,031 12,753 4,791,000
Error 237,520 1512,157d
a. ,256 MS(corpora) + MS(Error)
b. ,351 MS(context * corpora) + MS(Error)
c. MS(context * corpora) + ,299 MS(Error)
d. MS(Error)
Fig 5. Influence the choice of a linguistic corpus (main, newspaper or spoken) and context to
represent the results on concepts «altruism» and «vzaimopomoshh`-mutual help»
As we can see, the choice of a linguistic corpus (main, newspaper or speech)
has not influence (p = 0,432) to represent the results on concepts «altruism» and
«vzaimopomoshh`-mutual help». From another side, the context and interaction
between context and corpus are strong statistically significant (Sig., p < 0,001).
Chi-Square Tests shows the significance of differences between the use of the
word «altruism» and «vzaimopomoshh`-mutual help» (p < 0,001) in main,
newspaper or spoken linguistic corpuses. We can imagine them on a graph (Fig.6)
Fig. 5. The spheres of application (context) of «altruism» and «vzaimopomoshh`-mutual help» (concepts) in spoken, newspaper and main linguistic corpuses
Discussion and conclusion
We had explored the use of the two Russian words – «altruism» and
«vzaimopomoshh`» (mutual help), which had the same meanings originally. The
concepts «altruism» and «vzaimopomoshh`» (mutual help) are regarded as
synonyms in many Russian theoretical Social Sciences` concepts. Based on
Natural Semantic Metalanguage (NSM) and Russian National Corpus analysis
we describe seven contexts of using words «altruism» and «vzaimopomoshh`»:
people`s actions, human himself, relations` quality, state, social institutes,
organisations, conseptions-ideology.
The quantitative analyse shows differences in the use of these concepts.
The differences between the «vzaimopomoshh`» (mutual help) and «altruism»
are statistically significant for all three Russian corpuses: main, spoken and
newspaper. Only in few contexts these concepts may be used as synonyms: as
features of quality of relations, as conception and ideology.
Concept «Altruism» is often combined with pronouns and it is more
personal. The concept «vzaimopomoshh`» (mutual help) originally occurred
from the life of the Russian local community. However, in the 20th century, the
state has done its template. This explains its frequent mention in the context of
organizations, social institutions and the state. In these patterns, the lyrical
meaning of «happy life together» is almost lost.
In conclusion we would like to emphasize the importance of this
operationalization of concepts for empirical sociological research. We agree
with Lazarsfeld (Lazarsfeld, 1962:579) that the operationalization of concepts is
required. The conceptualization of social categories and prevents the loss of
meaning, which is important when we conduct in-depth interviews, focus groups
and in data processing of transcripts.
In future studies, we would have paid more attention to the replenishment
of the spoken Russian National Corpus with sociological interview transcripts,
search for social differences in the use of terms and reconsidered these concepts.