The way to reduce electrical charge of
a droplet dispensed from a pipette tip
Dongwhi Choi, Horim Lee, Do Jin Im and Dong Sung Kim
Mechanical Engineering,
POSTECH, KOREA
October 30, 2021
Recently,ourgroupreportedthatananyaqueousdropletdispensed
from a pipette tip has considerable amount of electrical charge. This
natural electrical charge of a droplet could cause undesired, unfamil-
iar experimental results. Since the origin of the charge of a droplet is
related to the pipette tip material, we modified the inside material of
thepipettetipwithpoly(dimethylsiloxane)-graphenenanocomposites.
The droplets dispensed from the modified pipette tip has lower elec-
trical charge than that from the common pipette tip. We compare the
experimental results with the droplets from common pipette tip and
modified pipette tip. This fluid dynamics video includes the principle
of the spontaneous electrification of the droplet and the results of the
droplet in oil experiments.
1 Detailed explanation
Our fluid dynamics video includes 4 segments:
1. The undesired, unfamiliar experimental results with droplet in oil sys-
tem.
The used droplets were DI water droplet and the fibroblast cell sus-
pension. The surrounding medium is silicone oil (50 cs). The charge
ofaDIwaterdropletdispensedfromthepipettetipspontaneouslyhas
positive charge and the cell suspension in our experiment has negative
charge. This cause a natural electrical repulsion among the DI water
droplets and electrical attraction between cell suspension and the DI
]nyd-ulf.scisyhp[
2v4617.9031:viXra
water droplet. Since this natural electrification phenomenon is not
well-known, these experimental results could seem to be strange.
2. The principle of the spontaneous electrification of the droplet dis-
pensed from a pipette tip.
When the solid contact with aqueous solution, the natural electrifica-
tion on the wall of the solid occurs. During dispensing the solution
from a pipette tip, this generated charges are dispensed together with
the solution.
3. The way we used to reduce the charge amount of a droplet.
We modified the pipette tip to reduce the charge amount. Since the
origin of the charge is highly related to the inner surface material of
thepipettetip,wecoatedtheinnersurfacewithpolydimethylsiloxane-
graphene nanocomposites through dip coating method.
4. Compared experimental results with the common, modified pipette
tip.
Weperformedtheexperimenttoconfirmthatthechargeofthedroplet
dispensed from the modified pipette tip has lower amount than that
from the common pipette tip. The merging of the DI water droplet
dispensed from the modified pipette tip was easily achieved because
of the lower electrical repulsion force among them. We compared the
experimental results to show that the pipette tip material could have
much effect on the droplet in oil experiment.
2 Reference
Spontaneouselectricalchargingofadropletdispensedbyconventionalpipet-
ting, Scientific Reports, 3, 2037, (2013).