1v5384.6090:viXra
The Complex Gradient Operator
CR and the -Calculus
June 25, 2009
Ken Kreutz–Delgado
Electrical and Computer Engineering
Jacobs School of Engineering
University of California, San Diego
VERSIONUCSD-ECE275CG-S2009v1.0
Copyright c 2003-2009, AllRightsReserved
1 Introduction
Often signals and system parameters are most conveniently represented as complex-valued vec-
tors. This occurs, for example, in array processing [1], as well as in communication systems [7]
when processing narrowband signals using the equivalent complex baseband representation [2].
Furthermore, in many important applications one attempts to optimize a scalar real-valued mea-
sureofperformance overthecomplexparameters defining thesignalorsystemofinterest. This is
the case, for example, in LMS adaptive filtering where complex filter coefficients are adapted on
line. To effect this adaption one attempts to optimizethe performance measure by adjustments of
thecoefficientsalong itsstochasticgradient direction[16, 23].
However, an often confusing aspect of complex LMS adaptive filtering, and other similar
gradient-basedoptimizationprocedures,isthatthepartialderivativeorgradientusedintheadapta-
tion ofcomplex parameters is not based on the standard complexderivativetaught in thestandard
mathematicsandengineeringcomplexvariablescourses[3]-[6],whichexistsifandonlyifafunc-
tion of a complex variable z is analytic in z.1 This is because a nonconstant real-valued function
of a complex variable is not (complex) analytic and therefore is not differentiable in the standard
textbookcomplex-variablessense.
1I.e.,complex-analytic.
K.Kreutz-Delgado—Copyright c 2003-2009,AllRightsReserved–VersionUCSD-ECE275CG-S2009v1.0 2
Nonetheless, the same real-valued function viewed as a function of the real-valued real and
imaginary components of the complex variable can have a (real) gradient when partial derivatives
are taken with respect to those two (real) components. In this way we can shift from viewing
the real-valued function as a non-differentiable mapping between C and R to treating it as a dif-
ferentiable mapping between R2 and R. Indeed, the modern graduate-level textbook in complex
variables theory by Remmert [12] continually and easily shifts back and forth between the real
function R2 R or R2 perspectiveand the complex function C C perspectiveof a complex or
real scalar-valued function,
ofacomplexvariablez = x+jy,
z C r = R2.
(cid:18) (cid:19)
In particular, when optimizing a real-valued function of a complex variable z = x + jy one can
work with the equivalent real gradient of the function viewed as a mapping from R2 to R in lieu
of a nonexistent complex derivative [14]. However, because the real gradient perspective arises
within a complex variables framework, a direct reformulation of the problem to the real domain
is awkward. Instead, it greatly simplifies derivations if one can represent the real gradient as a
redefined, new complex gradient operator. As we shall see below, the complex gradient is an
extensionofthestandardcomplexderivativeto non-complexanalyticfunctions.
Confusingtheissueisthefactthatthereisnooneuniquewaytoconsistentlydefinea“complex
gradient” which applies to (necessarily non-complex-analytic)real-valued functionsof a complex
variable, and authors do not uniformly adhere to the same definition. Thus it is often difficult to
resolve questions about the nature or derivation of the complex gradient by comparing authors.
Given the additional fact that typographical errors seem to be rampant these days, it is therefore
reasonable to be skeptical of the algorithms provided in many textbooks–especially if one is a
noviceinthesematters.
An additional source of confusion arises from the fact that the derivative of a function with
respect to a vector can be alternatively represented as a row vector or as a column vector when a
spaceisCartesian,2 andbothrepresentationscanbefoundintheliterature. Inthisnotewecarefully
distinguish between the complex cogradient operator (covariant derivative operator [22]), which
is a row vector operator, and the associated complex gradient operator which is a vector operator
whichgivesthedirectionofsteepest ascentofareal scalar-valuedfunction.
Becauseoftheconstantback-and-forthshiftbetweenarealfunction(“R-calculus”)perspective
andacomplexfunction(“C-calculus”)perspectivewhichacarefulanalysisofnonanalyticcomplex
functions requires [12], we refer to the mathematics framework underlying the derivatives given
in this note as a “CR-calculus.” In the following, we start by reviewing some of the properties of
standard univariate analytic functions, describe the CR-calculus for univariate nonanalytic func-
tions, and then develop a multivariatesecond order CR-calculus appropriate for optimizing scalar
real-valued costfunctionsofacomplexparametervector. Weend thenotewithsomeexamples.
2I.e.,isEuclideanwithidentitymetrictensor.
K.Kreutz-Delgado—Copyright c 2003-2009,AllRightsReserved–VersionUCSD-ECE275CG-S2009v1.0 3
2 The Derivative of a Holomorphic Function
Let z = x+jy,forx,y real, denoteacomplexnumberand let
be a general complex-valued function of the complex number z.3 In standard complex variables
courses itisemphasized thatforthecomplexderivative,
f (z) = lim − ,
to exist in a meaningful way it must be independent of the direction with which ∆z approaches
zero in the complex plane. This is a very strong condition to be placed on the function f(z). As
notedin an introductorycommentfromthetextbookby Flanigan[6]:
You will learn to appreciate the difference between a complex analytic function (roughly
a complex-valued function f(z) having a complex derivative f′ (z)) and the real functions
y = f(x) which you differentiated in calculus. Don’t be deceived by the similarity of the
notations f(z), f(x). Thecomplex analytic function f(z)turns out tobemuch morespecial,
enjoying many beautiful properties not shared by the run-of-the-mill function from ordinary
real calculus. The reason [ ] is that f(x) is merely f(x) whereas the complex analytic
function f(z)canbewrittenas
wherez = x+iy andu(x,y),v(x,y)areeachreal-valued harmonicfunctionsrelatedtoeach
otherinaverystrongway: theCauchy-Riemannequations
Insummary,thedeceptively simplehypothesis that
f (z) exists
forces a great deal of structure on f(z); moreover, this structure mirrors the structure of the
harmonicu(x,y)andv(x,y),functions oftworealvariables.4
In particularthefollowingconditionsareequivalentstatementsaboutacomplexfunctionf(z)
on anopen set containingz inthecomplexplane[6]:
3Later, in Section 3, we will interchangeably alternate between this notation and the more informative notation
f(z,z¯). Otherusefulrepresentationsaref(u,v)andf(x,y). Inthissectionwe lookforthe (strong)conditionsfor
which f : z f(z) C is differentiableas a mappingC C (in which case we say that f is C-differentiable),
butinsubsequentsectionswewilladmittheweakerconditionthatf :(x,y) (u,v)bedifferentiableasamapping
R2 R2(inwhichcasewesaythatf isR-differentiable);seeRemmert[12] 7→ foradiscussionofthesedifferenttypes
ofdifferentiability.
4Quoted frompage2 ofreference[6]. Note that in the quotei = √ 1 whereasin this note we take j = √ 1
followingstandardelectricalengineeringpractice.
K.Kreutz-Delgado—Copyright c 2003-2009,AllRightsReserved–VersionUCSD-ECE275CG-S2009v1.0 4
Thederivativef′(z) existsand iscontinuous.
Thefunctionf(z) isholomorphic(i.e, complex-analyticinz).5
Thefunctionf(z) satisfiestheCauchy-Riemannconditions(1).
Allderivativesofthefunctionf(z) existandf(z) hasaconvergent powerseries.
Furthermore, itisa simpleconsequenceoftheCauchy-Riemannconditionsthat
isholomorphiconlyifthefunctionsu(x,y)and v(x,y)bothsatisfyLaplace’sequation
+ = 0 and + = 0.
∂x2 ∂y2 ∂x2 ∂y2
Such functions are known as harmonic functions. Thus if either u(x,y) or v(x,y) fail to be har-
monic,thefunctionf(z) isnotdifferentiable.6
Although many important complex functions are holomorphic, including the functions zn, ez,
ln(z), sin(z), and cos(z), and hence differentiable in the standard complex variables sense, there
are commonlyencountereduseful functionswhicharenot:
Thefunction f(z) = z¯, where ‘z¯’ denotes complex conjugation,fails to satisfy theCauchy-
Riemann conditions.
The functions f(z) = Re(z) = z+z¯ = x and g(z) = Im(z) = z−z¯ = y fail the Cauchy-
Riemann conditions.
Thefunctionf(z) = z 2 = z¯z = x2 +y2 is notharmonic.
5Afunctionisanalyticonsomedomainifitcanbeexpandedinaconvergentpowerseriesonthatdomain.Although
this condition implies that the function has derivativesof all orders, analyticity is a stronger condition than infinite
differentiabilityasthereexistfunctionswhichhavederivativesofallordersbutwhichcannotbeexpressedasapower
series. Foracomplex-valuedfunctionofacomplexvariable,theterm(complex)analytichasbeenreplacedinmodern
mathematicsbytheentirelysynonymoustermholomorphic.Thusreal-valuedpower-series-representablefunctionsof
areal-variableareanalytic(real-analytic),whilecomplex-valuedpower-series-representablefunctionsofacomplex-
variableareholomorphic(complex-analytic).Wecannowappreciatethemeritofdistinguishingbetweenholomorphic
and(real)analyticfunctions—afunctioncanbenonholomorphic(i.e. non-complex-analytic)inthecomplexvariable
z =x+jyyetstillbe(real)analyticintherealvariablesxandy.
6Because a harmonic function on R2 satisfies the partial differential equation known as Laplace’s equation, by
existence and uniqueness of the solution to this partial differential equation its value is completely determined at
a point in the interior of any simply connected region which contains that point once the values on the boundary
(boundaryconditions)of thatregionare specified. Thisis the reasonthatcontourintegrationofa complex-analytic
(holomorphic)functionworksandthatwehavethefreedomtoselectthatcontourtomaketheintegrationaseasyas
possible. Ontheotherhand,thereis,ingeneral,noequivalenttocontourintegrationforanarbitraryfunctiononR2.
SeetheexcellentdiscussioninFlanigan[6].
K.Kreutz-Delgado—Copyright c 2003-2009,AllRightsReserved–VersionUCSD-ECE275CG-S2009v1.0 5
Anynonconstantpurelyreal-valuedfunctionf(z)(forwhichitmustbethecasethatv(z,y)
0) fails the Cauchy-Riemann condition. In particular the real function f(z) = z = √z¯z =
x2 +y2 isnot differentiable.7
Nopte in particular, the implication of the above for the problem of minimizing the real-valued
squared-errorlossfunctional
k k k k k k k k
(cid:8) (cid:9)
for finite second-order moments stationary scalar complex random variables ξ and η , and un-
known complex constant a = a + ja . Using the theory of optimization in Hilbert spaces, the
minimizationcan bedonebyinvokingtheprojectiontheorem (whichisequivalenttotheorthogo-
nalityprinciple)[34]. Alternatively,theminimizationcan beperformedbycompletingthesquare.
EitherprocedurewillresultintheWiener-Hopfequations,whichcanthenbesolvedfortheoptimal
complexcoefficientvariablea.
However, if a gradient procedure for determining the optimum is desired, we are immediately
stymied by the fact that the purely real nonconstant function ℓ(a) is not complex-analytic (holo-
morphic)andthereforeitsderivativewithrespect toadoesnotexistintheconventionalsenseofa
complexderivative[3]-[6], which appliesonlytoholomorphicfunctionsofa. A wayto break this
impassewill bediscussedin thenext section. Meanwhilenotethat all ofthereal-valued nonholo-
morphicfunctionsshownabovecanbeviewedasfunctionsofbothz and itscomplexconjugatez¯,
as thisfact willbeofsignificanceinthefollowingdiscussion.
3 Extensions of the Complex Derivative – The -Calculus
In this section we continue to focus on functions of a single complex variable z. The primary
references forthematerialdevelopedhereare Nehari [11], Remmert [12], and Brandwood[14].
3.1 A Possible Extension of the Complex Derivative.
As wehaveseen, inorder forthecomplexderivativeofafunctionofz = x+jy,
to exist in the standard holomorphic sense, the real partial derivatives of u(x,y) and v(x,y) must
not only exist, they must also satisfy the Cauchy-Riemann conditions (1). As noted by Flanigan
[6]: “This is much stronger than the mere existence of the partial derivatives.” However, the
“mere existence” of the (real) partial derivatives is necessary and sufficient for a stationary point
7Thus we have the classic result that the only holomorphic real-valued functions are the constant real-valued
functions.
K.Kreutz-Delgado—Copyright c 2003-2009,AllRightsReserved–VersionUCSD-ECE275CG-S2009v1.0 6
of a (necessarily nonholomorphic)non-constant real-valued functional f(z) to exist when f(z) is
viewedasadifferentiablefunctionoftherealandimaginarypartsofz, i.e.,asafunctionoverR2,
f(z) = f(x,y) : R2 R. (3)
Thus the trick is to exploit the real R2 vector space structure which underlies C when performing
gradient-based optimization. In essence, the remainder of this note is concerned with a thorough
discussionofthis“trick.”
Towardsthisend,itisconvenienttodefineageneralizationorextensionofthestandardpartial
derivative to nonholomorphic functions of z = x + jy that are nonetheless differentiable with
respecttoxandy andwhichincorporatestherealgradientinformationdirectlywithinthecomplex
variables framework. After Remmert [12], we will call this the real-derivative, or R-derivative,
of a possibly nonholomorphic function in order to avoid confusion with the standard complex-
derivative, or C-derivative, of a holomorphic function which was presented and discussed in the
previoussection. Furthermore,wewouldlikethereal-derivativetoreducetothestandardcomplex
derivativewhen appliedto holomorphicfunctions.
Notethatifonerewritesthereal-valuedlossfunction(2)intermsofpurelyrealquantities,one
obtains(temporarilysuppressingthetimedependence, k)
x y x y x − x x − y y y y x − x y
From thiswecan easilydete(cid:8)rmineth(cid:9)at (cid:8) (cid:9)
= 2E e ξ +e ξ ,
= 2E e ξ e ξ .
∂a − { − }
Togetherthesecan bewritten as
(cid:18) x y(cid:19) x y
whichlooksvery similarto thestandard resultforthereal case.
Indeed,equation(5)isthedefinitionofthegeneralizedcomplexpartialderivativeoftengivenin
engineeringtextbooks,includingreferences [7]-[9]. However,thisisnot thedefinitionusedinthis
note, which instead follows the formulation presented in [10]-[20]. We do not use the definition
(5) because it does not reduce to the standard C-derivative for the case when a function f(a) is a
holomorphicfunctionofthecomplexvariablea. Forexample,takethesimplestcaseoff(a) = a,
for which the standard derivative yields d f(a) = 1. In this case, the definition (5) applied to
f(a)unfortunatelyresultsinthevalue0. Thuswewillnot viewthedefinition(5)as anadmissible
generalizationofthestandardcomplexpartialderivative,althoughitdoesallowthedetermination
ofthestationarypointsofℓ(a).8
8Infact,itisascaledversionoftheconjugateR-derivativediscussedinthenextsubsection.
K.Kreutz-Delgado—Copyright c 2003-2009,AllRightsReserved–VersionUCSD-ECE275CG-S2009v1.0 7
3.2 The R-Derivative and Conjugate R-Derivative.
There are a variety of ways to develop the formalism discussed below (see [11]-[14]). Here, we
roughlyfollowthedevelopmentgiveninRemmert[12]withadditionalmaterialdrawnfromBrand-
wood[14]and Nehari [11].
Note that the nonholomorphic (nonanalytic in the complex variable z) functions given as ex-
amples in the previous section can all be written in the form f(z,z¯), where they are holomorphic
in z = x +jy for fixed z¯and holomorphic in z¯ = x jy for fixed z.9 It can be shown that this
factis truein generalforany complex-orreal-valued function
of a complex variable for which the real-valued functions u and v are differentiable as functions
of the real variables x and y. This fact underlies the development of the so-called Wirtinger cal-
culus [12] (or, as we shall refer to it later, the CR-calculus.) In essence, the so-called conjugate
coordinates,
Conjugate Coordinates: c , (z,z¯)T C C, z = x+jy and z¯= x jy (7)
canserveasaformalsubstitutefortherealr = (x,y)T representationofthepointz = x+jy C
[12].10 AccordingtoRemmert[12],thecalculusofcomplexvariablesutilizingthisperspectivewas
initiated by Henri Poincare´ (over 100 years ago!) and further developed by Wilhelm Wirtinger in
the1920’s[10]. AlthoughthismethodologyhasbeenfruitfullyexploitedbytheGerman-speaking
engineering community (see, e.g., references [13] or [31]), it has not generally been appreciated
by theEnglishspeakingengineeringcommunityuntilrelativelyrecently.11
For a general complex- or real-valued function f(c) = f(z,z¯) consider the pair of partial
derivativesoff(c)formally12 defined by
R-Derivativeoff(c), and ConjugateR-Derivativeoff(c), (8)
(cid:12)z¯=const. (cid:12)z=const.
(cid:12) (cid:12)
(cid:12) (cid:12)
9Thatis,ifwemakethesubstitution(cid:12)w = z¯,theyareanalyticinwforfixedz,andanalyticinz f(cid:12)orfixedw. This
simpleinsightunderliesthedevelopmentgiveninBrandwood[14]andRemmert[12].
10Warning! Theinterchangeableuseofthevariousnotationalformsoff implicitinthestatementf(z)= f(z,z¯)
canleadtoconfusion.Tominimizethispossibilitywedefinetheterm“f(z)(z-only)”tomeanthatf(z)isindependent
of z¯(andhence is holomorphic)and the term “f(z¯) (z¯only)”to mean thatf(z)is a functionof z¯only. Otherwise
therearenorestrictionsonf(z)=f(z,z¯).
11An important exception is Brandwood [14] and the work that it has recently influenced such as [1, 15, 16].
However,theselatterreferencesdonotseemtofullyappreciatetheclarityandeaseofcomputationthattheWirtinger
calculus(CR-calculus) can provideto the problemof differentiatingnonholomorphicfunctionand optimizingreal-
valuedfunctionsofcomplexvariables. Perhapsthisisdotothefactthat[14]didnotreferencetheWirtingercalculus
assuch,norcitetherichbodyofworkwhichhadalreadyexistedinthemathematicscommunity([11,18,12]).
12Thesestatementsareformalbecauseonecannottrulyvaryz =x+jy whilekeepingz¯=x jy constant,and
viceversa.
K.Kreutz-Delgado—Copyright c 2003-2009,AllRightsReserved–VersionUCSD-ECE275CG-S2009v1.0 8
wheretheformalpartialderivativesaretakentobestandardcomplexpartialderivatives(C-derivatives)
taken with respect to z in the first case and with respect to z¯ in the second.13 For example, with
f(z,z¯) = z2z¯wehave
= 2zz¯ and = z2.
Asdenotedin(8),wecallthefirst expressiontheR-derivative(thereal-derivative)andthesecond
expressiontheconjugateR-derivative(or R-derivative).
It is proved in [11, 14, 12] that the R-derivative and R-derivative formally defined by (8) can
beequivalentlywritten as14
∂f 1 ∂f ∂f ∂f 1 ∂f ∂f
(cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18) (cid:19)
wherethepartialderivativeswithrespecttoxandy aretrue(i.e.,non-formal)partialderivativesof
thefunctionf(z) = f(x,y),whichisalwaysassumedinthisnotetobedifferentiablewithrespect
to x and y (i.e., to be R-differentiable). Thus it is the right-hand-sides of the expressions given in
(9)whichmakerigoroustheformaldefinitionsof(8).
Notethatfrom equation(9)thatweimmediatelyhavetheproperties
= = 1 and = = 0. (10)
Comments:
1. The condition ∂f = 0 is true for an R-differentiable function f if and only the Cauchy-
Riemann conditions are satisfied (see [11, 14, 12]). Thus a function f is holomorphic
(complex-analytic in z) if and only if it does not depend on the complex conjugated vari-
ablez¯. I.e.,if andonlyiff(z) = f(z) (z only).15
2. TheR-derivative, ∂f, ofan R-differentiablefunctionf isequal tothestandard C-derivative,
f′(z), when f(z,z¯) isindependentofz¯,i.e., when f(z) = f(z) (z only).
13A careful and rigorous analysis of these formal partial derivatives can be found in Remmert [12]. In [12], a
differentiablecomplexfunctionf iscalledC-differentiablewhileiff isdifferentiableasamappingfromR2 R2,
itissaidtobereal-differentiable(R-differentiable)(SeeFootnote3).Itisshownin[12]thatthepartialderivati → ves(8)
existifandonlyiff isR-differentiable.Asdiscussedfurtherbelow,throughoutthisnoteweassumethatallfunctions
aregloballyreal-analytic(R-analytic),whichisasufficientconditionforafunctiontobegloballyR-differentiable.
14Recalltherepresentationf =f(x,y)=u(x,y)+jv(x,y). Notethattherelationships(9)makeitclearwhythe
partialderivatives(8)existifandonlyiff isR-differentiable.(Seefootnotes3and13).
15This obviouslyprovidesa simple and powerfulcharacterizationof holomorphicand nonholomorphicfunctions
andshowstheeleganceoftheWirtingercalculusformulationbasedontheuseofconjugatecoordinates(z,z¯). Note
thatthetwoCauchy-Riemannconditionsarereplacedbythesinglecondition ∂f = 0. Thereadershouldreexamine
thenonholomorphic(nonanalyticinz)functionsdiscussedintheprevioussectioninthelightofthiscondition.
K.Kreutz-Delgado—Copyright c 2003-2009,AllRightsReserved–VersionUCSD-ECE275CG-S2009v1.0 9
3. An R-differentiable function f is holomorphic in z¯ (complex-analytic in z¯) if and only if
it does not depend on the variable z, f(z,z¯) = f(z¯) (z¯ only), which is true if and only if
∂f = 0.
To summarize, an R-differentiable function f is holomorphic (complex-analytic in z) if and only
if f(z) = f(z) (z only), which is true if and only if ∂f = 0, in which case the R-derivative
coincides with the standard C-derivative, ∂f = f′(z). We call the single condition ∂f = 0 the
Cauchy-Riemannconditionforf to beholomorphic:
Cauchy Riemann Condition: = 0 (11)
Real-AnalyticComplexFunctions. Throughoutthediscussiongivenabovewehavebeenmak-
ing the assumption that a complex function f is real differentiable (R-differentiable). We hence-
forth make the stronger assumption that complex functions over C are globally real-analytic (R-
analytic) over R2. As discussed above, and rigorously proved in Remmert [12], R-analytic func-
tionsareR-differentiableand R-differentiable.
A functionf(z) has apowerseriesexpansioninthecomplexvariablez,
0 0 0 0 0 0 0
where the complex coefficient f(n)(z ) denotes an n-times C-derivative of f(z) evaluated at the
pointz , ifandonlyifitis holomorphicinan openneighborhoodofz . Ifthefunctionf(z) is not
holomorphicoverC, so that theaboveexpansiondoes not exist,but is nonethelessstillR-analytic
as a mapping from R2 to R2, then the real and imaginary parts of f(z) = u(x,y) + jv(x,y),
z = x+jy,can beexpandedin termsofthereal variablesr = (x,y)T,
(cid:18) (cid:19)
(cid:18) (cid:19)
NotethatiftheR-analyticfunctionispurelyreal, thenf(z) = u(x,y)and wehave
(cid:18) (cid:19)
K.Kreutz-Delgado—Copyright c 2003-2009,AllRightsReserved–VersionUCSD-ECE275CG-S2009v1.0 10
Properties ofthe R-and R-Derivatives. TheR-derivativeand R-derivativeare bothlinearoper-
atorswhichobeytheproductruleofdifferentiation. Thefollowingimportantandusefulproperties
alsohold(see references [11, 12]).16
Complex Derivative Identities:
(cid:18) (cid:19)
(cid:18) (cid:19)
df = dz + dz¯ Differential Rule (14)
= + Chain Rule (15)
= + Chain Rule (16)
Asasimpleconsequenceoftheabove,notethatiff(z)isreal-valuedthenf ¯ (z) = f(z)sothatwe
havetheadditionalveryimportantidentitythat
∈ ⇒ ∂z ∂z¯
(cid:18) (cid:19)
As a simple first application of the above, note that the R-derivative of ℓ(a) can be easily
computedfromthedefinition(2)and theaboveproperties tobe
= E e¯ e = E e +e¯ = E 0 e e¯ ξ = E ξ e¯ . (18)
k k k k k k k k k
(cid:26) (cid:27)
which is the same result obtained from the “brute force” method based on deriving expanding the
loss function in terms of the real and imaginary parts of a, followed by computing (5) and then
usingtheresult (9). Similarly,itcan beeasily shownthat theR-derivativeofℓ(a)is givenby
(cid:8) (cid:9)
Note that the results (18) and (19) are the complex conjugates of each other, which is consistent
withtheidentity(17).
We view the pair offormal partial derivativesfor a possiblynonholomorphicfunction defined
by(8)asthenaturalgeneralizationofthesinglecomplexderivative(C-derivative)ofaholomorphic
16Inthefollowingforz =x+jywedefinedz =dx+jdy anddz¯=dx jdy,whileh(g)=h gdenotesthe
compositionofthetwofunctionhandg.
K.Kreutz-Delgado—Copyright c 2003-2009,AllRightsReserved–VersionUCSD-ECE275CG-S2009v1.0 11
function. The fact that there are two derivatives under general consideration does not need to be
developed in elementary standard complex analysis courses where it is usually assumed that f
is always holomorphic (complex-analytic in z). In the case when f is holomorphic then f is
independentofz¯andtheconjugatepartialderivativeiszero,whiletheextendedderivativereduces
tothestandard complexderivative.
First-Order Optimality Conditions. As mentioned in the introduction, we are often interested
in optimizing a scalar function with respect to the real and imaginary parts r = (x,y)T of a
complex number z = x + jy. It is a standard result from elementary calculus that a first-order
necessary condition for a point r = (x ,y )T to be an optimum is that this point be a stationary
point of the loss function. Assuming differentiability, stationarity is equivalent to the condition
that the partial derivatives of the loss function with respect the parameters r = (x,y)T vanish at
the point r = (x ,y )T. The following fact is an easy consequence of the definitions (8) and is
discussedin[14]:
Anecessaryandsufficientconditionforareal-valuedfunction,f(z) = f(x,y),z = x+jy,
to have a stationary point with respect to thereal parameters r = (x,y)T R2 is that its R-
derivativevanishes. Equivalently,a necessary and sufficient conditionfor f(z) = f(x,y)
tohaveastationarypointwithrespect tor = (x,y)T R2 isthat itsR-derivativevanishes.
Forexample,settingeitherofthederivatives(18)or(19)tozeroresultsintheso-calledWiener-
Hopf equations for the optimal MMSE estimate of a. This result can be readily extended to the
multivariatecase, as willbediscussedlaterin thisnote.
TheUnivariateCR-Calculus. Asnotedin[12],theapproachwehavebeendescribingisknown
as theWirtingercalculus in the German speaking countries, after the pioneeringwork ofWilhelm
Wirtinger in the 1920’s [10]. Because this approach is based on being able to apply the calculus
of real variables to make statementsabout functions ofcomplex variables, in this notewe usethe
term “CR-calculus”interchangeablewith“Wirtingercalculus.”
Despite the important insights and ease of computation that it can provide, it is the case that
the use of conjugate coordinates z and z¯ (which underlies the CR-calculus) is not needed when
developing the classical univariate theory of holomorphic (complex-analytic in z) functions.17 It
is only in the multivariate and/or nonholonomic case that the tools of the CR-calculus begin to
be indispensable. Therefore it is not developed in the standard courses taught to undergraduate
engineering and science students in this country [3]-[6] which have changed little in mode of
presentationfromtheearliest textbooks.18
17“The differential calculus of these operations ... [is] ... largely irrelevant for classical function theory ...” —
R.Remmert[12],page66.
18Forinstance,thewidelyusedtextbookbyChurchill[3]adherescloselytotheformatandtopicsofitsfirstedition
which was published in 1948. The latest edition (the 7th at the time of this writing) does appear to have one brief
homeworkproblemondifferentiatingnonholomorphicfunctions.
K.Kreutz-Delgado—Copyright c 2003-2009,AllRightsReserved–VersionUCSD-ECE275CG-S2009v1.0 12
Ironically, the elementary textbook by Nehari [11] was an attempt made in 1961 (almost 50
years ago!) to integrate at least some aspects of the CR-calculus into the elementary treatment of
functionsofasinglecomplexvariable.19 However,becausethevastmajorityoftextbookstreatthe
univariate case, as long as the mathematics community, and most of the engineering community,
wasabletoavoiddealingwithnonholomorphicfunctions,therewasnorealneedtobringtheideas
oftheCR-calculus intothemainstreamunivariatetextbooks.
Fortunately, an excellent, sophisticated and extensiveintroduction to univariate complex vari-
ables theory and theCR-calculus is availablein the textbookby Remmert [12], which is a transla-
tion from the 1989 German edition. This book also details the historical development of complex
analysis. The highly recommended Remmert and Nehari texts have been used as primary refer-
ences for this note (in addition to the papers by Brandwood [14] and, most importantly for the
second-orderanalysisgivenbelow,van den Bos[25]).
The Multivariate CR-Calculus. Although one can forgo the tools of the CR-calculus in the
case of univariate holomorphicfunctions, this is not the situation in the multivariateholomorphic
case where mathematicians have long utilized these tools [17]-[20].20 Unfortunately, multivariate
complex analysis is highly specialized and technically abstruse, and therefore virtually all of the
standardtextbooksareaccessibleonlytothespecialistortotheaspiringspecialist. Itiscommonly
assumed in these textbooks that the reader has great facility with differential geometry, topology,
calculus on manifolds, and differential forms, in addition to a good grasp of advanced univariate
complex variables theory. Moreover, because the focus of the theory of multivariate complex
functions is primarily on holomorphic functions, whereas our concern is the essentially ignored
(inthisliterature)caseofnonholomorphicreal-valuedfunctionals,itappears tobetruethatonlya
verysmallpartofthematerialpresentedinthesereferencesisdirectlyusefulforourpurposes(and
primarilyfor creating a rigorous and self-consistentmultivariateCR-calculus framework based on
theresultsgiveninthepapers byBrandwood [14]and vanden Bos [25]).
TheclearpresentationbyBrandwood[14]providesahighlyaccessibleaspectofthefirst-order
multivariate CR-calculus as applied to the problem of finding stationary values for real-valued
functionals of complex variables.21 As this is the primary interest of many engineers, this pithy
paperisaveryusefulpresentationofjustthoseveryfewtheoreticalandpractical issueswhichare
needed to get a clear grasp of the problem. Unfortunately, even twenty years after its publication,
thispaperstillisnotaswidelyknownasitshouldbe. However,therecentutilizationoftheBrand-
wood results in [1, 13, 15, 16] seems to indicate a standardization of the Brandwood presentation
of the complex gradient into the mainstream textbooks. The results given in the Brandwood pa-
per [14] are particulary useful when coupled with with the significant extension of Brandwood’s
19Thisisstillanexcellenttextbookthatishighlyrecommendedforanaccessibleintroductiontotheuseofderiva-
tivesbasedontheconjugatecoordinateszandz¯.
20“[TheCR-calculus]isquiteindispensableinthefunctiontheoryofseveralvariables.” —R.Remmert[12],page
67.
21Although,asmentionedinanearlierfootnote,Brandwoodforsomereasondidnotciteormentionanypriorwork
relatingtotheuseofconjugatecoordinatesortheWirtingercalculus.
K.Kreutz-Delgado—Copyright c 2003-2009,AllRightsReserved–VersionUCSD-ECE275CG-S2009v1.0 13
resultsto theproblem ofcomputingcomplexHessianswhich has been providedby vanden Bos’s
paper[25].
Atthisstillrelativelyearlystageinthedevelopmentofawidelyacceptedframeworkfordealing
with real-valued (nonholomorphic) functions of several complex variables, presumably even the
increasinglywidelyusedformalismofBrandwood[14]andvandenBos[25]potentiallyhassome
room for improvement and/or clarification (though this is admittedly a matter of taste). In this
spirit,and mindfulofthe increasing acceptance of theapproach in [14] and [25], in theremainder
ofthisnotewedevelopamultivariateCR-calculusframeworkthatisonlyslightlydifferentthanthat
of[14]and[25],incorporatinginsightsavailablefromtheliteratureonthecalculusofmultivariate
complexfunctionsand complexdifferentialmanifolds[17]-[20].22
4 Multivariate -Calculus
The remaining sections of this note will provide an expanded discussion and generalized presen-
tation ofthe multivariateCR-calculus as presented in Brandwood [14] and van den Bos [25]. The
discussiongivenbelowalso utilizesinsightsgainedfrom references [17, 18, 19, 20, 21,22].
4.1 The Space Z = Cn.
Wedefine then-dimensionalcolumnvectorz by
z = z z T = Cn
(cid:0) (cid:1)
wherez = x +jy , i = 1, ,n, or, equivalently,
with x = (x x )T and y = (y y )T. The space = Cn is a vector space over the field
of complex numbers with the standard component-wise definitions of vector addition and scalar
multiplication. Notingtheone-to-onecorrespondence
z Cn r = , R2n = Rn Rn
(cid:18) (cid:19)
itis evidentthat thereexistsanatural isomorphismbetween = Cn and = R2n.
Theconjugatecoordinatesofz Cn are defined by
¯z = z¯ z¯ T = Cn
22Realistically,onemustadmitthatmany,(cid:0)andlikelymost(cid:1),practicingengineerswillbeunlikelytomakethemove
fromtheperspectiveandtoolsprovidedby[14]and[25](whichalreadyenabletheengineertosolvemostproblems
of practical interest) to that developedin this note, primarily because of the requirementof some familiarity of (or
willingnesstolearn)conceptsofdifferentialgeometryattheleveloftheearlierchaptersof[21]and[22]).
K.Kreutz-Delgado—Copyright c 2003-2009,AllRightsReserved–VersionUCSD-ECE275CG-S2009v1.0 14
Wedenotethepairofconjugatecoordinatevectors(z,¯z) by
c , C2n = Cn Cn
(cid:18) (cid:19)
Notingthatc,(z,¯z),z,(x,y),andrarealternativewaystodenotethesamepoint z = x+jy
in = Cn,for afunction
throughoutthisnotewe willusetheconvenient(albeit abusive)notation
where z = x + jy = Cn. We will have more to say about the relationships between these
representationslateron inSection 6below.
We further assume that = Cn is a Riemannian manifold with a hermitian, positive-definite
n n metric tensor Ω = ΩH > 0. This assumption makes every tangent space23 T = Cn a
× z z z Z z
Hilbertspacewithinnerproduct
v ,v = vHΩ v v ,v Cn.
h 1 2 i 1 z 2 1 2 ∈ z
4.2 The Cogradient Operator and the Jacobian Matrix
The Cogradient and Conjugate Cogradient. Define the cogradient and conjugate cogradient
operatorsrespectivelyas therowoperators24
Cogradient Operator: , ∂ ∂ (20)
(cid:0) (cid:1)
Conjugate cogradient Operator: , ∂ ∂ (21)
(cid:0) (cid:1)
where (z , z¯), i = 1, ,n are conjugate coordinates as discussed earlier and the component
operators areR-derivativesand R-derivativesdefined according to equations(8)and (9),
= j and = +j , (22)
i (cid:18) i i(cid:19) i (cid:18) i i(cid:19)
23A tangentspace at the pointz is the space of all differentialdisplacements, dz, at the point z or, alternatively,
thespaceofallvelocityvectorsv = dz atthepointz. Theseareequivalentstatementsbecausedzandv arescaled
versionofeachother,dz=vdt. ThetangentspaceT =Cnisalinearvarietyinthespace =Cn. Specificallyit
isacopyofCnaffinelytranslatedtothepointz,Cn = z Z z + z Cn. Z
24The “cogradient” is a covariant operator [22]. It is not itself a gradient, but is the companion to the gradient
operatordefinedbelow.
K.Kreutz-Delgado—Copyright c 2003-2009,AllRightsReserved–VersionUCSD-ECE275CG-S2009v1.0 15
fori = 1, ,n.25 Equivalently,wehave
= j and = +j , (23)
(cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18) (cid:19)
When applying the cogradient operator ∂ , ¯z is formally treated as a constant, and when
applying the conjugate cogradient operator ∂ , z is formally treated as a constant. For example,
considerthescalar-valued function
For this function we can readily determine by partial differentiation on the z and z¯ components
= z¯ z¯ and = z z .
∂z 2 1 ∂¯z 2 1
(cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:1)
The JacobianMatrix. Letf(c) = f(z,¯z) Cm beamapping26
f : = Cn Cm.
Thegeneralizationoftheidentity(14)yieldsthevector formof thedifferentialrule,27
df(c) = dc = dz+ d¯z, Differential Rule (24)
where the m n matrix ∂f is called the Jacobian, or Jacobian matrix, of the mapping f, and the
m n matrix ∂f the conjugate Jacobian of f. The Jacobian of f is often denoted by J and is
computedbyapplyingthecogradientoperatorcomponent-wiseto f,
J f (c) = ∂f ∂ ( z c) =  ∂ . . . z  =  ∂z . . . 1 · . · .. · ∂z . . . n  ∈ Cm×n, (25)
andsimilarlytheconjugateJacobian,denotedbyJc iscomputingbyapplyingtheconjugatecogra-
dientoperatorcomponent-wiseto f,
J f c(c) = ∂f ∂ ( ¯z c) =  ∂ . . . ¯z  =  ∂z . . . ¯1 · . · .. · ∂z¯ . . . n  ∈ Cm×n. (26)
25Asbeforetheleft-hand-sidesof(22)and(23)areformalpartialderivatives,whiletheright-hand-sidesareactual
partialderivatives.
26It will always be assumed that the components of vector-valued functions are R-differentiable as discussed in
footnotes(3)and(13).
27Atthispointinourdevelopment,theexpression∂f(c)dconlyhasmeaningasashorthandexpressionfor ∂f(c)dz+
∂f(c)d¯z, each term ofwhich mustbe interpretedformallyas z and¯z cannotbe variedindependentlyof eachother.
(Later,wewillexaminetheveryspecialsenseinwhichtheaderivativewithrespecttocitselfcanmakesense.) Also
notethat,unliketherealcasediscussedin[22],themappingdz df(c)isnotlinearindz. Evenwheninterpreted
formally,themappingisaffineindz,notlinear.
K.Kreutz-Delgado—Copyright c 2003-2009,AllRightsReserved–VersionUCSD-ECE275CG-S2009v1.0 16
Withthisnotationwecan writethedifferentialruleas
df(c) = J (c)dz+Jc(c)d¯z. Differential Rule (27)
Applyingproperties(12)and (13)component-wiseyieldstheidentities
(cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18) (cid:19)
Notefrom(28)that,
(cid:18) (cid:19)
However, in the important special case that f(c) is real-valued (in which case ¯f(c) = f(c)) we
With(27)thisyieldsthefollowingimportantfact whichholdsforreal-valued functionsf(c),28
f(c) Rm df(c) = J (c)dz+J (c)dz = 2Re J (c)dz . (31)
Considerthecompositionoftwomappingsh : Cm Cr and g : Cn Cm,
h g = h(g) : Cn Cr.
Thevectorextensionsofthechainruleidentities(15)and (16)toh g are
= + Chain Rule (32)
= + Chain Rule (33)
whichcan bewrittenas
J = J J +Jc J¯c (34)
h◦g h g h g
Jc = J Jc +Jc J¯ (35)
h◦g h g h g
28Therealpartofavector(ormatrix)isthevector(ormatrix)oftherealparts. Notethatthemappingdz df(c)
isnotlinear.
K.Kreutz-Delgado—Copyright c 2003-2009,AllRightsReserved–VersionUCSD-ECE275CG-S2009v1.0 17
Holomorphic Vector-valued Functions. By definition the vector-valued function f(z) is holo-
morphic(analyticin thecomplexvectorz)ifand onlyifeach ofitscomponents
f (c) = f (z,¯z) = f (z , ,z ,z¯ , ,z¯ ) i = 1, ,m
i i i 1 n 1 n
is holomorphic separately with respect to each of the components z ,j = 1, ,n. In the refer-
ences [17, 18, 19, 20] it is shown that f(z) is holomorphicon a domain if and only if it satisfies a
matrixCauchy Riemannconditioneverywhereon thedomain:
Cauchy Riemann Condition: Jc = = 0 (36)
Thisshowsthatavector-valuedfunctionwhichisholomorphiconCn mustbeafunctionofzonly,
Stationary Points ofReal-ValuedFunctionals. Supposethat f is ascalar real-valued function
from Cn to R,29
f : Cn R; z f(z).
As discussed in [14], the first-order differential condition for a real-valued functional f to be
optimizedwithrespect to thereal and imaginaryparts ofz atthepointz is
∂f(z ,¯z )
Condition I for a Stationary Point: 0 0 = 0 (37)
That this fact is true is straightforward to ascertain from equations (20) and (23). An equivalent
first-orderconditionforareal-valuedfunctionalf tobestationaryat thepointz is givenby
∂f(z ,¯z )
Condition II for a Stationary Point: 0 0 = 0 (38)
The equivalence of the two conditions (37) and (38) is a direct consequence of (28) and the fact
thatf isreal-valued.
DifferentiationofConjugateCoordinates? Notethattheuseofthenotationf(c)asshorthand
for f(z,¯z) appears to suggest that it is permissible to take the complex cogradient of f(c) with
respecttotheconjugatecoordinatesvectorcbytreatingthecomplexvectorcitself asthevariable
of differentiation. This is not correct. Only complex differentiation with respect to the complex
vectors z and ¯z is well-defined. Thus, from the definition c , col(z,¯z) C2n, for c viewed as a
complex2n-dimensionalvector, thecorrect interpretationof ∂ f(c)isgivenby
(cid:20) (cid:21)
29Thefunctionf isunboldedtoindicateitsscalar-valuestatus.
K.Kreutz-Delgado—Copyright c 2003-2009,AllRightsReserved–VersionUCSD-ECE275CG-S2009v1.0 18
Thus,forexample,wehavethat
cHΩc 6= cHΩ
which would be true if it were permissible to take the complex cogradient with respect to the
complexvectorc (whichitisn’t).
Remarkably, however, below we will show that the 2n-dimensional complex vector c is an
element ofan n-dimensionalreal vectorspaceand that, as a consequence, it is permissibleto take
thereal cogradientwithrespect to thereal vectorc!
Comments. Withthemachinerydevelopeduptothispoint,onecansolveoptimizationproblems
which have closed-form solutions to the first-order stationarity conditions. However, to solve
generalnonlinearproblemsonemustoftenresorttogradient-basediterativemethods. Furthermore,
to verify that the solutionsare optimal, one needs to check second order conditionswhich require
theconstructionofthehessianmatrix. Therefore,theremainderofthisnoteisprimarilyconcerned
with the development of the machinery required to construct the gradient and hessian of a scalar-
valuedfunctionalofcomplexparameters.
4.3 Biholomorphic Mappings and Change of Coordinates.
HolomorphicandBiholomorphicMappings. Avector-valuedfunctionf isholomorphic(complex-
analytic) if its components are holomorphic. In this case the function does not depend on the
conjugatecoordinate¯z, f(c) = f(z) (z-only),and satisfies theCauchy-Riemann Condition,
Jc = = 0.
As aconsequence(see(27)),
f(z) holomorphic df(z) = J (z)dz = dz. (39)
Notethatwhen f isholomorphic,themappingdz df(z) islinear, exactlyas inthereal case.
Considerthecompositionoftwomappingsh : Cm Cr and g : Cn Cm,
h g = h(g) : Cn Cr,
which are both holomorphic. In this case, as a consequence of the Cauchy-Riemann condition
(36), the second chain rule condition (35) vanishes, Jc = 0, and the first chain rule condition
(34)simplifiesto
f and g holomorphic J = J J . (40)
Nowconsidertheholomorphicmappingξ = f(z),
K.Kreutz-Delgado—Copyright c 2003-2009,AllRightsReserved–VersionUCSD-ECE275CG-S2009v1.0 19
and assumethatit isinvertible,
If the invertible function f and its inverse g = f−1 are both holomorphic, then f (equivalently, g)
issaid tobebiholomorphic. In thiscase, wehavethat
showingthat
Coordinate Transformations. Admissiblecoordinates on a space defined overa space of com-
plex numbers are related via biholomorphic transformations [17, 18, 19, 20]. Thus if z and ξ are
admissible coordinates on = Cn, there must exist a biholomorphic mapping relating the two
coordinates, ξ = f(z). This relationship is often denoted in the following (potentially confusing)
(cid:18) (cid:19)
(cid:18) (cid:19)
These equations tell us how vectors (elements of any particular tangent space Cn) properly trans-
form underachange ofcoordinates.
In particular under the change of coordinates ξ = ξ(z), a vector v Cn must transform to its
newrepresentation w Cn accordingto the
Vector Transformation Law: w = v = J v (47)
Forthecompositecoordinatetransformationη(ξ(z)), thechain ruleyields
Transformation Chain Rule: = or J = J J (48)
Finally, applying the chain rule to the cogradient, ∂f, of a an arbitrary holomorphicfunction f
Thisshowsthatthecogradient,asan operatoronholomorphicfunctions,transformslike
Cogradient Transformation Law: · = · = · J = · J
K.Kreutz-Delgado—Copyright c 2003-2009,AllRightsReserved–VersionUCSD-ECE275CG-S2009v1.0 20
Notethatgenerally thecogradient transformsquitedifferentlythandoes avector.
Finallythetransformationlawforthemetrictensorunderachangeofcoordinatescanbedeter-
minedfromtherequirementthattheinnerproductmustbeinvariantunderachangeofcoordinates.
Forarbitrary vectorsv ,v Cn transformed as
w = J v Cn i = 1,2,
w ,w = wH Ω w = vH JH Ω J v = vH J −H Ω J v = vH Ω v = v ,v .
h 1 2 i 1 ξ 2 1 ξ ξ ξ 2 1 z ξ z 2 1 z 2 h 1 2 i
Thisresultsinthe
Metric Tensor Transformation Law: Ω = J −H Ω J −1 = JH Ω J (50)
ξ ξ z ξ z z z
5 The Gradient Operator ∇
1st-OrderApproximationofaReal-ValuedFunction. Letf(c)beareal-valuedscalar30func-
tionaltobeoptimizedwithrespect tothereal and imaginarypartsofthevectorz = Cn,
f : Cn R.
As a real-valued function, f(c) does not satisfy the Cauchy-Riemann condition (36) and is there-
forenot holomorphic.
From (31)wehave(withf(z) = f(z,¯z) = f(c))that
df(z) = 2Re J (z)dz = 2Re dz . (51)
(cid:26) (cid:27)
Thisyieldsthefirst orderrelationship
(cid:26) (cid:27)
and thecorrespondingfirst-order powerseries approximation
(cid:26) (cid:27)
whichwillberederivedby othermeansinSection 6 below.
30Andthereforeunbolded.
K.Kreutz-Delgado—Copyright c 2003-2009,AllRightsReserved–VersionUCSD-ECE275CG-S2009v1.0 21
The Complex Gradient of a Real-Valued Function. The relationship (51) defines a nonlinear
functional,df ( ),on thetangentspace Cn,31
df (v) = 2Re v , v Cn, c = (z,¯z). (54)
(cid:26) (cid:27)
AssumingtheexistenceofametrictensorΩ wecan write
v = Ω −1 Ω v = ( f) H Ω v = f, v , (55)
∂z z ∂z z ∇ z z h∇ z i
(cid:18) (cid:19)
where f is thegradient off, defined as
Gradient of f: f , Ω −1 (56)
(cid:18) (cid:19)
Consistentwiththisdefinition,thegradientoperator is defined as
Gradient Operator: ( ) , Ω −1 · (57)
∇ z · z ∂z
(cid:18) (cid:19)
Note the relationships between the gradients and the cogradients. One can show from the coordi-
nate transformation laws for cogradients and metric tensors that the gradient f transformslike
a vector and thereforeisa vector,
f Cn.
Equations(54)and(55)yield,
df (v) = 2Re f, v .
Keeping v = 1wewanttofindthedirectionsv ofsteepestincreaseinthevalueof df (v) . We
haveasa consequenceoftheCauchy-Schwarz inequalitythat forallunitvectorsv Cn,
df (v) = 2 Re f, v 2 f, v 2 f v = 2 f .
Thisupperboundisattainedifandonlyifv f,showingthatthegradientgivesthedirections
of steepest increase, with + f giving the direction of steepest ascent and f giving the
direction of steepest descent. The result (57) is derived in [14] for the special case that the metric
isEuclidean Ω = I.32
Notethatthefirst-ordernecessaryconditionsforastationarypointtoexistisgivenby f = 0,
butthat itis mucheasier toapply thesimplercondition ∂f = 0 whichdoes notrequireknowledge
ofthemetrictensor. OfcoursethisdistinctionvanisheswhenΩ = I as isthecasein [14].
31Becausethisoperatorisnonlinearindz,unliketherealvector-spacecase[22],wewillavoidcallingita“differ-
entialoperator.”.
32Thereforeonemustbecarefultoascertainwhenaresultderivedin[14]holdsinthegeneralcase. Alsonotethe
correspondingnotationaldifferencebetweenthis note and [14]. We have denotingthe gradientoperatorfor the
generalcaseΩ =I while[14]denotesthegradientoperatoras forthespecialcaseΩ =I.
K.Kreutz-Delgado—Copyright c 2003-2009,AllRightsReserved–VersionUCSD-ECE275CG-S2009v1.0 22
CommentsonApplyingtheMultivariateCR-Calculus. Becausethecomponentsofthecogra-
dient and conjugate cogradient operators (20) and (21) formally behave like partial derivatives
of functions over real vectors, to use them does not require the development of additional vector
partial-derivative identities over and above those that already exist for the real vector space case.
Real vector space identities and procedures for vector partial-differentiation carry over without
change, provided one first carefully distinguishesbetween those variables which are to be treated
likeconstantsandthosevariableswhich aretobeformallydifferentiated.
Thus,althoughavarietyofcomplexderivativeidentitiesaregiveninvariousreferences[14,15,
16], there is actually no need to memorize or look up additional “complex derivative identities”
if one already knows the real derivative identities. In particular, the derivation of the complex
derivative identities given in references [14, 15, 16] is trivial if one already knows the standard
real-vectorderivativeidentities. Forexample,itis obviouslythecasethat
aHz = aH = 0,
as z is to be treated as a constant when(cid:0)takin(cid:1)g partial derivativeswith respect to¯z. Therefore the
fact that ∂ aHz = 0does not haveto bememorizedas aspecialcomplexderivativeidentity.
To reiterate, if one already knows the standard gradient identities for real-valued functions of
real variables, there is no need to memorize additional complex derivative identities.33 Instead,
one can merely use the regular real derivative identities while keeping track of which complex
variables are to be treated as constants.34 This is the approach used to easily derive the complex
LMSalgorithmin theapplicationssectionat theend ofthisnote.
Toimplementatruegradientdescentalgorithm,oneneedstoknowthemetrictensor. Thecor-
rect gradient, which depends on the metric tensor, is called the “natural gradient” in [24] where it
is argued that superior performance of gradient descent algorithms in certain statistical parameter
estimation problems occurs when the natural gradient is used in lieu of the standard “naive” gra-
dientusuallyused insuchalgorithms(where“naive”correspondstoassumingthatΩ = I evenif
thatisnotthecase). However,thedeterminationofthemetrictensorforaspecificapplicationcan
behighlynontrivialand theresultingalgorithmssignificantlymorecomplex,as discussedin [24],
although there are cases where the application ofthe natural gradient methodologyis surprisingly
straightforward.
To closethissection,wementionthatinterestingandusefulapplicationsoftheCR-calculusas
developed in [14] and [25] can be found in references [13], [26]-[33], and [36], in addition to the
plentifulmaterialtobefound inthetextbooks[1], [15], [16], and [23].
33This extra emphasisis made because virtually all of the textbooks(eventhe exemplarytext[15]) providesuch
extendedderivativeidentities and use them to derive results. This sends the message that unless such identities are
athand,onecannotsolveproblems. Also,itplacesoneatthemercyoftypographicalerrorswhichmayoccurwhen
identitiesareprintedinthetextbooks.
34Thus, in the real case, x is the variable to be differentiated in xTx and we have ∂ xTx = 2xT, while in the
complex case, if we take ¯z to be treated as constant and z to be the differentiated variable, we have ∂ zHz =
zH ∂ z = zH. Notethatinbothcasesweusethedifferentiationrulesforvectordifferentiationwhicharedeveloped
initiallyforthepurelyrealcaseoncewehavedecidedwhichvariablesaretobetreatedasconstant.
K.Kreutz-Delgado—Copyright c 2003-2009,AllRightsReserved–VersionUCSD-ECE275CG-S2009v1.0 23
6 2nd-Order Expansions of a Real-Valued Function on Cn
It is common to numerically optimize cost functionals using iterative gradient descent-like tech-
niques. Determination of the gradient of a real-valued loss function via equation (56) allows the
use of elementary gradient descent optimization, while the linear approximation of a biholomor-
phicmapping g(ξ) via (43) enables optimizationof the nonlinearleast-squares problem using the
Gauss-Newtonalgorithm.35
Another commonly used iterative algorithm is the Newton method, which is based on the re-
peated computation and optimization of the quadratic approximation to the loss function as given
by a power series expansion to second order. Although the first-order approximation to the loss
functiongivenby(53)wasrelativelystraight-forwardtoderive,itissomewhatmoreworktodeter-
minethesecondorderapproximation,whichisthefocusofthissectionandwhichwillbeattacked
using the elegant approach of van den Bos [25].36 Along the way we will rederive the first order
approximation (53) and the Hessian matrix of second partial derivatives of a real scalar-valued
function which is needed to verify the optimality of a solution solving the first order necessary
conditions.
6.1 Alternative Coordinate Representations of Z = Cn.
Conjugate Coordinate Vectors c ∈ C Form a Real Vector Space. The complex space, Cn,
of dimension n naturally has the structure of a real space, R2n, of dimension 2n, Cn R2n, as a
consequenceoftheequivalence
z = x+jy = Cn r = , R2n.
∈ Z ⇔ y ∈ R
(cid:18) (cid:19)
Furthermore, as noted earlier, an alternative representation is given by the set of conjugate
coordinatevectors
c = C2n R4n,
¯z ∈ C ⊂ ≈
(cid:18) (cid:19)
where isdefinedtobethecollectionofallsuchvectorsc. Notethattheset isobviouslyasubset
(and not a vector subspace)37 of the 4n dimensional complex vector space C2n. Remarkably, it is
alsoa 2ndimensionalvectorspaceover thefieldof realnumbers!
This is straightforward to show. First, in the obvious manner, one can define vector addition
of any two elements of . To show closure under scalar multiplicationby a real number α is also
straightforward,
c = αc = .
(cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18) (cid:19)
35RecallthattheGauss-Newtonalgorithmisbasedoniterativere-linearizationofanonlinearmodelz g(ξ).
36A detailed exposition of the second order case is given by Abatzoglou, Mendel, & Harada in [36]. See also
[32]. Thereferences[36],[25]and[32]alldevelopthecomplexNewtonalgorithm,althoughwithsomewhatdifferent
notation.
37Itis,infact,a2ndimensionalsubmanifoldofthespaceC2n R4n.
K.Kreutz-Delgado—Copyright c 2003-2009,AllRightsReserved–VersionUCSD-ECE275CG-S2009v1.0 24
Notethatthishomogeneitypropertyobviouslyfailswhen α iscomplex.
To demonstrate that is 2n dimensional, we will construct below the one-to-one transforma-
tion, J, which maps onto , and vice versa, thereby showing that and are isomorphic,
. In this manner and are shown to be alternative, but entirely equivalent (including
theirdimensions),real coordinaterepresentationsfor = Cn. The coordinatetransformationJ is
alinearmapping,andthereforealsocorrespondstotheJacobianofthetransformationbetweenthe
coordinatesystem and thecoordinatesystem .
In summary, we have available three vector space coordinate representations for representing
complex vectors z = x + jy. The first is the canonical n-dimensional vector space of complex
vectorsz = Cnitself. Thesecondisthecanonical2n-dimensionalrealvectorspaceofvectors
r = col(x,y) = R2n, which arises from the natural correspondence Cn R2n. The third is
the2n-dimensionalreal vectorspace ofvectors c C2n, R2n.
Because canbealternativelyviewedasacomplexsubsetofC2n orasarealvectorspaceiso-
morphictoR2n,weactuallyhaveafourth“representation”;namelythenon-vectorspacecomplex-
vectorperspectiveofelementsof aselementsofthespaceC2n,c = col(z,¯z).38 Thisperspective
is just the (z,¯z) perspective used above to analyze general, possibly nonholomorphic, functions
In order to avoid confusion, we will refer to these two alternative interpretations of c
C2n asthec-real case(respectively,the -real case) forwhen weconsiderthevectorc R2n
(respectively,therealvectorspace R2n),andthec-complexcase(respectively,the -complex
case)whenweconsideravectorc C2n (respectively,thecomplexsubset C2n).39 These
twodifferent perspectivesof are usedthroughouttheremainderofthisnote.
CoordinateTransformations andJacobians. From thefact that
z = x+jy and ¯z = x jy
itis easilyshownthat
(cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18) − (cid:19)(cid:18) (cid:19)
whereI isthen nidentitymatrix. Defining40
38SincewhenviewedasasubsetofC2ntheset isnotasubspace,thisviewof doesnotresultinatruecoordinate
representation.
39Inthelattercasec=col(z,¯z)isunderstoodintermsofthebehaviorandpropertiesofitscomponents,especially
fordifferentiationpurposesbecause,asmentionedearlier,inthecomplexcasethederivative ∂ isnotwell-definedin
itself,butisdefinedintermsoftheformalderivativeswithrespecttozand¯z.Asweshalldiscoverbelow,inthec-real
case,thederivative ∂ isatruerealderivativewhichiswellunderstoodintermsofthebehaviorofthederivative ∂ .
40Exceptforatrivialreorderingoftheelementsofr = (xT yT)T,thisisthetransformationproposedandutilized
byvandenBos[25],whoclaimsin[29]tohavebeeninspiredtodosobyRemmert.(See,e.g.,thediscussiononpage
87of[12].)
K.Kreutz-Delgado—Copyright c 2003-2009,AllRightsReserved–VersionUCSD-ECE275CG-S2009v1.0 25
(cid:18) − (cid:19)
thenresultsin themapping
It iseasilydetermined that
sothat wehavetheinversemapping
r = r(c) = J−1c = JHc. (61)
Becausethemappingbetween and islinear,one-to-one,andonto,bothofthesespacesare
obviously isomorphic real vector spaces of dimension 2n. The mappings (59) and (61) therefore
correspond to an admissible coordinate transformation between the c and r representations of
z . Consistent with thisfact, we henceforth assumethat thereal vectorcalculus (includingall
ofthevectorderivativeidentities)applytoreal-valued functionsover .
Notethatforthecoordinatetransformationc = c(r) = JrwehavetheJacobian
J , c(r) = Jr = J (62)
showing that J is also the Jacobian of the coordinate transformation from to .41 The Jacobian
oftheinversetransformationr = r(c) isgivenby
J = J −1 = J−1 = JH. (63)
Ofcourse, then,wehavethedifferentialrelationships
dc = dr = J dr = Jdr and dr = dc = J dc = JHdc (64)
whichcorrespond tothefirst-orderrelationships42
1st-Order Relationships: ∆c = J ∆r = J∆r and ∆r = J ∆c = JH∆c (65)
wheretheJacobianJ isgivenby(60)and
(cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18) (cid:19)
41Wehavejustproved,ofcourse,thegeneralpropertyoflinearoperatorsthattheyaretheirownJacobians.
42Forageneral,nonlinear,coordinatetransformationthesefinite-difference(non-infinitesimal)first-orderrelation-
shipswouldbeapproximate. However,becausethe coordinatetransformationconsideredherehappenstobelinear,
therelationshipsareexact.
K.Kreutz-Delgado—Copyright c 2003-2009,AllRightsReserved–VersionUCSD-ECE275CG-S2009v1.0 26
The Cogradientwithrespect to theReal Conjugate Coordinates Vectorc. Thereadermight
well wonder why we didn’t just point out that (64) and (65) are merely simple consequences of
the linear nature of the coordinate transformations (59) and (61), and thereby skip the interme-
diate steps given above. The point is that once we have identified the Jacobian of a coordinate
transformation over a real manifold, we can readily transform between different coordinate rep-
resentations of all vector-like (contravariant) objects, such as the gradient of a functional, and
between all covector-like (covariant) objects, such as the cogradient of a functional, over that
manifold. Indeed, as a consequence of this fact we immediately have the important cogradient
operatortransformations
Cogradient Transf’s: · = · J = · JH and · = · J = · J (67)
withtheJacobianJ givenby (58) andJ = J−1.
Equation (67) is very important as it allows us to easily, yet rigorously, define the cogradient
taken with respect to c as a true (nonformal) differential operator provided that we view c as an
elementofthereal coordinaterepresentationspace . Thecogradient
iswell-defined interms
ofthecogradient
and the“pullback”transformation,
∂( ) 1∂( )
· = · JH.
Thisshowsthat
whichwas originallydefined in termsof thecogradientand conjugatecogra-
dientstaken withrespect toz (the c-complexinterpretationof
can betreated as a real differ-
entialoperator withrespect to the“real” vectorc (thec-real interpretationof
Complex Conjugation. It is easily determined that the operation of complex conjugation, z
¯z, isanonlinearmappingon = Cn. Considerageneralelementζ C2n writtenas
ζ = top C2n = Cn Cn with ζ Cn and ζ Cn.
ζ ∈ × top ∈ bottom ∈
(cid:18) bottom(cid:19)
OfcoursetheoperationofcomplexconjugationonC2n,ζ ζ ¯ ,is,ingeneral,anonlinearmapping.
Now consider the linear operation of swapping the top and bottom elements of ζ, ζ ζ,
defined as
ζ = top ζ ¯ = bottom = top = Sζ
(cid:18) bottom(cid:19) (cid:18) top (cid:19) (cid:18) (cid:19)(cid:18) bottom(cid:19)
43ThuswecandirectlydifferentiateanexpressionlikecTΩcwithrespecttocusingthestandardidentitiesofreal
vectorcalculus. (Thefactthattheseidentitiesholdforthercalculusandbeusedtoprovetheirvalidityforthec-real
calculus.) MoreproblematicisanexpressionlikecHΩc. Itisnotappropriatetotakethecomplexderivativeofthis
expressionwithrespecttothecomplexvectorcbecausec, asanelementofCn issubjecttoconstraintsamongstits
components.Instead(seeimmediatelybelow)onecanusetheidentity¯c=˜c=SctoobtaincHΩc=cTSΩcwhich
can thenbe differentiatedwith respectto c. Of course, thislatter approachcan failif cTSΩc cannotbe interpreted
in some appropriatesense in the field of real numbers. Note thatreal versuscomplexdifferentiationof cHΩc with
respecttocwoulddifferbyafactorof2.
K.Kreutz-Delgado—Copyright c 2003-2009,AllRightsReserved–VersionUCSD-ECE275CG-S2009v1.0 27
(cid:18) (cid:19)
istheswap operator on C2n whichobeystheproperties
S = ST = S −1,
showing that S is symmetric and its own inverse, S2 = I. Note that, in general, swapping is not
equal tocomplexconjugation,ζ = ζ.
The swap operator S will be used extensively throughout the remainder of this note, so it is
important to become comfortable with its use and manipulation. The swap operator is a block
permutation matrix which permutes (swaps)44 blocks of rows or blocks of columns depending on
whether S premultiplies or postmultipliesa matrix. Specifically, let a 2n 2n matrix A be block
partitionedas
A = 11 12 .
(cid:18) (cid:19)
Then premultiplicationby S resultsin ablock swap ofthetopn rowsen massewiththebottomn
SA = 21 22 .
(cid:18) (cid:19)
Alternatively,postmultiplicationbyS resultsinablockswapofthefirstncolumnswiththelastn
columns,46
AS = 12 11 .
(cid:18) (cid:19)
It isalso usefultonotetheresult ofa“sandwiching”byS,
SAS = A = 22 21 .
(cid:18) (cid:19)
Because S permutes n rows (or columns), it is a product of n elementary permutation matrices,
each of which is known to have a determinant which evaluates to 1. As an easy consequence of
this,wehave
detS = ( 1)n.
Otherimportantpropertiesoftheswap operatorS willbedevelopedas weproceed.
Now note that the subset C2n contains precisely those elements of C2n for which the
operationsofswappingandcomplexconjugationcoincide,
n (cid:12) o
44“Permutation”isjustafancytermfor“swapping.” (cid:12)
45MatrixpremultiplicationofAbyanymatrixalwaysyieldsarowoperation.
46Matrix postmultiplication of A by any matrix always yields a column operation. The fact that pre- and post-
multiplication yield different actions on A is an interesting and illuminating way to interpret the fact that matrix
multiplicationisnoncommutative,MA=AM.
K.Kreutz-Delgado—Copyright c 2003-2009,AllRightsReserved–VersionUCSD-ECE275CG-S2009v1.0 28
and thus it is true by construction that c obeys ¯c = ˜c, even though swapping and complex
conjugation are different operations on C2n. Now although is not a subspace of the complex
vector space C2n, it is a real vector space in its own right. We see that the linear operation of
component swapping on the -space coordinate representation of = Cn is exactly equivalent
to the nonlinear operation of complex conjugation on . It is important to note that complex
conjugationandcoordinateswappingrepresentdifferentoperationsonavectorcwhencisviewed
as an elementofC2n.47
We can view the linearswap mappingS : as a coordinatetransformation(a coordinate
“reparameterization”),¯c = ˜c = Sc, on . Because S is linear, theJacobian of thistransformation
isjustS itself. Thusfrom thecogradient transformationproperty weobtaintheuseful identity
∂¯c ∂˜c ∂c
It isalso straightforwardtoshowthat
I = JTSJ (69)
forJ givenby (58)
Letusnowturntothealternativecoordinaterepresentationgivenbyvectorsrinthespace =
R2n. Specifically, consider the coordinate vector r corresponding to the change of coordinates
r = 1JHc. Sincethevectorrisreal,itisitsowncomplexconjugate,¯r = r.48 Complexconjugation
ofz isthenonlinearmappinginCn
and correspondsintherepresentationspace tothelinearmapping49
r = ˇr , = = Cr
y → y 0 I y
(cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18)− (cid:19) (cid:18) − (cid:19)(cid:18) (cid:19)
whereC is theconjugationmatrix
C , . (70)
(cid:18) − (cid:19)
C = CT = C −1,
47As mentioned earlier, c, in a sense, does “double duty” as a representation for z; once as a (true coordinate)
representationofzintherealvectorspace ,andalternativelyasa“representation”ofzinthe“doubledup”complex
spaceC2n =Cn Cn. Inthedevelopmen C tgivenbelow,wewillswitchbetweenthesetwoperspectivesofc.
48Notethatourtheoreticaldevelopmentsareconsistentwiththisrequirement,as
¯r= (JHc)= JT¯c= JT˜c= JTSc= JTSJr=Ir=r.
49Werefertoˇras“r-check.”
K.Kreutz-Delgado—Copyright c 2003-2009,AllRightsReserved–VersionUCSD-ECE275CG-S2009v1.0 29
i.e., thatC issymmetric,C = CT,and itsowninverse,C2 = I. Itis straightforwardtoshowthat
C = JHSJ (71)
whichcan becomparedto (69). Finally,itis straightforwardtoshowthat
To summarize, we can represent the complex vector z by either c or r, where c has two inter-
pretations(asacomplexvector, “c-complex”,inC2n,orasan element,“c-real”, ofthereal vector
space R2n), and wecan represent thecomplexconjugate¯z by¯c,˜c, orˇr. And complexconju-
gation,whichisanonlinearoperationinCn,correspondstolinearoperatorsinthe2n-dimensional
isomorphicreal vectorspaces and .
6.2 Low Order Series Expansions of a Real-Valued Scalar Function.
By noting that a real-valued scalar function of complex variables can be viewed as a function of
eitherrorc-real orc-complexorz,
itisevidentthatoneshouldbeabletorepresentf asapowerseriesinanyoftheserepresentations.
Following the line of attack pursued by van den Bos in [25], by exploiting the relationships (65)
and(67)wewillreadilyshowtheequivalenceuptosecondorderinapowerseriesexpansionoff.
Up to second order, the multivariate power series expansion of the real-valued function f
viewedas an analyticfunctionofvectorr is givenas,
2nd-Order Expansioninr: f(r+∆r) = f(r)+ ∆r+ ∆rT (r)∆r+h.o.t. (73)
H ∂r ∂r ∈ R
(cid:18) (cid:19)
is the real r-Hessian matrix of second partial derivatives of the real-valued function f(r) with
respect tothecomponentsofr. It iswell knownthat areal Hessianis symmetric,
= T .
However, there is no general guarantee that the Hessian will be a positive definite or positive
semidefinitematrix.
Itisassumedthatthetermsf(r)andf(r+∆r)bereadilyexpressedintermsofcandc+∆c
or z and z+∆z. Our goal is to determine the proper expression of the linear and quadratic terms
of(73)intermsofc and ∆c orzand ∆z.
50When no confusion can arise, one usually drops the subscripts on the Hessian and uses the simpler notation
(ρ)= (ρ). NotethattheHessianisthematrixofsecondpartialderivativesofareal-valuedscalarfunction.
K.Kreutz-Delgado—Copyright c 2003-2009,AllRightsReserved–VersionUCSD-ECE275CG-S2009v1.0 30
Scalar Products and Quadratic Forms on the Real Vector Space C. Consider two vectors
c = col(z,¯z) and s = col(ξ,ξ ¯ ) . The scalar product for any two such vectors in -real
(i.e., inthereal vectorspace R2n) isdefined by
c,s , cTSs = ¯cTs = cHs = zHξ +¯zHξ ¯ = zHξ +zHξ = 2RezHξ.
The row vector cTS = cH is a linear functional which maps the elements of -real into the real
numbers. The set of all such linear functionals is a vector space itself and is known as the dual
space, ∗,of [34,35]. Theelementsof ∗ areknownas dualvectorsorcovectors,and theterms
“dual vector”, “covector”, and “linear functional” should all be taken to be synonymous. Given a
vectorc , thereisanaturalone-to-onemappingbetweencandacorrespondingdualvector,c∗
in ∗ defi ∈ ne C d by51
C c∗ , cTS = cH.
Henceforth it isunderstoodthatscalar-product expressionslike
aHs or cHb
where s and c are known to be elements of are only meaningful if a and b are also
elements of . Thus, itmust be thecasethat both vectorsin a scalar product mustbelong to if it
isthecasethat oneofthem does,otherwiseweviewtheresultingnumericalvalueas nonsensical.
Thus,fora real-valuedfunctionofup toquadraticorderinavectorc ,
f(c) = a+bHc+ cHMc = a+bHc+ cHs, s = Mc, (75)
tobewell-posed,itmustbethecasethata R,b ,52 ands = Mc .53 Thus,asweproceed
to derivevarious first and second order functions of the form (75), we will need to check for these
conditions. Iftheconditionsare met,wewillsaythatvectorband theoperatorM; thetermsbHc
and cHMc; and theentirequadraticformitself,are admissible (ormeaningful).
Thus b is admissible if and only if b , and M is admissible if and only if M is a linear
mappingfrom to , M ( , ).
C C ∈ L C C
To testwhetheravectorb C2n belongsto isstraightforward:
b b¯ = Sb. (76)
It is somewhat more work to develop a test to determine if a matrix M C2n×2n has the
propertythat itisa linearmappingfrom to ,
M ( , ) = M Mc , c and M is linear (C2n,C2n) = C2n×2n.
∈ L C C { | ∈ C ∀ ∈ C } ⊂ L
51Warning! Do not confuse the dual vector (linear functional) c∗ with an adjoint operator, which is often also
denotedusingthe“star”notation.
52I.e.,thatbH beabonafidelinearfunctionalon ,bH =b∗ ∗.
53I.e.,becausecH = c∗ ∗,isalinearfunction C alon ,itm ∈ us C thavealegitimateobjectstooperateon,namely
anelements=Mc .
K.Kreutz-Delgado—Copyright c 2003-2009,AllRightsReserved–VersionUCSD-ECE275CG-S2009v1.0 31
Note that the fact that ( , ) (C2n,C2n) is just the statement that any matrix which maps
from C2n to C2n is also obviously a linear mapping from C2n to C2n. However, this is
justasubsetstatement;itisnotasubspacestatement. Thisisbecause ( , )isarealvectorspace
of linear operators,54 while (C2n,C2n) is a complex vector space of linear operators.55 Because
theyarevectorspacesoverdifferentfields,theycannothaveavector-subspace/vector-parent-space
relationshipto each other.
To determine necessary and sufficient conditions for a matrix M C2n×2n to be an element
of ( , ) suppose that the vector c = col(z,¯z) always maps to ∈ a vector s = col(ξ,ξ ¯ )
L C C ∈ C ∈ C
undertheaction ofM, s = Mc. Expressedin blockmatrixform, thisrelationshipis
= 11 12 .
ξ ¯ M M ¯z
(cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18) (cid:19)(cid:18) (cid:19)
Thefirst blockrowofthismatrixequationyieldstheconditions
whilethecomplexconjugateofthesecondblock rowyields
andsubtractingthesetwosetsofequationsresultsinthefollowingconditionontheblockelements
11 22 12 21
Withz = x+jy, thissplitsintothetwo setsofconditions,
11 22 12 21
11 22 12 21
Sincetheseequationsmustholdforany xand y,theyare equivalentto
11 22 12 21
11 22 12 21
Finally, adding and subtracting these two equations yields the necessary and sufficient conditions
forM toadmissible(i.e., tobea mappingfrom to ),
M = 11 12 C2n×2n isan elementof ( , ) iff M = M¯ and M = M¯ . (77)
M M ∈ L C C 11 22 12 21
(cid:18) (cid:19)
54I.e.,avectorspaceoverthefieldofrealnumbers.
55I.e.,avectorspaceoverthefieldofcomplexnumbers.
K.Kreutz-Delgado—Copyright c 2003-2009,AllRightsReserved–VersionUCSD-ECE275CG-S2009v1.0 32
Thisnecessaryandsufficientadmissibilityconditionismoreconvenientlyexpressedinthefollow-
ingequivalentform,
M ( , ) M = SM ¯ S M ¯ = SMS (78)
∈ L C C ⇔ ⇔
whichis straightforwardtoverify.
Givenan arbitrary matrix M C2n×2n, we can definea natural mappingof M into ( , )
C2n×2n by ∈ L C C ⊂
inwhich casetheadmissibilitycondition(78)hasan equivalentrestatement as
It isstraightforwardto demonstratethat
I.e., P is an idempotentmapping of C2n×2n onto ( , ), P2 = P. However, as thingscurrently
standPisnot alinearoperator(theactionofcomplexconjugationprecludesthis)noraprojection
operator in the conventional sense of projecting onto a lower dimensional subspace as its range
space is not a subspace of its domain space. (However, with some additional work, one can rea-
sonably interpret P as a projector of the manifold C2n onto the submanifold C2n in some
A final important fact is that if M C2n×2n is invertible, then M ( , ) if and only if
M−1 ( , ), whichwestateequivale ∈ ntlyas ∈ L C C
Let M beinvertible,then P(M) = M iffP(M −1) = M −1. (82)
I.e.,ifaninvertiblematrixM isadmissible,thenM−1 isadmissible. Theproofisstraightforward:
M = SM¯S and M invertible
(cid:0) (cid:1)
= SM−1S.
56WithC2n×2n R4n×4n R16n2 and ( , ) (R2n,R2n) R2n×2n R4n2 ,itisreasonabletoviewPas
alinearprojection ≈ operatorfro ≈ mtherealve L cto C rs C pac ≈ e L R16n2 ontoth ≈ erealvecto ≈ rsubspaceR4n2 ofR4n. Thisallows
ustointerpretPasaprojectionoperatorfromthemanifoldC2n ontothesubmanifold C2n. Onceweknowthat
P is a linear mapping from C2n into C2n, we can then computeits adjoint operator, C P ⊂∗, and then test to see if its
self-adjoint.Ifitis,thentheprojectionoperatorPis,infact,anorthogonalprojectionoperator.
K.Kreutz-Delgado—Copyright c 2003-2009,AllRightsReserved–VersionUCSD-ECE275CG-S2009v1.0 33
FirstOrderExpansions. Uptofirstorder,thepowerseriesexpansionofthereal-valuedfunction
f viewedas afunctionofr is
First-OrderExpansioninr: f(r+∆r) = f(r)+ ∆r+h.o.t. (83)
Focussing our attention first on the linear term ∂f(r) ∆r, and using the c-real vector space
interpretationofc,namelythatc where,asdiscussedabove, isa2n-dimensionalcoordinate
spaceisomorphicto R2n, wehave
∆r = J −1∆c (fromequation(65))
= ∆c (from equation(67))
whichyieldsthefirst orderexpansionoff interms oftheparameterization inc,
First-OrderExpansionin c: f(c+∆c) = f(c)+ ∆c+h.o.t. (84)
Note that ∂f(c) ∆c is real valued. Furthermore, as a consequence of the fact that with f(c) real-
valuedwehave
(cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18) (cid:19)
thequantity ∂f(c) satisfiesthenecessary and sufficientconditiongivenin (76)that
(cid:16) (cid:17)
.
(cid:18) (cid:19)
Thus ∂f(c) ∗ and the term ∂f(c) ∆c is admissible in the sense defined earlier. Note that an
equivalentconditionfortheterm ∂f(c) ∆c to beadmissibleisthat
(cid:18) (cid:19)
whichis trueifand onlyif
.
(cid:18) (cid:19)
This shows a simple inspection of ∂f(c) itself can be performed to test for admissibility of the
first-orderterm.57
57Inthisnote,thefirstorderexpansion(84)isdoingdoubledutyinthatitissimultaneouslystandingforthec-real
expansionandthec-complexexpansion. Amorecarefuldevelopmentwouldmakethisdistinctionexplicit,inwhich
case one would more carefully explore the distinction between ∂f(c) versus ∂f(c) in the first-order term.
Becausethisnotehasalreadybecomerathernotationallytedious,(cid:16)thisop(cid:17)tionforgr(cid:16)eaterpr(cid:17)ecisionhasbeendeclined.
However,greatercaremustthereforebemadewhenswitchingbetweenthe -realand -complexperspectives.
K.Kreutz-Delgado—Copyright c 2003-2009,AllRightsReserved–VersionUCSD-ECE275CG-S2009v1.0 34
Asdiscussedabove,tobemeaningfulasatruederivative,thederivativewithrespecttochasto
beinterpretedasarealderivative. Thisisprovidedbythec-realinterpretationof(84). Inaddition,
(84) has a c-complex interpretation for which the partial derivative with respect to c is not well-
defined as a complex derivative as it stands, but rather only makes sense as a shorthand notation
forsimultaneouslytakingthecomplexderivativeswithrespect toz and¯z,
= , .
(cid:18) (cid:19)
Thus, to work in the domain of complex derivatives, we must move to the c-complex perspective
c = col(z,¯z), and then break c apart so that we can work with expressions explicitly involving z
and¯z,exploitingthefactthattheformalpartialderivativeswithrespecttozand¯zarewelldefined.
Notingthat
(cid:18) (cid:19)
weobtain (cid:0) (cid:1)
= ∆z+ ∆z (f isreal-valued)
(cid:26) (cid:27)
whichyieldsthefirst-orderexpansionoff in termsoftheparameterization inz,
First-Order Expansioninz: f(z+∆z) = f(z)+2Re ∆z +h.o.t. (85)
(cid:26) (cid:27)
This is the rederivation of (53) promised earlier. Note that (85) makes explicit the relationship
whichis implied in thec-complexinterpretationof(84).
We also summarize our intermediate results concerning the linear term in a power series ex-
pansionusingther, c orz representations,
Linear-Term Relationships: ∆r = ∆c = 2Re ∆z (86)
(cid:26) (cid:27)
The derivative in the first expression is a real derivative. The derivative in the second expression
is interpreted as a real derivative (the c-real interpretation). The derivative in the last expression
is a complex derivative; it corresponds to the c-complex interpretation of the second term in (86).
Notethatallofthelineartermsare real valued.
We now have determined the first-order expansion of f in terms of r, c, and z. To construct
the second-order expansion it remains to examine the second-order term in (73) and some of the
propertiesofthereal Hessianmatrix(74)which completelyspecifies that term.
K.Kreutz-Delgado—Copyright c 2003-2009,AllRightsReserved–VersionUCSD-ECE275CG-S2009v1.0 35
SecondOrderExpansions. Notefrom(73)thatknowledgeoftherealHessianmatrix com-
pletely specifies the second order term in the real power series expansion of f with respect to r.
The goal which naturally presents itselfto us at this point is now to reexpress this quadratic-order
term in terms of c, which we indeed proceed to do. However, because the canonical coordinates
vectorchastwo interpretations,oneas ashorthandforthepair(z,¯z)(thec-complexperspective)
and theother as an element of a real vectorspace (the c-real perspective), we will rewritethe sec-
ond orderterm intwo different forms,one(thec-complexform)involvingthec-complexHessian
C (υ) , for υ,c C2n (87)
Hcc ∂c ∂c ∈ C ⊂
(cid:18) (cid:19)
and theother(thec-real form)involvingthec-real Hessianmatrix
R (υ) , for υ,c R2n. (88)
Hcc ∂c ∂c ∈ C ≈
(cid:18) (cid:19)
In(87),thederivativewithrespecttoconlyhasmeaningasashort-handfor ∂ , ∂ . In(88),the
derivativewithrespect to c iswell-defined viathec-real interpretation.
(cid:0) (cid:1)
It is straightforward to show a relationship between the real Hessian and the c-complex
Hessian C ,
(cid:18) (cid:19)
(cid:18) (cid:19)
= J (from equation(67))
(cid:18) (cid:19)
(cid:18) (cid:19)
= JH J (from equation(67))
(cid:18) (cid:19)
(cid:18) (cid:19)
= JH C J.
Theresultingimportantrelationship
= JH C J (89)
between the real and c-complex Hessians was derived in [25] based on the there unjustified (but
true) assumption that the second-order terms of the powers series expansions of f in terms of r
K.Kreutz-Delgado—Copyright c 2003-2009,AllRightsReserved–VersionUCSD-ECE275CG-S2009v1.0 36
and c-complex must be equal. Here, we reverse this order of reasoning, and will show below the
equalityofthesecond ordertermsin thec-complexand rexpansionsasa consequenceof(89).
Notefrom(60)that
C = J JH. (90)
Hcc 4 H rr
Recalling that the Hessian is a symmetricmatrix,58 it is evident from (90) that C is Hermi-
C = ( C ) H
(and hence, like , has real eigenvalues), and positivedefinite (semidefinite) if and only is
positivedefinite(semidefinite).
As noted by van den Bos [25], one can now readily relatethevalues oftheeigenvaluesof C
and from thefact, whichfollowsfrom (60)and (90), that
C λI = J JH JJH = J( 2λI)JH .
Hcc − 4 H rr − 2 4 H rr −
This shows that the eigenvalues of the real Hessian matrix are twice the size of the eigenvalues of
thecomplexHessianmatrix (and,as aconsequence, mustsharethesameconditionnumber).60
Focussingourattentionnowon thesecond ordertermof(73), wehave
= ∆rH JH C J∆r (From equation(89))
= ∆cH C ∆c, (From equation(65))
therebyshowingtheequalityofthesecondordertermsinanexpansionofareal-valuedfunctionf
eitherintermsofr orc-complex,61
2 H rr 2 H cc
Notethatbothoftheseterms arereal valued.
Withtheproofoftheequalities86 and91, wehave(almost)completeda derivationofthe
2nd-OrderExpansioninc-Complex: f(c+∆c)=f(c)+ ∆c+ ∆cH C (c)∆c+h.o.t. (92)
58Intherealcase,thisisageneralpropertyofthematrixofsecondpartialderivativesofascalarfunction.
59As expected, as this is a general property of the matrix of partial derivatives ∂ ∂f(z) of any real-valued
functionf(z). (cid:16) (cid:17)
60ForaHermitianmatrix,thesingularvaluesaretheabsolutevaluesofthe(real)eigenvalues.Thereforethecondi-
tionnumber,whichistheratioofthelargesttothesmallesteigenvalue(assumingafullrankmatrix)isgivenbythe
ratioofthelargesttosmallesteigenvaluemagnitude.
61Andtherebyprovidingaproofofthisassumedequalityin[25].
K.Kreutz-Delgado—Copyright c 2003-2009,AllRightsReserved–VersionUCSD-ECE275CG-S2009v1.0 37
where the c-complex Hessian C is given by equation (87) and is related to the real hessian
byequations(89)and(90). Notethatallofthetermsin(92)arerealvalued. Thederivationhasnot
been fullycompleted becausewe havenot verified that ∆cH C (c)∆c isadmissiblein thesense
defined above. The derivation will be fully completed once we have verified that C ( , ),
Hcc ∈ L C C
whichwewilldo below.
The c-complex expansion (92) is not differentiable with respect to c-complex itself, which is
not well defined, but, if differentiation is required, should be instead interpreted as a short-hand,
orimplicit,statementinvolvingzand¯z, forwhichderivativesarewelldefined. Toexplicitlyshow
the second order expansionof the real-valued function f in terms of the complex vectors z and¯z,
itis convenientto definethequantities
∂ ∂f H ∂ ∂f H ∂ ∂f H ∂ ∂f H
, , , , , , and , . (93)
zz ¯zz z¯z ¯z¯z
(cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18) (cid:19)
With ∂ = ( ∂ , ∂ ),we alsohavefrom (87)and thedefinitions(93)that
C = H zz H ¯zz . (94)
H z¯z ¯z¯z
(cid:18)H H (cid:19)
Thus, using the earlier proven property that C is Hermitian, C = ( C ) H, we immediately
Hcc Hcc Hcc
havefrom(94)theHermitianconjugateconditions
= H and = H (95)
H zz Hzz H ¯zz Hz¯z
whichalso holdforz and¯z replaced by¯z andz respectively.
Someadditionalusefulpropertiescanbeshowntobetruefortheblockcomponentsof(94)de-
finedin(93). Firstnotethatasaconsequenceoff beingareal-valuedfunction,itisstraightforward
toshowthevalidityoftheconjugationconditions
or, equivalently,
= and = , (96)
¯z¯z zz ¯zz z¯z
whichalsoholdforzand¯zreplacedby¯zandzrespectively. Itisalsostraightforwardtoshowthat
C = S C S = S C S,
Hcc H¯c¯c Hcc
forS = ST = S−1 (showingthat C and C arerelatedbyasimilaritytransformationandthere-
fore share the same eigenvalues62), which is precisely the necessary and sufficient condition (78)
that the Hessian matrix C is admissible, C ( , ). This verifies that theterm ∆cH C ∆c
H H ∈ L C C H
62Theireigenvectorsarecomplexconjugatesofeachother,asreflectedinthesimilaritytransformationbeinggiven
bytheswapoperatorS
K.Kreutz-Delgado—Copyright c 2003-2009,AllRightsReserved–VersionUCSD-ECE275CG-S2009v1.0 38
is admissible and provides the completion of the proof of the validity of (92) promised earlier.
Finally,notethatproperties (96)and(95)yieldtheconjugatesymmetryconditions,
= T and = T , (97)
H zz H¯z¯z H z¯z Hz¯z
whichalso holdforz and¯z replaced by¯z andz respectively.
Fromequations(66),(91),and(94)wecannowexpandthesecondordertermin(73)asfollows
∆rT ∆r = ∆cH C ∆c
2 H rr 2 Hcc
zz ¯zz z¯z ¯z¯z
wherethelaststep followsas a (cid:8) consequenceof(96).63 Thus (cid:9) ,wehaveso-fardeterminedthat
2 H rr 2 H cc H zz H ¯zz
(cid:8) (cid:9)
Combining the results given in (73), (86), and (98) yields the desired expression for the second
orderexpansionoff interms ofz,
2nd-OrderExp.inz: f(z+∆z)=f(z)+2Re ∆z +Re ∆zH ∆z+∆zH ∆¯z +h.o.t.
(cid:26) (cid:27)
(cid:8) (cid:9) (99)
We note in passing that Equation (99) is exactly the same expression given as Equation (A.7)
of reference [36] and Equation (8) of reference [32], which were both derived via an alternative
procedure.
The c-complex expansion shown in Equation (92) is one of two possible alternative second-
order representations in c for f(c) (the other being the c-real expansion), and was used as the
starting pointof thetheoretical developmentsleading to the z-expansion(99). We now turn to the
development of the c-real expansion of f(c), which will be accomplished by writing the second
orderterm ofthequadraticexpansionin termsofthec-real Hessian R .
From the definitions (88), (87), and (93), and using the fact that ∂ = ( ∂ , ∂ ), it is straight-
forward to showthat
R = H z¯z H ¯z¯z = S H zz H ¯zz (100)
H zz ¯zz z¯z ¯z¯z
(cid:18)H H (cid:19) (cid:18)H H (cid:19)
R = C = S C = C S. (101)
Hcc Hc¯c Hcc H¯c¯c
63Alternatively,thelaststepalsofollowsasaconsequenceof(95).
64Alternative derivations are possible. For example, C = ∂ ∂f = ∂ ∂f = ∂ ∂fS =
∂ S ∂f T =S ∂ ∂f T =S R R =S C ,notingthatS = (cid:16) ST = (cid:17) S−1. (cid:16) (cid:17) (cid:16) (cid:17)
∂c ∂c ∂c ∂c Hcc ⇒Hcc Hcc
(cid:16) (cid:17) (cid:16) (cid:17)
K.Kreutz-Delgado—Copyright c 2003-2009,AllRightsReserved–VersionUCSD-ECE275CG-S2009v1.0 39
Note from the first equality in (100) and the conjugate symmetry conditions (97) that the c-real
Hessianis symmetric
R = ( R ) T . (102)
Equivalently,
S C = (S C ) T . (103)
Let theSingularValueDecomposition(SVD)of C be
thenfrom (101)theSVD of R isgivenby
R = U ′ ΣVH , U ′ = SU
showing that C and R share the same singular values, and hence the same condition number
(which is given by the ratio of the largest to smallest singular value). The three Hessian matrices
, R , and C are essentially equivalent for investigating numerical issues and for testing
H rr Hcc Hcc
whether a proposed minimizer of the second order expansion of f(r) = f(c) is a local (or even
global) minimum. Thus, one can choose to work with the Hessian matrix which is easiest to
computeandanalyze. Thisisusuallythec-complexHessian C ,anditisoftenmostconvenientto
determinenumericalstabilityandoptimalityusing C evenwhenthealgorithmisbeingdeveloped
from oneofthealternativeperspectives(i.e.,thereal r orthec-real secondorderexpansion).
Nownotethatfrom (101)we immediatelyandeasily have
1 ∆cT R ∆c= 1 ∆cT S C ∆c= 1 (S∆c)T C ∆c= 1 (∆c) T C ∆c= 1 ∆cH C ∆c
2 H cc 2 H cc 2 H cc 2 H cc 2 H cc
showingtheequivalenceofthec-realandc-complexsecondordertermsintheexpansionoff(c).65
Combining this result with (98), we have shown the following equivalences between the second
ordertermsin thevariousexpansionsoff underconsiderationin thisnote:
2nd-OrderTerms: ∆rT ∆r= ∆cT R ∆c= ∆cH C ∆c=Re ∆zH ∆z+∆zH ∆¯z
2 H rr 2 Hcc 2 Hcc H zz H ¯zz
(cid:8) ((cid:9)104)
where the second order expansion in r is given by (73), the c-complex expansion by (92), the
expansionin termsofz by(99), and thec-real expansionby
2nd-OrderExpansion inc-Real: f(c+∆c)= f(c)+ ∆c+ ∆cT R (c)∆c+h.o.t.
Notethatallofthetermsin (104)and (105)arereal valued.
65Onecanshowthattheterm∆cT R ∆cisadmissibleifandonlyif R =SM forM ( , ),whichisthe
Hcc Hcc ∈L C C
casehere.
K.Kreutz-Delgado—Copyright c 2003-2009,AllRightsReserved–VersionUCSD-ECE275CG-S2009v1.0 40
Theexpansioninoff(c)intermsofc-complexshownin(92)isnotdifferentiablewithrespect
tocas differentiationwithrespect toc-complexisnotdefined. (Recall, though,thatwecandiffer-
entiatethec-realexpansionwithrespect toc-real.) However,(92)isdifferentiablewithrespectto
zand¯zandcanbeviewedasashort-handequivalenttothefull(z,¯z)expansionprovidedby(99).
Therefore,itisEquation(99)whichisthenaturalformforoptimizationwithrespecttoc-complex
viaaderivative-basedapproach,becauseonlydifferentiationwithrespecttothecomponents(z,¯z)
ofc-complexiswell-posed. Ontheotherhand,differentiationwithrespecttoc-realiswell-posed,
sothat onecan optimize(105)by takingderivativesof(105)withrespect to c-real itself.
Note that (73), (92), and (105) are the natural forms to use for optimization via “completing
the square.” This is because the expansionsin terms of r, c-complex, and c-real are less awkward
for completing-the-squarepurposes than the expansion in z provided by (99).66 Note, further that
theexpansions(73)and(92)bothhaveaformamenabletooptimizationbycompletingthesquare
and bothare differentiablewithrespect totheexpansionvariableitself.
The various second order expansions developed above can be found in references [36], [25]
and[32]. In[25],vandenBosshowstheequalityofthefirst,second,andthirdsecond-orderterms
shown in equation (98) but does not mention the fourth (which, anyway, naturally follows from
the third term in (98) via a simple further expansion in terms of z and ¯z). Indeed, the approach
used in this note is a more detailed elaboration of the derivations presented by van den Bos in
[25]. In reference [32]Yan and Fan showtheequality ofthefirst and last terms in (98), but, while
they cite theresults of van den Bos [25] regarding themiddleterms in (98), do not appear to have
appreciated that thefourth term in (98) is an immediateconsequence of the second or third terms,
and insteadderiveditfromscratch usingan alternative,“bruteforce” approach.
QuadraticMinimizationandtheNewtonAlgorithm. TheNewtonalgorithmforminimizinga
scalar function f(z) exploitsthe fact that it is generally straightforward to minimizethe quadratic
approximations provided by second order expansions such as (73), (92), (99), and (105). The
Newton method starts with an initial estimate of the optimal solution, say ˆc, then expands f(c)
about the estimate ˆc to second order in ∆c = c ˆc, and then minimizes the resulting second
order approximation of f(c) with respect to ∆c. Having determined an estimated update ∆c in
this manner, one updates the original estimate ˆc ˆc + α∆c, for some small “stepsize” α > 0,
andthenstartstheoptimizationcyclealloveragain. Forappropriatechoicesofthestepsizeαc,this
iterativeapproximatequadraticoptimizationalgorithmcanrcesultinasequenceofestimatesˆc ,ˆc ,
ˆc , , whichconverges tothetrueoptimalsolutionextremelyquickly[34].
Notethattheoptimalsolutiontothequadraticapproximationsprovidedby(73),(92),and(105)
can be immediately written down using the “completing-the-square” procedure assuming that the
relevantHessiansareall invertible:
∆r = ( rr ) − (fromther expansion(73)) (106)
(cid:18) (cid:19)
66Althoughc(99)canalsobeoptimizedbycompletingthesquare.
K.Kreutz-Delgado—Copyright c 2003-2009,AllRightsReserved–VersionUCSD-ECE275CG-S2009v1.0 41
[ ∆cC = ( c C c ) − 1 ∂f(c) H (fromthec-complexexpansion(92)) (107)
(cid:18) (cid:19)
[ ∆cR = ( c R c ) − 1 ∂f(c) T (fromthec-real expansion(105)). (108)
(cid:18) (cid:19)
Solutions (106) and (107) can also be found in van den Bos [25]. Note that ∆cC is an admissible
solution,i.e.,that
as required for self-consistency of our theory, as a consequence of the fact that ∂f(c) and
satisfy (cid:16) (cid:17)
and ( c C c ) − 1 ( , ),
∂c ∈ C H ∈ L C C
(cid:18) (cid:19)
with the latter condition a consequence of property (82) and the fact that C ( , ). If this
werenot thecase, thenwegenerally wouldhavethemeaninglessanswerthat ∆cC / .
The admissibility of the solution (108) follows from the admissibility of (107). This will be
evidentfromthefact, as weshallshow,thatallofthesolutions(106)-(108)mustallcorrespondto
thesameupdate,
(cid:18) (cid:19)
= J JH JH (from (67)and(90))
− 4 H 2 ∂r
(cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18) (cid:19)
(cid:18) (cid:19)
= J (cid:0) ( rr ) − 1(cid:1) ∂f(r) T
(cid:18) (cid:19)
as required. Ontheotherhand,
(cid:18) (cid:19)
(cid:18) (cid:19)
= ( c C c ) − 1 ∂f(c) S T
(cid:18) (cid:19)
(cid:18) (cid:19)
K.Kreutz-Delgado—Copyright c 2003-2009,AllRightsReserved–VersionUCSD-ECE275CG-S2009v1.0 42
(cid:18) (cid:19)
= ∆cC.
Thus,theupdates(106)-(108)areindeed equivalent.
The updates (106) and (108), determined via a completing the square argument, can alterna-
tively be obtained by setting the (real) derivatives of their respective quadratically-approximated
lossfunctionstozero,andsolvingthenecessaryconditionforanoptimum. Notethatifweattempt
to (erroneously) take the (complex) derivative of (92) with respect to c-complex and then set this
expression to zero, the resulting “solution” will be off by a factor of two.67 In the latter case, we
must instead take the derivatives of (99) with respect to z and ¯z and set the resulting expressions
tozero inorderto obtaintheoptimalsolution.68
Atconvergence,theNewtonalgorithmwillproduceasolutiontothenecessaryfirst-ordercon-
and this point will be a local minimum of f( ) if the Hessians are strictly positive definite at this
point. Typically, one would verify positive definiteness of the c-complex Hessian at the solution
C (ˆc) = H zz H ¯zz > 0.
(cid:18)H H (cid:19)
Asdonein[36]and[32],thesolutiontothequadraticminimizationproblemprovidedby(106)-
(108) can be expressed in a closed form expression which directly produces the solutionˆz Cn.
To doso, werewritethesolution(107) fortheNewtonupdate∆c as
(cid:18) (cid:19)
whichwethen writeinexpandedform intecrmsofz and¯z
H H = ∂z . (109)
!
(cid:18)H H (cid:19) ∂¯z
(cid:16) (cid:17) 
Assuming that C is positive definite, then is invertible and the second block row in (109)
(cid:18) (cid:19)
67In a numerical solution procedurce a constant factor ecrror in the updates can be absorbed into the update step-
size factorandthereforewilllikelynotbenoticedinsimulationsorapplications. However,theclaimthataspecific
step-sizevaluesresultsinstableorunstableconvergencemightnotbeconfirmedinanexperimentusingthecorrectly
computedupdates.
68Thisistheprocedureusedin[36]and[32].
K.Kreutz-Delgado—Copyright c 2003-2009,AllRightsReserved–VersionUCSD-ECE275CG-S2009v1.0 43
Pluggingthisintothefirst blockrow of(109)then yieldstheNewtonalgorithmupdateequation
∆z = ∂f H + −1 ∂f H , (110)
H zz − ∂z H ¯zz H¯z¯z ∂¯z
(cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18) (cid:19)
zz zz ¯zz ¯z¯z z¯z
H H −H H H
is the Schur complement of in C . Equation (110) is equivalent to the solution given as
Equation (A.12) in [36]. Invertibility of the Schur complement follows from our assumption
that C ispositivedefinite,and theNewtonupdateistherefore givenby
∆z = −1 −1 −1 ∂f H ∂f H . (111)
H zz −H ¯zz H¯z¯zH z¯z H ¯zz H¯z¯z ∂¯z − ∂z
(cid:26) (cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:27)
(cid:0) (cid:1)
Thematrices and = −1 in(110)areinvertibleifandonlyif C is
H ¯z¯z H ¯z¯z H zz −H ¯zz H ¯z¯z H z¯z Hcc
invertible. Notethatinvertibilityof (equivalently, = )isnotasufficientconditionfor
(cid:0) H zz (cid:1)H ¯z¯z H zz
the Schur complement to bge nonsingular. However, if = = 0 then invertibilityof is
¯zz z¯z zz
anecessary and sufficientconditionforasolution∆z toexist.
As noted by Yan & Fan [32], the need to guarantee positivedefiniteness of the Schur comple-
is a significant
computational burden for an on-line adaptive
¯z¯z zz ¯zz ¯z¯z z¯z
H H −H H H
filtering algorithm to bear. For this reason, to improve the numerical robustness of the Newton
(cid:0) (cid:1)
algoritghm and to provide a substantial simplification, they suggest making the approximation that
theblockoff-diagonalelementsof C are zero
whichresultsin thesimplerapproximatesolution
∆z −1 ∂f H . (112)
(cid:18) (cid:19)
TheargumentgivenbyYanandFansup
portingtheuseoftheapproximation
0isthatasthe
Newton algorithm converges to the optimal solution zˆ = z , setting “to zero implies that we
will use a quadratic function to approximate the cost near z ” [32]. However Yan and Fan do not
give a formal definition of a “quadratic function” and this statement is not generally true as there
isno apriorireason whytheoff-diagonalblockmatrixelementsoftheNewtonHessianshouldbe
zero, orapproach zero, as wedemonstratein Example2 oftheApplicationssectionbelow.
However, as we shall discuss later below, setting the block off-diagonal elements to zero is
justifiable, but not necessarily as an approximation to the Newton algorithm. Setting the block
off-diagonal elements in the Newton Hessian to zero, results in an alternative, “quasi-Newton”
algorithmwhichcanbestudiedinitsownrightasacompetitoralgorithmtotheNewtonalgorithm,
theGauss-Newtonalgorithm,orthegradientdescent algorithm.69
69That is not to say that there can’tbe conditionsunder which the quasi-Newton algorithm does convergeto the
Newtonalgorithm. JustasonecangiveconditionsforwhichtheGauss-NewtonalgorithmconvergestotheNewton
algorithm,oneshouldbeabletodothesameforthequasi-Newtonalgorithm.
K.Kreutz-Delgado—Copyright c 2003-2009,AllRightsReserved–VersionUCSD-ECE275CG-S2009v1.0 44
Nonlinear Least-Squares: Gauss vs. Newton. In this section we are interested in finding an
approximatesolution,ˆz,to thenonlinearinverseproblem
for known y Cm and known real-analytic function g : Cn Cm. We desire a least-squares
solution,whichis asolutionthatminimizestheweightedleast-squareslossfunction70
2 k − kW 2 − −
where W is a Hermitian positive-definiteweighting matrix. Although the nonlinear function g is
assumedtobereal-analytic, ingeneral it isassumedtobenot holomorphic(i.e., g is notcomplex-
analyticinz).
Inthesubsequentdevelopmentwewillanalyzetheproblemusingthec-realperspectivedevel-
opedintheprecedingdiscussions. Thus,thelossfunctionisassumedtobere-expressibleinterms
2 k − kW 2 − −
Intermediatequantitiesproducedfromthisperspective71 mayhaveadifferentfunctionalformthan
thoseproduced purelywithinthez perspective,buttheend resultswillbethesame.
We will considertwo iterativealgorithmsfor minimizingtheloss function(113): TheNewton
algorithm,discussedabove,andtheGauss-Newtonalgorithmwhichisusuallyasomewhatsimpler,
yet related, method for iteratively finding a solution which minimizes a least-squares function of
theform(113).72
Asdiscussedearlier, theNewtonmethodisbasedonaniterativequadraticexpansionandmin-
imization of the loss function ℓ(z) about a current solutionestimation,ˆz. Specifically the Newton
method minimizes an approximation to ℓ(c) = ℓ(z) based on the second order expansion of ℓ(c)
in∆c about acurrent solutionestimateˆc = col(ˆz,ˆ¯z),
wherewedefine theNewton approximatelossfunction,
70Thefactorof 1 hasbeenincludedfornotationalconveniencein theensuingderivations. If itisremoved,some
oftheintermediatequantitiesderivedsubsequently(suchasHessians, etc.) willdifferbyafactorof2, althoughthe
ultimate answer is independentof any overallconstant factor of the loss function. If in your own problem solving
ventures, yourintermediatequantitiesappearto be off bya factor of 2 relativeto the results givenin this note, you
shouldcheckwhetheryourlossfunctiondoesordoesnothavethisfactor.
71SuchastheGauss-NewtonHessiantobediscussedbelow.
72TheNewtonalgorithmisageneralmethodthatcanbeusedtominimizeavarietyofdifferentlossfunctions,while
theGauss-Newtonalgorithmisaleast-squaresestimationmethodwhichisspecifictotheproblemofminimizingthe
least-squareslossfunction(113).
K.Kreutz-Delgado—Copyright c 2003-2009,AllRightsReserved–VersionUCSD-ECE275CG-S2009v1.0 45
Minimizingthe Newton loss function ℓ ˆ (∆c)Newton then results in a correction ∆c Newton which is then
used to update the estimateˆc ˆc+α∆c for some stepsizeα > 0. The algorithmthen starts
alloveragain. Asmentionedabove,a“completing-the-square”argumentcancbeinvokedtoreadily
showthatthecorrection whichminimizcesthequadraticNewtonlossfunctionisgivenby
∆c Newton = C (ˆc) −1 (115)
(cid:18) (cid:19)
provided that the c-complex Hecssian C (ˆc) is invertible. Because it defines the second-order
term in the Newton loss function and directly enters into the Newton correction, we will often
refer to C (ˆc) as the Newton Hessian. If we block partition the Newton Hessian and solve for
the correction ∆z , we obtain the solution (111) which we earlier derived for a more general
(possiblynon-quadratic)lossfunction.
Wenowdet c erminetheformofthecogradient ∂ℓ(ˆc) oftheleast-squareslossfunction(113). This
is done by utilizing the c-real perspective which allows us to take (real) cogradients with respect
toc-real. First,however,it isconvenienttodefinethecompoundJacobianG(ˆc) ofg(ˆc) as
(cid:16) (cid:17)
(cid:0) (cid:1)
Settinge = y g(c),wehave73
= eHW e+ eTWT ¯e
1 ∂g 1 ∂g¯
= eHW eTWT
= eHW G eTWT S
(cid:18) (cid:19)
= eHW G eTWT GS
= eHW G eHW GS. (117)
Thisexpressionfor ∂ℓ isadmissible,as required, as itisreadily verified that
(cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18) (cid:19)
as pertherequirementgivenin (76).
73Rememberthat ∂ isonlywell-definedasaderivativewithinthec-realframework.
K.Kreutz-Delgado—Copyright c 2003-2009,AllRightsReserved–VersionUCSD-ECE275CG-S2009v1.0 46
Thelineartermin theNewtonlossfunctionℓ ˆ Newton isthereforegivenby
∆c = eHW G∆c eHW GS∆c
= eHW G∆c eHW G∆c
= Re eHW G∆c .
(cid:8) (cid:9)
∆c = Re eHW G∆c = Re (y g(c)) H W G∆c . (118)
If the reader has any doubts as t(cid:8)o the validity(cid:9)or correctness of this derivation, she/he is invited to
showthattheright-handsideof(118)isequal to2Re ∂ℓ ∆z as required fromequation(86).
Beforecontinuingontodeterminethefunctionalfo(cid:8)rmofth(cid:9)ec-complexHessian C (ˆc)needed
to form the Newton loss function and solution, we turn first to a discussion of the Gauss-Newton
algorithm.
Whereas theNewton methodis based on an iterativequadraticexpansionand minimizationof
the loss function ℓ(z) about a current solution estimation, ˆz, The Gauss-Newton method is based
on iterative “relinearization” of the system equations y g(z) about the current estimate, ˆz and
minimizationoftheresultingapproximateleast-squaresproblem. Weput“linearization”inquotes
because(unlessthefunctionghappenstobeholomorphic)generallywearenotlinearizinggwith
respect toz but,rather,we arelinearizingwithrespect to c = col(z,¯z).
Expandingthesystemequationsy g(z)aboutacurrent estimateˆz, wehave
(cid:18) (cid:19)
where∆z = z ˆzand∆¯z = ∆z = ¯z ¯ˆz = ¯z ˆ¯z. Notethattheapproximationtogisnotalinear
functionofz ascomplexconjugationisanonlinearoperation onz. However,ifg isholomorphic,
then ∂g 0, in which case the approximation is linear in z. Although the approximation of g
generally isnotlinearinz, itis linearin c = col(z,¯z), andwerewritetheapproximationas
where∆y = y g(ˆz),ˆc = col(ˆz,ˆ¯z),∆c = c ˆc,andG(ˆc)isthe(compound)Jacobianmapping
ofg evaluatedat thecurrent estimateˆc givenin Equation(116). Withthisapproximation,theloss
function (113) is approximated by the following quadratic loss function (notationally suppressing
thedependenceonˆc),
K.Kreutz-Delgado—Copyright c 2003-2009,AllRightsReserved–VersionUCSD-ECE275CG-S2009v1.0 47
= ∆y 2 Re ∆yHW G∆c + ∆cH GHWG∆c
Unfortunately,theresultingquadraticform
isnot admissibleas it stands.74 Thisisbecause thematrixGHWGisnot admissible,
GHWG = W / ( , ).
∂c ∂c ∈ L C C
(cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18) (cid:19)
Thiscan beseen by showingthatthecondition(78)isviolated:
SGHWGS = S W S
(cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18) (cid:19)
(cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18) (cid:19)
(cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18) (cid:19)
= W .
(cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18) (cid:19)
Fortunately,wecanrewritethequadraticform(120)asanequivalentformwhichisadmissible
on . Todo thisnotethatGHWGisHermitian,so that
∆cHGHWG∆c = ∆cHGHWG∆c R.
Also recall from Equation (79) that P(GHWG) ( , ) and ∆c S∆c = ∆¯c. For an
∈ L C C ∈ C ⇒
74AndthusthecomplexGauss-NewtonalgorithmisgenerallymorecomplicatedinformthantherealGauss-Newton
algorithmforwhichthequadraticform(120)ismeaningful.
K.Kreutz-Delgado—Copyright c 2003-2009,AllRightsReserved–VersionUCSD-ECE275CG-S2009v1.0 48
admissiblevariation∆c wehave75
∆cHGHWG∆c = ∆cHP(GHWG)∆c+∆cH GHWG P(GHWG) ∆c
= ∆cHP(GHWG)∆c+ ∆cH(cid:0) GHWG SGHWGS(cid:1) ∆c
1 (cid:16) (cid:17)
= ∆cHP(GHWG)∆c+ ∆cHGHWG∆c ∆cHGHWG∆c
= ∆cHP(GHWG)∆c+0 (cid:16) (cid:17)
Thus we have shown that on the space of admissible variations, ∆c , the inadmissible
quadratic form (120) is equivalent to the admissible quadratic form (the Gauss-Newton approxi-
matelossfunction)
Gauss-Newton Hessian Gauss(ˆc) , P GH(ˆc)WG(ˆc) (122)
denotes the Gauss-Newton Hessian. Note that the Gauss-New(cid:0)ton Hessian is(cid:1)the exact Hessian
matrixoftheGauss-Newtonapproximatelossfunction.
NotethattheGauss-NewtonHessian Gauss(ˆc)isHermitianandalwaysguaranteedtobeatleast
positivesemi-definite,and guaranteed tobepositivedefiniteifg isassumedto beone-to-one(and
thereby ensuring that the compound Jacobian matrix G has full column rank). This is in contrast
totheNewton(i.e.,thec-complex)Hessian C (ˆc)which,unfortunately,canbeindefiniteorrank
deficient eventhoughitisHermitianand evenifg is one-to-one.
Assuming that Gauss(ˆc) is invertible, the correction which minimizes the Gauss-Newton ap-
proximatelossfunction(121)is givenby
∆c Gauss = Gauss(ˆc) −1 . (123)
(cid:18) (cid:19)
Becauseoftheadmissibilityof c Gauss and ∂ℓ(ˆc) H ,theresultingsolutionisadmissible∆c Gauss .
Hcc ∂c ∈ C
Comparing Equations (115) and (123(cid:16)), it i(cid:17)s evident that the difference between the two al-
gorithms resides in the difference between the Newton Hessian, C (ˆc), which is the actual c-
complex Hessian of the least-squares loss function ℓ(c), and the Gauss-Newton Hessian Gauss(ˆc)
which has an as yet unclear relationship to ℓ(c).76 For this reason, we now turn to a discussion of
therelationshipbetween theHessians C (ˆc) and Gauss(ˆc).
75NotethattheensuingderivationdoesnotimplythatGHWG = P(GHWG),afactwhichwouldcontradictour
claimthatGHWGisnotadmissible. ThisisbecauseinthederivationwearenotallowingarbitraryvectorsinC2n
butareonlyadmittingvectors∆cconstrainedtoliein ,∆c C2n.
76Notethat,byconstruction, Gauss(ˆc)istheHessianmatrixoftheGauss-Newtonapproximatelossfunction. The
questionis: whatisitsrelationshiptotheleast-squareslossfunctionortheNewtonapproximatelossfunction?
K.Kreutz-Delgado—Copyright c 2003-2009,AllRightsReserved–VersionUCSD-ECE275CG-S2009v1.0 49
We can computetheNewtonHessian C from therelationship(seeEquation(101))
C = S R = S
H cc H cc ∂c ∂c
(cid:18) (cid:19)
where ∂ is takento beac-real cogradient operator. Notefrom (117)that,
= GHWe SGHWe = B +SB , (124)
∂c −2 − 2 2
(cid:18) (cid:19)
(cid:0) (cid:1)
B , GHWe (125)
withe = y g(c). Thisresultsin
(cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18) (cid:19)
(cid:0) (cid:1)
Alsonotethat
= = S = S.
(cid:18) (cid:19)
H cc ∂c ∂c 2 ∂c ∂c
(cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18) (cid:19)
R = = S + S . (126)
H cc ∂c ∂c 2 ∂c ∂c
(cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18) (cid:19)
Thisyields
C = S R = +S S (127)
H cc H cc 2 ∂c ∂c
(cid:18) (cid:19)
withB givenby (125), whichwecan writeas
C = S R = P . (128)
Hcc Hcc ∂c
(cid:18) (cid:19)
Recallthat C mustbeadmissible. ThefunctionP( )producesadmissiblematriceswhichmap
from to ,andtherebyensuresthattheright-handsideofequation(128)isindeedanadmissible
matrix, as required for self-consistency of our development. The presence of the operator P does
not show up in the real case (which is the standard development given in textbooks) as ∂B is
automaticallysymmetricas required foradmissibilityin thereal case.
NotethatB can bewritten as
∂g H m ∂g H
(cid:18) (cid:19) i=1 (cid:18) (cid:19)
K.Kreutz-Delgado—Copyright c 2003-2009,AllRightsReserved–VersionUCSD-ECE275CG-S2009v1.0 50
whereg and[W (y g)] denotethei-th(scalar)componentsofthevectorsgandWe = W(y
g)respectively. Wecan thencompute ∂B as
∂B ∂g H ∂g m ∂ ∂g H
(cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18) (cid:19) i=1 (cid:18) (cid:19)
= GHWG i [W (y g)]
i=1 (cid:18) (cid:19)
= GHWG i [We] . (129)
i=1 (cid:18) (cid:19)
Equations (128) and (129) result in the following succinct relationship between the complex
Newtonand Gauss-NewtonHessians,
Newton Hessian Newton = C = Gauss (i) (130)
cc cc cc cc
wheretheGauss-NewtonHessian Gauss isgivenby (122) and
(i) , P i [We] , i = 1, ,m. (131)
!
(cid:18) (cid:19)
Equation (130), which is ourfinal result for the structural form of the Newton Hessian C , looks
very much like the equivalent result for the real case.77 The first term on the right-hand-side of
(130) is the Gauss-Newton Hessian Gauss, which is admissible, Hermitian and at least positive
semidefinite (under the standard assumption that W is Hermitian positive definite). Below, we
will show that the matrices (i), i = 1, ,m, are all individually admissible and Hermitian.78
While the Gauss-Newton Hessian is always positive semidefinite (and always positive definite if
g is one-to-one), the presence of the second term on the right-hand-side of (130) can cause the
NewtonHessianto becomeindefinite, orevennegativedefinite.
We can now understand the relationship between the Gauss-Newton method and the Newton
method when applied to the problem of minimizing the least-squares loss function. The Gauss-
Newton method is an approximationto the Newton method which arises fromignoringthesecond
term on the right-hand-side of (130). This approximation is not only easier to implement, it will
generally have superior numerical properties as a consequence of the definiteness of the Gauss-
Newton Hessian. Indeed, if the mapping g is onto, via the Gauss-Newton algorithm one can
produce a sequence of estimatesˆc , k = 1,2,3, , which drives e(ˆc ) = y g(ˆc ), and hence
77TheprimarydifferenceisduetothepresenceoftheprojectorPinthecomplexNewtonalgorithm. Despitethe
similarity,notethatittakesmuchmoreworktorigorouslyderivethecomplexNewton-Algorithm!
78Ofcourse,because C and GaussarebothHermitianandadmissiblethetotalsum m (i)mustbeHermitian
Hcc Hcc i=1H cc
andadmissible.
K.Kreutz-Delgado—Copyright c 2003-2009,AllRightsReserved–VersionUCSD-ECE275CG-S2009v1.0 51
(with some additional smoothness assumptions on g) the second term on the right-hand-side of
(130), to zero as k . In which case, asymptotically there will be little difference in the
convergence properties between the Newton and Gauss-Newton methods. This property is well
known in the classical optimization literature, which suggests that by working within the c-real
perspective,wemaybeabletoutilizeavarietyofinsightsthathavebeendevelopedfortheNewton
and Gauss-Newtonmethodswhenoptimizingoverreal vectorspaces.
We will now demonstrate that each individual term (i), i = 1, ,m, in (130) is admissible
and Hermitian. Notethatthe“raw”matrix
(cid:18) (cid:19)
is neither Hermitian nor admissible because of the presence of the complex scalar factor [We] .
Fortunately, the processing of the second matrix of partial derivatives by the operator P to form
thematrix (i) via
Hcc i ∂c ∂c
!
(cid:18) (cid:19)
createsamatrixwhichisbothadmissibleandHermitian. Thefactthat (i) isadmissibleisobvious,
as theprojectorP isidempotent. Wewillnowprovethat (i) isHermitian.
Define thematrix
A (g ) , i , (132)
(cid:18) (cid:19)
and notethat
" # " # " #
(cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18) (cid:19)
whichshowsthatA (g )has thepropertythat
Nownotethat
(cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18) (cid:19)
(cid:18) (cid:19)
(cid:18) (cid:19)
(cid:18) (cid:19)
K.Kreutz-Delgado—Copyright c 2003-2009,AllRightsReserved–VersionUCSD-ECE275CG-S2009v1.0 52
whichestablishesthesecondproperty that
SA (g )S = A (g ). (134)
cc i ¯c¯c i
Finallynotethatproperties(133)and (134) togetheryieldtheproperty
cc i cc i ¯c¯c i cc i
Setting a = [We] , wehave
a A (g )+Sa A (g )S a A (g )+a¯ SA (g )S a A (g )+a¯ A (g )H
(i) =P(a A (g ))= i cc i i cc i = i cc i i cc i = i cc i i cc i
Hcc i cc i 2 2 2
whichis obviouslyHermitian. Notethat theaction oftheprojectorPon “raw”matrix a A (g ),
Hermitiansymmetrizesthematrixa A (g ).
Below, we will examine the least-squares algorithms at the block-component level, and will
showthatsignificantsimplificationsoccurwhen g(z)isholomorphic.
GeneralizedGradientDescentAlgorithms. Asintherealcase,theNewtonandGauss-Newton
algorithms can be viewed as special instances of a family of generalized gradient descent algo-
rithms. Given a general real-valued loss function ℓ(c) which we wish to minimize79 and a current
estimate, ˆc of optimal solution, we can determine an update of our estimate to a new value ˆc
whichwilldecrease thelossfunctionas follows.
Forthelossfunctionℓ(c),withc =ˆc+dc,we have
whichis justthedifferentiallimitofthefirst orderexpansion
The stepsize α > 0 is a control parameter which regulates the accuracy of the first order approxi-
mationassumingthat
If weassumethat is aCartesian space,80 thenthegradientofℓ(c) isgivenby81
ℓ(c) = .
(cid:18) (cid:19)
79Thelossfunctiondoesnothavetoberestrictedtotheleast-squareslossconsideredabove.
80I.e.,Weassumethat hasidentitymetrictensor. WecalltheresultinggradientaCartesiangradient(ifthemetric
tensorassumptionΩ =I istrueforthespaceofinterest)oranaivegradient(iftheidentitymetrictensorassumption
isfalse,butmadeanywayforconvenience).
81NoteforfuturereferencethatthegradienthasbeenspecificallycomputedinEquation(124)forthespecialcase
whenℓ(c)istheleast-squareslossfunction(113).
K.Kreutz-Delgado—Copyright c 2003-2009,AllRightsReserved–VersionUCSD-ECE275CG-S2009v1.0 53
Taketheupdatetobethegeneralizedgradientdescent correction
(cid:18) (cid:19)
where Q(ˆc) is a Hermitian matrix function of c which is assumed to be positive definite when
evaluatedat thevalueˆc.82 Thisthenyieldsthekeystabilitycondition83
wheretheright-hand-sideisequal tozero ifand onlyif
ℓ(ˆc) = 0.
Thusifthestepsizeparameterα ischosen smallenough,makingtheupdate
new ≈ − k∇ c kQ ≤
showingthat we either have a nontrivialupdateof the valueofˆc which results in a strict decrease
in the value of the loss function, or we have no update of ˆc nor decrease of the loss function
because ˆc is a stationary point. If the loss function ℓ(c) is bounded from below, iterating on this
procedure starting from a estimate ˆc will produce a sequence of estimates ˆc , i = 1,2,3, ,
which will converge to a local minimum of the loss function. This simple procedure is the basis
forall generalized gradientdescent algorithms.
Assuming that we begin with an admissible estimate, ˆc , for this procedure to be valid, we
require that thesequence of estimatesˆc , i = 1,2,3, , be admissible, which is true ifthe corre-
spondingupdates∆c areadmissible,
(cid:18) (cid:19)
Wehaveestablishedtheadmissibilityof ℓ(c) = ∂ℓ(c) above. It is evidentthatinorder
∇ c ∂c ∈ C
forageneralizedgradientdescent algorithm(GDA)(cid:16)tobe(cid:17)admissibleitmustbethecasethatQbe
admissible,
Generalized GDAisAdmissible Generalized GradientQ-MatrixisAdmissible, Q ( , ).
82ThefactthatQisotherwisearbitrary(exceptfortheadmissibilitycriteriondiscussedbelow)iswhatmakesthe
resultingalgorithmageneralized gradientdescentalgorithm. WhenQ = I, weobtainthestandard(naive)gradient
descentalgorithm.
83Weinterpretthestabilityconditiontomeanthatforasmallenoughstepsizeα>0,wewillhave∆ℓ(ˆc;α) 0.
K.Kreutz-Delgado—Copyright c 2003-2009,AllRightsReserved–VersionUCSD-ECE275CG-S2009v1.0 54
Furthermore, a sufficient condition that the resulting algorithm be stablizable84 is that Q be Her-
mitian and positive definite. Note that given a candidate Hermitian positive definite matrix, Q′,
whichis notadmissible,
Q / ( , ),
wecan transform itintoan admissibleHermitianpositivedefinitematrixviatheprojection
It can bemuchtrickiertoensurethat QremainspositivedefiniteundertheactionofP.
QNewton(c) = [ Newton(c)]
Newton = C
thenweobtaintheNewtonalgorithm(115). Ifwetakethelossfunctiontobetheleast-squaresloss
function(113)andset
we obtain the Gauss-Newton algorithm (123). Whereas the Gauss-Newton algorithm generally
has a positive definite Q-matrix (assuming that g(c) is one-to-one), the Newton algorithm can
have convergence problems due to the Newton Hessian Newton = C becoming indefinite. Note
thattaking
which we refer to as the “Cartesian,” “standard,” “simple,” or “naive” choice (depending on the
context) results in the standard gradient descent algorithm which is stable for a small enough
stepsizeso thatthestabilitycondition(136)holds.
Animportantpracticalissueistheproblemofstabilityversusspeedofconvergence. Itiswell-
known that the Newton algorithm tends to have a very fast rate of convergence, but at the cost of
constructing and inverting the Newton Hessian Newton = C and potentially encountering more
difficult algorithm instability problems. On the other hand, standard gradient descent (Q = I)
tendstobeverystableandmuchcheapertoimplement,butcanhaveverylongconvergencetimes.
The Gauss-Newton algorithm, which is an option available when the loss function ℓ(c) is the
least-squares loss function (113), is considered an excellent trade-off between the Newton algo-
rithmandstandardgradientdescent. TheGauss-NewtonHessian Gaussisgenerallysimplerinform
and, if g(c) is one-to-one, is always positivedefinite. Furthermore, if g(c) is also onto, assuming
thealgorithmconverges,theGauss-NewtonandNewtonalgorithmsareasymptoticallyequivalent.
We can also begin to gain some insight into the proposal by Yan and Fan [32] to ignore the
blockoff-diagonalelementsoftheNewtonHessian,85
Newton = C = H zz H ¯zz .
(cid:18)H H (cid:19)
84I.e.,thatasmallenoughstepsizecanbechosentoensurethatthestabilitycondition(136)issatisfied.
85Thevaluesoftheblockelementsof Newtonwillbecomputedforthespecialcaseoftheleast-squareslossfunction
(113)laterbelow.
K.Kreutz-Delgado—Copyright c 2003-2009,AllRightsReserved–VersionUCSD-ECE275CG-S2009v1.0 55
As mentioned earlier, Yan and Fan make the claim in [32] that the block off-diagonal elements
vanish for a quadratic loss function. As noted above, and shown in an example below, this is
not generally true.86 However, it is reasonable to ask what harm (if any), or what benefit (if any)
can accrue by constructing a new87 generalized gradient descent algorithm as a modification to
the Newton algorithm created by simply ignoring the block off-diagonal elements in the Newton
Hessianand workinginsteadwiththesimplifiedquasi-NewtonHessian,
quasi-Newton , C , H zz .
H cc H cc 0 ¯z¯z
(cid:18) H (cid:19)
This results in a new generalized gradient dbescent algorithm, which we call the quasi-Newton
algorithm,whichissomewhereincomplexitybetweentheNewtonalgorithmandstandardgradient
descent. Note that the hermitian matrix is positive definite if and only if is positive
definite. Thusinvertibilityandpositive-definitenessofthequasi-NewtonHessian quasi-Newton = C
isequivalentto invertibilityandpositivedefinitenessoftheblockelement .
On the other hand, invertibility and positive definiteness of is only a necessary condition
forinvertibilityandpositivedefinitenessofthecompleteNewtonHessian Newton = C . Assuming
that C ispositivedefinite,wehavethewell-knownfactorization
I 0 I −1 0
(cid:18)−H z¯z Hz − z 1 I (cid:19) H c C c (cid:18) 0 −H ¯z I z H zz (cid:19) = (cid:18) H 0 zz H zz (cid:19) (137)
H zz H zz −H ¯zz H¯z¯zH z¯z
is the Schur complement of in C . From the factorization (137) we immediately obtain the
H zz He cc
usefulcondition
rank( C ) = rank( )+rank . (138)
(cid:16) (cid:17)
Note from condition (138) that the Newton Hessian Newtone= C is positive definite if and
only if and its Schur complement are both positivedefinite. Thus it is obviously a more
difficultmatterto ascertain and ensure thestabilityoftheNewton Hessianthan to do thesamefor
thequasi-NewtonHessian. g
The quasi-Newton algorithm is constructed by forming the Q matrix from the quasi-Newton
Hessian quasi-Newton = C ,
QbPseudo-Newton = ( Hc qu c asi-Newton) −1 = Hc C c −1 = H 0 z − z 1 0 −1
(cid:18) H (cid:19)
(cid:16) (cid:17)
which is admissible and hermitian, and positive definite provided = is positive definite.
Thus, if = is positive definite, the quasi-Newton algorithm is guaranteed to be stable
86Whatistrue,aswe’venoted,isthatforaquadraticlossfunction,theGauss-NewtonandNewtonHessiansasymp-
toticallybecomeequal.
87I.e.,noapproximationalgorithmsareinvoked.
K.Kreutz-Delgado—Copyright c 2003-2009,AllRightsReserved–VersionUCSD-ECE275CG-S2009v1.0 56
(assuming a small enough stepsize α > 0 so that the stability condition (136) is satisfied). With
thischoiceofQin(135), thequasi-Newtonupdateis givenby88
∆zquasi-Newton = −1 ∂f H (139)
(cid:18) (cid:19)
which is just the simplification shown earlier in Equation (112) and proposed by Yan and Fan in
[32]. However, unlike Yan and Fan, we do not present the quasi-Newton algorithm as an approx-
imation to the Newton algorithm, but rather as onemorealgorithm in the family of generalized
Newton algorithmsindexedbythechoiceof thematrixQ.
Indeed,recognizingthattheGauss-Newtonalgorithmpotentiallyhasbetterstabilityproperties
than the Newton algorithm, naturally leads us to propose a quasi-Gauss-Newton algorithm for
minimizingtheleast-squareslosefunction(113)asfollows. BecausethehermitianGauss-Newton
Hessianis admissible,itcan bepartitionedas
Gauss = zz ¯zz
(cid:18) (cid:19)
with U = UT .89 The Gauss-Newton Hessian is positive-definiteif and only if U (equivalently
¯zz ¯zz zz
U )and itsSchurcomplementU = U U U U are invertible.
zz zz zz ¯zz zz ¯zz
On theotherhand thequasi-Gauss-NewtonHessian,
quasi-Gauss , zz
(cid:18) (cid:19)
ispositivedefiniteifand onlyifU ispositivedefinite. Choosing
Qquasi-Gauss = (
asi-Gauss) −1 =
(cid:18) zz (cid:19)
resultsinthequasi-Gauss-Newtonalgorithm
∆zquasi-Gauss = U −1 ∂f H (140)
(cid:18) (cid:19)
which is guaranteed to be stable (for a small enough stepsize so that the stability condition (136)
issatisfied)ifU is positivedefinite.
Notethat canbecomeindefiniteevenwhileU remainspositivedefinite. Thus,thequasi-
Gauss-Newton algorithm appears to be generally easier to stabilize than the quasi-Newton algo-
rithm. Furthermore,ifgisonto,weexpectthatasymptoticallythequasi-Gauss-Newtonandquasi-
Newtonalgorithmbecomeequivalent. Thusthequasi-Gauss-Newtonalgorithmisseen tostandin
88Wecanignoretheremainingupdateequationasitisjustthecomplexconjugateoftheshownupdateequation.
89Thevaluesoftheseblockcomponentswillbecomputedbelow.
K.Kreutz-Delgado—Copyright c 2003-2009,AllRightsReserved–VersionUCSD-ECE275CG-S2009v1.0 57
the same relationship to the quasi-Newton algorithm as the Gauss-Newton algorithm does to the
Newtonalgorithm.
Without too much effort, we can construct the block matrix components needed to implement
theNewtonandGauss-Newtonalgorithmsdevelopedaboveinordertominimizetheleast-squares
lossfunction(113).90
Let us first look at the elements needed to implement the Gauss-Newton algorithm. From
Equation(122)and thederivationsfollowingEquation(120)oneobtains
1 ∂g H ∂g ∂g H ∂g
U = W + W (141)
!
(cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18) (cid:19)
which ispositivedefinite, assumingthat W ispositivedefiniteand thatg is one-to-one. Similarly,
onefindsthat
1 ∂g H ∂g ∂g H ∂g
U = W + W . (142)
!
(cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18) (cid:19)
Also U = U and U = U . We have now completely specified the Gauss-Newton Hessian
¯z¯z zz z¯z ¯zz
Gauss and thequasi-Gauss-NewtonHessian attheblockcomponentslevel,
Gauss = zz ¯zz quasi-Gauss , zz
Hcc U U Hcc 0 U
(cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18) (cid:19)
Now note the important fact that U = U = 0 when g is holomorphic! Thus, when g is
holomorphic there is no difference between the Gauss-Newton and pseudo-Gauss-Newton algo-
rithms.91 Furthermore, when g(z)isholomorphic,U simplifiesto
1 ∂g H ∂g 1
U = W = JHWJ , (143)
zz 2 ∂z ∂z 2 g g
(cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18) (cid:19)
whereJ istheJacobian matrixofg.
Now let us turn to the issue of computing the elements need to implement the Newton Algo-
rithm,recallingthat theNewtonHessianis blockpartitionedas
Newton = C = H zz H ¯zz .
(cid:18)H H (cid:19)
One can readily relatethe block components and to thematrices U and U used in the
zz ¯zz zz ¯zz
Gauss-Newtonand quasi-Gauss-Newtonalgorithmsby useofEquation(130). Wefind that
90This, of course, results in only a special case applicationof the Newton and quasi-Newtonalgorithms, both of
whichcanbeappliedtomoregenerallossfunctions.
91Recallthatg(z)isholomorphic(analyticinz)ifandonlyiftheCauchy-Riemanncondition ∂g(z) =0issatisfied.
K.Kreutz-Delgado—Copyright c 2003-2009,AllRightsReserved–VersionUCSD-ECE275CG-S2009v1.0 58
! !
(cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18) (cid:19)
wheree = y g(z). Similarly,we findthat
¯zz ¯zz ¯zz
! !
(cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18) (cid:19)
Furthermore, V = V andV = V .
¯z¯z zz z¯z ¯zz
NotethatneitherV norV vanishwheng isholomorphic,butinsteadsimplifyto
zz 2 ∂z ∂z i ¯zz 2 ∂¯z ∂z i
(cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18) (cid:19)
We have shownthat the relationshipbetween the Newton Hessian and Gauss-Newton Hessian
H zz H ¯zz = zz ¯zz zz ¯zz
z¯z ¯z¯z U z¯z U ¯z¯z − V z ( ¯z i) V ¯z ( ¯z i)
(cid:18)H H (cid:19) (cid:18) (cid:19) i=1 (cid:18) (cid:19)
HNccewton HG
In thespecialcasewhen
ationshipbecomes
H zz H ¯zz = U zz 0 1 m 0∂ ∂ z„ ∂g ∂ i z (z) « H [We] i ∂ ∂ ¯z„ ∂g ∂ i z (z) « H [We] i1 .
(cid:18)H z¯z H ¯z¯z (cid:19) (cid:18) 0 U ¯z¯z (cid:19) − 2 Xi=1 B B ∂ ∂gi(z) H [We] ∂ ∂gi(z) H [We] C C
ewton HGccauss
This show|s tha{tzif g(z}) is|holo{mzorph}ic, so that the block off-diagonal elements of the Gauss-
Newton Hessian vanish, and g(z) is also onto, so that asymptotically we expect that e 0, then
theclaimofYanandFanin[32]thatsettingtheblockoff-diagonalelementsoftheHessianmatrix
canprovedagoodapproximationtotheHessianmatrixisreasonable,atleastwhenoptimizingthe
least-squares loss function. However, when e 0 the Newton least-squares loss function (114)
reduces to the Gauss-Newton loss function (121), so that in the least-squares case one may as
wellmakethemoveimmediatelyto theevensimplerGauss-Newtonalgorithm(which inthiscase
coincideswiththequasi-Gauss-Newtonalgorithm).
However,therealpointtobemadeisthatanygeneralizedgradientdescentalgorithmisworthy
ofconsideration,92 providedthat it is admissible,provablystable, and (at least locally)convergent
92I.e.,wedon’thavetonecessarilyinvokeanapproximationargument.
K.Kreutz-Delgado—Copyright c 2003-2009,AllRightsReserved–VersionUCSD-ECE275CG-S2009v1.0 59
to the desired optimal solution. After all the standard gradient descent algorithm corresponds to
thecheapest “approximation”ofall,namely that
and very few will deny the utility of this algorithm, even though as an “approximation” to the
Newton algorithm it might be far from correct. The resulting algorithm has intrinsic merit as an
algorithm in its own right, namely as the member of the family of gradient descent algorithms
correspondingtothesimplestchoiceoftheQ-matrix,
Q = I.
In theend,ifthealgorithmworks, it’sok. As itissaid, “theproofisin thepudding.”93
We see, then, that we have a variety of algorithms at hand which fit within the framework of
generalizedgradientdescentalgorithms. Thesealgorithmsarecharacterizedbythespecificchoice
of the Q-matrix in the gradient descent algorithm, and include (roughly in the expected order
of decreasing complexity, decreasing ideal performance, and increasing stability when applied to
the least-squares loss function): 1) the Newton algorithm, 2) the quasi-Newton algorithm, 3) the
Gauss-Newtonalgorithm,4)thequasi-Gauss-Newtonalgorithm,and5)standardgradientdescent.
Note that the Newton, quasi-Newton, and standard gradient descent algorithms are algorithms for
minimizingagenerallossfunction,whiletheGauss-Newtonandquasi-Gauss-Newtonalgorithms
are methodsforminimizingtheleast-squareslossfunction(113).
For convenience, we will now summarize the generalized gradient descent algorithms that we
havedevelopedinthisnote. Inall ofthealgorithms,theupdatestepisgivenby
or, equivalently,
fora specificchoice ofthestepsizeα > 0. The stabilityclaimsmadeare based on theassumption
that α has been chosen small enough to ensure that the stability condition (136) is valid. Further-
more, weusetheshorthandnotation
Note that in the taxonomy given below only the Newton Hessian Newton is generally the true Hes-
sianofthelossfunction.
93Of course, we are allowed to ask what the performance of the Q = I standard gradient-descent algorithm is
relativetotheQNewtonalgorithm.
K.Kreutz-Delgado—Copyright c 2003-2009,AllRightsReserved–VersionUCSD-ECE275CG-S2009v1.0 60
1. Standard (a.k.a. Simple, Cartesian, orNaive)GradientDescent.
Appliestoanysmoothlossfunctionwhichisboundedfrom below.
Qstandard(ˆc) = I
(cid:16) (cid:17)H
Applicationto Least-Squa(cid:16)res Lo(cid:17)ssFunction(113):
∂c −2 − 2 2
(cid:0) (cid:1) − (cid:0) (cid:1)
(cid:20) (cid:21)
(cid:16) (cid:17) (cid:16) (cid:17)
(cid:0) (cid:1) H H
(cid:20) (cid:21)
(cid:16) (cid:17) (cid:16) (cid:17)
g(z) holomorphic:
(cid:16) (cid:17)H
(cid:0) ∆zs (cid:1) tandard = 1 g(ˆz) We(ˆz)
(cid:16) (cid:17)
Generally stablebutslow.
2. Gauss-NewtonAlgorithm.
Appliestotheleast-squareslossfunction(113).
Gauss(ˆc) = zz ¯zz
(cid:18) (cid:19)
whereU isgivenby (141), U = U , U is givenby(142), and U = U .
zz ¯z¯z zz ¯zz z¯z ¯zz
∂ℓ H = 1GHWe (cid:16) 1S (cid:17) GHWe = 1 B(ˆc)+SB(ˆc)
∂c −2 − 2 2
(cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:1)
∆zGauss = U U U −1U −1 U U −1 ∂ℓ H ∂ℓ H where
(cid:0) H (cid:1) H (cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:1)
(cid:20) (cid:21)
(cid:16) (cid:17) (cid:16) (cid:17)
(cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:1)
K.Kreutz-Delgado—Copyright c 2003-2009,AllRightsReserved–VersionUCSD-ECE275CG-S2009v1.0 61
g(z)holomorphic:
U takesthesimplerform(143), U = U , and U = U = 0.
zz ¯z¯z zz z¯z ¯zz
U 0 ∂g H W ∂g 0
Gauss(ˆc) = zz = 1 ∂z ∂z
Hcc (cid:18) 0 U ¯z¯z (cid:19) 2 (cid:0) (cid:1) 0 (cid:0) (cid:1) ∂ ∂ g z H W ∂ ∂ g z !
(cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:16) (cid:17) H −1 H
zz ∂z ∂z ∂z ∂z
(cid:20) (cid:21)
(cid:16) (cid:17) (cid:16) (cid:17) (cid:16) (cid:17)
Stability gene(cid:0)rally(cid:1) requires positive definiteness of both U and its Schur complement:
. Theneedtostepforpositive-definitenessoftheSchurcomplement
zz zz ¯zz ¯z¯z z¯z
can significantlyincreasethecomplexityofan on-lineadaptivefilteringalgorithm.
Ifg(z)isholomorphic,then stabilityonlyrequires positivedefiniteness ofthematrixU =
∂g(ˆz) W ∂g(ˆz) , whichwillbethecaseifg(z)isone-to-one. Thus,thealgorithmmay
b(cid:16)eeasi(cid:17)ertost(cid:16)abilize(cid:17)when g(z)is holomorphic.
Convergencetendsto befast.
3. Pseudo-Gauss-NewtonAlgorithm.
Appliestotheleast-squareslossfunction(113).
Gauss(ˆc) = zz
(cid:18) (cid:19)
whereU isgivenby (141) and U = U .
zz ¯z¯z zz
Qpseudo-Gauss(ˆc) = [ pseudo-Gauss(ˆc)] −1 = U z − z 1 0
Hcc 0 U −1
(cid:18) (cid:19)
∆cpseudo-Gauss = Qpseudo-Gauss(ˆc) ∂ℓ(ˆc) where
∂ℓ H = 1GHWe 1SG (cid:16) HWe (cid:17) = 1 B(ˆc)+SB(ˆc)
∂c −2 − 2 2
(cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:1)
(cid:20) (cid:21)
(cid:16) (cid:17) (cid:16) (cid:17)
(cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:1)
(cid:20) (cid:21)
(cid:16) (cid:17) (cid:16) (cid:17)
g(cid:0) (z(cid:1)
)holomorphic:
U takesthesimplerformof(143), andU = U .
zz ¯z¯z zz
U 0 ∂g H W ∂g 0
pseudo-Gauss(ˆc) = zz = 1 ∂z ∂z
H cc (cid:18) 0 U ¯z¯z (cid:19) 2 (cid:0) (cid:1) 0 (cid:0) (cid:1) ∂ ∂ g z H W ∂ ∂ g z !
(cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:1)
K.Kreutz-Delgado—Copyright c 2003-2009,AllRightsReserved–VersionUCSD-ECE275CG-S2009v1.0 62
(cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:16) (cid:17) H −1 H
(cid:20) (cid:21)
(cid:16) (cid:17) (cid:16) (cid:17) (cid:16) (cid:17)
Stability requires positive definiteness of U (ˆz) = ∂g(ˆz) W ∂g(ˆz) which will be the
caseifg(z)is one-to-one. (cid:16) (cid:17) (cid:16) (cid:17)
ConvergenceisexpectedtobequickbutgenerallyslowerthanforGauss-Newtonduetoloss
of efficiency due to neglecting the block off-diagonal terms in the Gauss-Newton Hessian
(off-set,however,byreducedcomplexityandpossiblegainsinstability),exceptforthecase
when g(z)isholomorphic,in whichcasethetwoalgorithmscoincide.
4. Newton-Algorithm.
Appliestoanysmoothlossfunctionwhichisboundedfrom below.
Newton(ˆc) = H zz H ¯zz
(cid:18)H H (cid:19)
∆zNewton = (cid:16) −1 (cid:17) −1 −1 ∂ℓ H ∂ℓ H
H zz −H ¯zz H ¯z¯z H z¯z H ¯zz H ¯z¯z ∂¯z − ∂z
Application(cid:0) to theLeast-Square(cid:1)s LonssFunctio(cid:0)n((cid:1)113):(cid:0) (cid:1) o
Newton = H zz H ¯zz = zz ¯zz m zz ¯zz
H cc (cid:18)H z¯z H ¯z¯z (cid:19) (cid:18) U z¯z U ¯z¯z (cid:19) − i=1 (cid:18) V z ( ¯z i) V ¯z ( ¯z i) (cid:19)
= Gauss(ˆc) m zz ¯zz
H cc − i=1 V(i) V(i)
(cid:18) z¯z ¯z¯z(cid:19)
U isgivenby(141), U = U , PU isgivenby(142), U = U
zz ¯z¯z zz ¯zz z¯z ¯zz
V(i) is givenby(144), V(i) = V(i), V(i) isgivenby (145), V(i) = V(i).
zz ¯z¯z zz ¯zz z¯z ¯zz
∆cNewton = QNewton(ˆc) ∂ℓ(ˆc) where
∂ℓ H = 1GHWe (cid:16)1SG (cid:17) HWe = 1 B(ˆc)+SB(ˆc)
∂c −2 − 2 2
(cid:0) (cid:1) − (cid:0) (cid:1)
∆zNewton = −1 −1 −1 ∂ℓ H ∂ℓ H where
H zz −H ¯zz H ¯z¯z H z¯z H ¯zz H ¯z¯z ∂¯z − ∂z
(cid:20) (cid:21)
(cid:16) (cid:17) (cid:16) (cid:17)
g(cid:0)(z(cid:1)) holomorphic: (cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:1)
Newton = zz m zz ¯zz = pseudo-Gauss(ˆc) m zz ¯zz
Hcc 0 U − i=1 V(i) V(i) Hcc − i=1 V(i) V(i)
(cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18) (cid:19)
K.Kreutz-Delgado—Copyright c 2003-2009,AllRightsReserved–VersionUCSD-ECE275CG-S2009v1.0 63
V(i) and V(i) takethesimplerformsof(146), V(i) = V(i), V(i) = V(i)
zz ¯zz ¯z¯z zz z¯z ¯zz
U takes thesimplerform of(143), U = U
zz ¯z¯z zz
∆zNewton = −1 −1 −1 ∂ℓ H ∂ℓ H where
H zz −H ¯zz H ¯z¯z H z¯z H ¯zz H ¯z¯z ∂¯z − ∂z
∂ℓ H = (cid:0)1 g(ˆz) H We(ˆz); (cid:1) ∂ n ℓ H = ∂ℓ (cid:0) H(cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:1) o
(cid:16) (cid:17)
(cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:1)
Stability generally requires positive definiteness of both and its Schur complement
. The need to step for positive-definiteness of the Schur com-
¯z¯z zz ¯zz ¯z¯z z¯z
H H −H H H
plementcan significantlyincreasethecomplexityofan on-lineadaptivefilteringalgorithm.
(cid:0) (cid:1)
When minimizing the least-squares loss function, we expect stability to be greater when
g(c) is holomorphic. This is particularly true if g(c) is also onto and the algorithm is con-
vergent, as we then expect the difference between the Newton and Gauss-Newton Hessians
(and hence the difference between the Newton and Gauss-Newton algorithms) to become
negligibleasymptotically.
TheNewtonalgorithmisknowntohaveveryfastconvergenceproperties,provideditcanbe
stabilized.
5. Pseudo-Newton Algorithm.
Appliestoanysmoothlossfunctionwhichisboundedfrom below.
pseudo-Newton(ˆc) = H zz
Hcc 0 (ˆc)
(cid:18) H (cid:19)
Qpseudo-Newton(ˆc) = [ pseudo-Newton(ˆc)]
∆cpsedudo-Newton = Qpseudo-Newton(ˆc) ∂ℓ(ˆc)
(cid:16) H(cid:17)
Applicationto theLeast-Squ(cid:16)ares L(cid:17)ossFunction(113):
H c ps c eudo-Newton = (cid:18) H z 0 z (ˆc) H ¯z¯ 0 z (ˆc) (cid:19) =  zz − 0 i P =1 zz U ¯z¯z m V ¯z ( ¯z i) 
= c ps c eudo-Gauss(ˆc)  i=1 m 
H − P 0 V(i)
V(i) is givenby(144)and V(i) = V(i). U is givenby(141)and U = U
zz ¯z¯z zz zz ¯z¯z zz
∆cpseudo-Newton = Qpseudo-Newton(ˆc) ∂ℓ(ˆc) where
∂ℓ H = 1GHWe 1SGH (cid:16) We = (cid:17)1 B(ˆc)+SB(ˆc)
∂c −2 − 2 2
(cid:0) (cid:1) − (cid:0) (cid:1)
K.Kreutz-Delgado—Copyright c 2003-2009,AllRightsReserved–VersionUCSD-ECE275CG-S2009v1.0 64
− H zz ∂z − zz − zz ∂z
(cid:20) i=1 (cid:21)
(cid:16) (cid:17) (cid:16) (cid:17)
(cid:20) (cid:21)
(cid:16) (cid:17) (cid:16) (cid:17)
g(cid:0)(z(cid:1)) holomorphic ⇒
U takes thesimplerform of(143), U = U .
zz ¯z¯z zz
V(i) takes thesimplerform (146), V(i) = V(i)
zz ¯z¯z zz
(cid:16) (cid:17) (cid:16) (cid:17) m −1 H
∆zpseudo-Newton = 1 U V(i) g(ˆz) We(ˆz)
2 zz − zz ∂z
(cid:20) i=1 (cid:21)
= ∂g H W P ∂g m
(cid:20) i=1 (cid:21)
(cid:16) (cid:17) (cid:16) (cid:17)
(cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:1) P
Stabilitygenerallyrequires positivedefiniteness of .
Thepseudo-Newtonisexpectedtobefast,buthavealossofefficiencyrelativetotheNewton
algorithm. When g(z)is holomorphicand onto, weexpect good performance as asymptoti-
callyastabilizedpseudo-NewtonalgorithmwillcoincidewiththeNewtonalgorithm. Ifg(z)
is nonholomorphic,thepseudo-Newtonand Newton algorithmswill not coincideasymptot-
ically, so the speed of the pseudo-Newton algorithm is expected to always lag the Newton
algorithm.
The algorithm suggested by Yan and Fan in [32] corresponds in the above taxonomy to the
pseudo-Newton algorithm. We see that for obtaining a least-squares solution to the nonlinear
inverse problem y = g(z), if g is holomorphic, then the Yan and Fan suggestion can result in a
goodapproximationtotheNewtonalgorithm. However,fornonholomorphicleast-squaresinverse
problems and for other types of optimizationproblems (including the problem considered by Yan
andFanin[32]),theapproximationsuggestedbyYanandFanisnot guaranteedtoprovideagood
approximation to the Newton algorithm.94 However, as we have discussed, it does result in an
admissible generalized gradient descent method in its own right, and, as such, one can judge the
resultingalgorithmonits ownmeritsand in comparisonwithothercompetitoralgorithms.
EqualityConstraints. Theclassicalapproachtoincorporatingequalityconstraintsintotheprob-
lem of optimizing a scalar cost function is via the method of Lagrange multipliers. The theory of
Lagrange multipliers is well-posed when the objective function and constraints are real-valued
functions of real unknown variables. Note that a vector of p complex equality constraint condi-
g(z) = 0 Cp
94Suchaclaimmightbetrue.However,itwouldhavetobejustified.
K.Kreutz-Delgado—Copyright c 2003-2009,AllRightsReserved–VersionUCSD-ECE275CG-S2009v1.0 65
isequivalentto 2preal equalityconstraintscorrespondingtotheconditions
Reg(z) = 0 Rp and Img(z) = 0 Rp.
Thus,giventheproblemofoptimizingarealscalar-valuedlossfunctionℓ(z)subjecttoavector
ofp complexequalityconstraintsh(z) = 0, onecan construct awell-defined lagrangianas
forreal-valued p-dimensionallagrangemultipliervectorsλ and λ .
If wedefinethecomplexlagrangemultipliervector λ by
itis straightforwardtoshowthatthelagrangian(147)can beequivalentlywrittenas
One can now apply the multivariate CR-Calculus developed in this note to find a stationary
solution to the Lagrangian (148). Of course, subtle issues involving the application of the z, c-
complex,and c-real perspectivestotheproblemwilllikelyariseonacase-by-case basis.
Final Comments on the 2nd Order Analysis. It is evident that the analysis of second-order
properties of a real-valued function on Cn is much more complicated than in the purely real case,
perhaps even dauntingly so. Thus, it is perhaps not surprising that very little analysis of second
properties can be found in any single location in the literature.95 By far, the most illuminating is
the paper by van den Bos [25], which, unfortunately, is very sparse in its explanation.96 A careful
readingofvandenBosindicatesthatheisfullyawarethattherearetwointerpretationsofc,vizthe
real interpretation and the complex interpretation. This is a key insight. As we have seen above,
it provides a very powerful analysis and algorithm development tool which allows us to switch
between the c-real interpretation (which enables us to use the tools and insights of real analysis)
and the c-complex perspective (which is shorthand for working at the algorithm implementation
levelofzand¯z). Thenow-classicpaperbyBrandwood[14]presentsadevelopmentofthecomplex
vectorcalculus using thec-complex perspectivewhich, although adequate for thedevelopmentof
first-order algorithms, presents greater difficulties when used as a tool for second order algorithm
development. In this note, we’ve exploited the insights provided by van den Bos [25] to perform
a more careful analysis of second-order Newton and Gauss-Newton algorithms. Of course, much
work remains to explore the analytical, structural, numerical, and implementation properties of
these, andothersecond order, algorithms.
95ThatIcouldfind. PleasealertmetoanyrelevantsurveyreferencesthatIamignorantof.
96Likelyaresultofpagelimitationsimposedbythepublisher.
K.Kreutz-Delgado—Copyright c 2003-2009,AllRightsReserved–VersionUCSD-ECE275CG-S2009v1.0 66
7 Applications
1. ASimple“Nonlinear”LeastSquaresProblem-I. Thisisasimple,butinteresting,problem
whichis nonlinearinz C yetlinearin c C2.
Letz Cbeanunknownscalarcomplexquantitywewishtoestimatefrommultipleiidnoisy
measurements,
k = 1, ,n, ofascalarsignals C whichisrelated to z via
whereα Candβ Careknowncomplexnumbers. Itisassumedthatthemeasurementnoisen
isiidand(complex)Gaussian,n N(0,σ2I),withσ2 known. Notethatthefunctiong(z)isboth
nonlinear in z (because complex conjugation is a nonlinear operation on z) and nonholomorphic
(nonanalytic in z). However, because the problem must be linear in the underlying real space
= R2 (a fact which shows up in the obvious fact that the function g is linear in c), we expect
thatthisproblemshouldbeexactlysolvable,as willbeshowntoindeedbethecase.
Undertheaboveassumptionsthemaximumlikelihoodestimate(MLE)isfoundbyminimizing
thelossfunction[15]97
2n − − − −
2n − − − −
Notethatthisisanonlinearleast-squaresproblemasthefunctiong(z)isnonlinearinz.98 Further-
more, g(z) is nonholomorphic(nonanalytic in z). Note, however, that although g(z) is nonlinear
inz,itislinearinc = (z,z¯)T,andthatasaconsequencethelossfunctionℓ(z) = ℓ(c)hasanexact
second orderexpansionin c oftheform (92), which can beverified by a simpleexpansionofℓ(z)
in terms of z and z¯ (see below). The corresponding c-complex Hessian matrix (to be computed
below) does not have zero off-diagonal entries, which shows that a loss function being quadratic
does notaloneensurethat = 0, afact whichcontradicts theclaimmadein [32].
97Theadditionaloverallfactorof 1 hasbeenaddedforconvenience.
98Recallthatcomplexconjugationisanonlinearoperation.
K.Kreutz-Delgado—Copyright c 2003-2009,AllRightsReserved–VersionUCSD-ECE275CG-S2009v1.0 67
Defining thesampleaverageofnsamples ξ , ,ξ by
thelossfunctionℓ(z) can beexpandedand rewrittenas
| | − h i h i | | | | − h i h i
or D E (cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:16) (cid:17)
1 1 z 1 z H α 2+ β 2 2α¯β z
2 | | − 2 h i h i h i h i z¯ 4 z¯ 2αβ¯ α 2+ β 2 z¯
D E (cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18) | | | | (cid:19)(cid:18) (cid:19)
(cid:0) (cid:1)
Since this expansion is done using the z-perspective, we expect that it corresponds to a second
orderexpansionaboutthevalueˆz = 0,
∂c ∂z ∂¯z −2 h i h i h i h i
and (cid:16) (cid:17) (cid:0) (cid:1)
Hcc 2 2αβ ¯ α 2 + β 2
Andindeed thisturnsoutto bethecase. Simpledifferentiationof(149)yields,
∂z 2 | | | | − 2 h i h i
(cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:1)
∂z¯ 2 | | | | − 2 h i h i
which evaluated at zero givethe linear te(cid:0)rm in the qu(cid:1)adratic loss function, and further differentia-
tionsyield,
Hcc 2 2αβ ¯ α 2 + β 2
(cid:18)H H (cid:19) (cid:18) | | | | (cid:19)
whichis independentofz. Notethat,as expected,
= .
If we set the two partial derivatives to zero, we obtain two stationarity equations for the two
stationaryquantitiesz and z¯. Solvingforz thenyieldstheleast-squaresestimateofz,99
opt α 2 β 2 h i− h i
99Notethatthisanswerreducestotheobvioussolutionsforthetwospecialcasesα=0andβ =0.
K.Kreutz-Delgado—Copyright c 2003-2009,AllRightsReserved–VersionUCSD-ECE275CG-S2009v1.0 68
Thissolutioncan also beobtainedbycompletingthesquareon(150)to obtain
opt − H cc ∂c
(cid:18) (cid:19)
An obviousnecessary conditionfortheleast-squares solutiontoexististhat
α 2 = β 2.
The solution will be a global100 minimum if the Hessian matrix is positive definite. This will be
true if the two leading principal minors are strictly positive, which is true if and only if, again,
α 2 = β 2. Thus,if α 2 = β 2 thesolutiongivenaboveisaglobalminimumtotheleastsquares
problem.
Thecondition α 2 = β 2 corresponds tolossofidentifiabilityofthemodel
To see this, first note that to identify a complex number is equivalent to identifying both the real
and imaginarypartsofthenumber. If eitherofthem isunidentifiable,thenso isthenumber.
Now note that the condition α 2 = β 2 says that α and β have the same magnitude, but, in
general, a different phase. If we call the phase difference φ, then the condition α 2 = β 2 is
equivalenttothecondition
whichyields
z = ejφ 2βRe ejφ 2z .
(cid:16) (cid:17) (cid:16) (cid:17) n o
Thus, it is evident that the imaginary part of
z is unidentifiable, and thus the complex number
z itselfis unidentifiable. And,since
(cid:16) (cid:17) (cid:16) n o n o(cid:17)
itis obviousthatz isunidentifiable.
Noteforthesimplestcaseofα = β (φ = 0), wehave
inwhich caseIm z , andhence z, is unidentifiable.
100BecausetheHessianisindependentofz.
K.Kreutz-Delgado—Copyright c 2003-2009,AllRightsReserved–VersionUCSD-ECE275CG-S2009v1.0 69
2. A Simple “Nonlinear” Least Squares Problem - II. The “nonlinearity” encountered in the
previousexample, is in asense “bogus”and is not anonlinearityat all, at least when viewedfrom
the c-real perspective. Not surprisingly then, we were able to compute an exact solution. Here,
wewillbrieflylookattheNewtonandGauss-Newtonalgorithmsappliedtothesimpleproblemof
Example1.
In the previous example, we computed the Newton Hessian of the least-squares loss function
(149). The difference between the Newton and Gauss-Newton algorithm resides in the difference
between the Newton Hessian and the Gauss-Newton Hessian. To compute the Gauss-Newton
Hessian,notethat
(cid:18) (cid:19)
and therefore(sincetheproblemislinearinc)wehavethenot surprisingresultthat
G = (α β).
In thisexample,theleast-squares weightingmatrixis W = I and wehave
α¯ α 2 α¯β
(cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18) | | (cid:19)
whichis seen tobeindependentofc. From (122), weconstructtheGauss-NewtonHessianas
Gauss = P GHG = (cid:18) | | (cid:19) (cid:18) | | (cid:19) = | | | | = C
H cc 2 2 2αβ¯ α2+ β 2 H cc
(cid:0) (cid:1)
showing that for this simple example the Newton and Gauss-Newton Hessians are the same, and
therefore the Newton and Gauss-Newton algorithms are identical. As seen from Equations (130)
and (132), this is a consequence of the fact that g(c) is linear in c as then the matrix of second
partialderivativesofg requiredtocomputethedifferencebetweentheNewtonandGauss-Newton
algorithmsvanishes
A (g) , = 0.
(cid:18) (cid:19)
From thederivativescomputedinthepreviousexample,wecan compute ∂ℓ(ˆc) as
(cid:16) (cid:17)
(cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18) | | | | (cid:19)(cid:18) (cid:19)
(cid:16) (cid:17)  (cid:16) (cid:17) 
K.Kreutz-Delgado—Copyright c 2003-2009,AllRightsReserved–VersionUCSD-ECE275CG-S2009v1.0 70
= + C ˆc.
∂c ∂c H cc
(cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18) (cid:19)
TheoptimalupdateintheNewtonalgorithmistherefore givenby
− H cc ∂c − H cc ∂c − opt −
(cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18) (cid:19)
Theupdatestecp intheNewtonalgorithmisgivenby
Ifwetakethe“Newtonstepsize”α = 1, weobtain c
new opt − opt
showing that we can attain the optimal solution in only one update step. For the real case, it
is well-known that the Newton algorithm attains the optimum in one step for a quadratic loss
function. Thus our result is not surprisinggiventhat theproblem is a linear least-squares problem
inc.
Note that the off-diagonal elements of the constant-valued Hessian C are never zero and
generally are not small relative to the size of the diagonal elements of C . This contradicts the
statement made in [32] that for a quadratic loss function, the diagonal elements must be zero.101
However,thepseudo-Newtonalgorithmproposedin[32]willconvergetothecorrectsolutionwhen
applied to our problem, but at a slower convergent rate than the full Newton algorithm, which is
seen to be capable of providing one-step convergence. We have a trade off between complexity
(the less complex pseudo-Newton algorithm versus the more complex Newton algorithm) versus
speed of convergence (the slower converging pseudo-Newton algorithm versus the fast Newton
algorithm).
3. The Complex LMS Algorithm. Consider the problem of determining the complex vector
parameter a Cn which minimizes the following generalization of the loss function (2) to the
vectorparameter case,
ℓ(a) = E e 2 , e = η aHξ , (151)
Cn. Wewill assum(cid:8)ethr(cid:9)oughoutthat theparameter space is Euclideanso that
Ω = I. Thecogradientofℓ(a) withrespect to theunknownparameter vectoraisgivenby
ℓ(a) = E e 2 .
(cid:26) (cid:27)
101Itistrue,aswenotedabove,thatforthequadraticlossfunctionassociatedwithaholomorphicnonlinearinverse
problemtheoff-diagonalelementsoftheHessianarezero. However,thestatementisnottrueingeneral.
K.Kreutz-Delgado—Copyright c 2003-2009,AllRightsReserved–VersionUCSD-ECE275CG-S2009v1.0 71
To determinethecogradientof
k k k k k k k k k
k k − k k − k
and thate = (η aHξ ) is independentofa. Then wehave
∂a k k k ∂a k − k
= e ξH .
Thegradientof e 2 = e e¯ isgivenby
e e¯ = e e¯ = e ξH H = ξ e¯ .
∇ a k k ∂a k k − k k − k k
(cid:18) (cid:19)
(cid:0) (cid:1)
Thus,wereadilyhavethatthegradient(directionofsteepestascent)ofthelossfunctionℓ(a) =
(cid:8) (cid:9) ∇ a − { k k } − k k − k
If we set this (or the cogradient) equal to zero to determine a stationary point of the loss function
(cid:8) (cid:9)
weobtainthestandardWiener-HopfequationsfortheMMSEestimateofa.102
Alternatively,ifwemaketheinstantaneousstochastic-gradientapproximation,
∇ a ≈ ∇ a k ∇ a | k | − k k k k − k k
wherea isacurrentestimateoftheMMSEvalueofaand ℓ(cid:0)(a)givesthe(cid:1)directionofsteepest
k b b −∇ a b
descent of ℓ(a), we obtain the standard LMS on-line stochastic gradient-descent algorithm for
learningan estimateofthecomplexvectora,
k+1 k k a k
k k k k − k k
k k(cid:0)k k k(cid:1)k k
Thus,wehaveeasilyderivedthecom(cid:0)plexLMSal(cid:1)gorithm,
Complex LMS Algorithm: a = I α ξ ξH a +α ξ η¯ . (152)
k+1 − k k k k k k k
102Which, as mentioned earlier, can also be obtained from the(cid:0)orthogonality p(cid:1)rinciple or completing the square.
Thus,iftheWiener-Hopfequationsareouronlygoalthereisnoneedtodiscusscomplexderivativesatall. Itisonly
whena directionofsteepestdescentisneededinordertoimplementanon-lineadaptivedescent-likealgorithmthat
theneedfortheextendedorconjugatederivativearises.
K.Kreutz-Delgado—Copyright c 2003-2009,AllRightsReserved–VersionUCSD-ECE275CG-S2009v1.0 72