Phil.Trans.R.Soc.B(2007)362,773–786
Publishedonline29March2007
The cognitive neuroscience of constructive
memory: remembering the past
and imagining the future
Daniel L. Schacter1,2,* and Donna Rose Addis1,2
1Departmentof Psychology, HarvardUniversity, 33 Kirkland Street, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA
2Athinoula AMartinosCenter for Biomedical Imaging,MassachusettsGeneral Hospital,
149 Thirteenth Street, Suite 2301, Charlestown, MA02129,USA
Episodic memory is widely conceived as a fundamentally constructive, rather than reproductive,
process that is prone to various kinds of errors and illusions. With a view towards examining the
functionsservedbyaconstructiveepisodicmemorysystem,weconsider recentneuropsychological
andneuroimagingstudies indicatingthatsometypesofmemorydistortions reflecttheoperationof
adaptiveprocesses.Animportantfunctionofaconstructiveepisodicmemoryistoallowindividuals
to simulate or imagine future episodes, happenings and scenarios. Since the future is not an exact
repetitionofthepast,simulationoffutureepisodesrequiresasystemthatcandrawonthepastina
mannerthatflexiblyextractsandrecombineselementsofpreviousexperiences.Consistentwiththis
constructiveepisodic simulationhypothesis, weconsider cognitive,neuropsychological andneuroima-
ging evidence showing that there is considerable overlap in the psychological and neural processes
involvedin remembering the past and imagining the future.
Keywords:constructivememory;false recognition; mental simulation; neuroimaging; amnesia;
Alzheimer’sdisease;
1.INTRODUCTION The situation is rather different when we turn to
The analysis of human memory comprises avarietyof cognitive neuroscience approaches, which attempt to
approaches, conceptual frameworks, theoretical ideas elucidate the neural underpinnings of memory. Here,
andempiricalfindings.Despitethewealthofcontrast- sustainedinterestinconstructiveaspectsofmemoryhas
ing and sometimes conflicting ideas, there are some developed only more recently. Such interest has been
basic observations on which memory researchers can driven mainly by observations concerning the memory
agree. One of the least controversial—but most distortionknownasconfabulation,inwhichpatientswith
important—observationsisthatmemoryisnotperfect. damage tovarious regions within prefrontal cortex and
Instead, memory is prone to various kinds of errors, related regions produce vivid but highly inaccurate
illusions and distortions. For instance, it has been ‘recollections’ of events that never happened (e.g.
proposedthatmemory’simperfectionscanbeclassified Johnson 1991; Moscovitch 1995; Burgess & Shallice
into seven basic categories or ‘sins’ (Schacter 1999, 1996; Dalla Barba et al. 1999; Schnider 2003; Moulin
2001). Each of the memory sins has important et al. 2005). During the past decade, investigations of
practicalimplications,rangingfromannoyingeveryday memorydistortionsinotherpatientpopulations,aswell
instances of absent-minded forgetting to misattribu- as neuroimaging studies of accurate versus inaccurate
tions and suggestibility that can distort eyewitness rememberinginhealthyindividuals,havecontributedto
identifications. But for memory researchers, such anincreaseinresearchonthecognitiveneuroscienceof
constructive memory (for reviews, see Schacter et al.
imperfectionsaremostimportantbecausetheyprovide
1998a;Schacter&Slotnick2004).
criticalevidenceforthefundamentalideathatmemory
Inthepresentpaper,wefocusonepisodicmemory,
is not a literal reproduction of the past, but rather is a
the system that enables people to recollect past
constructive process in which bits and pieces of
experiences (Tulving 1983, 2002). We consider some
information from various sources are pulled together;
recent work concerning the neural basis of memory
memory errors are thought to reflect the operation of
construction with a view to addressing a question
specific components of this constructive process. This
concerning its function: why does memory involve a
characterization of memory dates at least to the
constructiveprocessofpiecingtogetherbitsandpieces
pioneering ideas of Bartlett (1932) and has been a
of information, rather than something more akin to a
major influence in contemporarycognitivepsychology
replay of the past? Several researchers have grappled
for nearly40 years.
with this issue and proposed various reasons why
human memory, in contrast to video recorders or
*Authorforcorrespondence(dls@wjh.harvard.edu). computers,doesnotstoreandretrieveexactreplicasof
experience (e.g. Bjork & Bjork 1988; Anderson &
One contribution of 14 to a Discussion Meeting Issue ‘Mental
processesinthehumanbrain’. Schooler1991;Schacter1999,2001).Wefocusonone
773 Thisjournalisq2007TheRoyalSociety
774 D. L.Schacter& D.R. Addis Constructive memoryin thehuman brain
hypothesis concerning the origins of a constructive brainsystems.Schacteretal.notedevidencesupporting
episodic memory: that an important function of this theideathatrepresentationsofnewexperiencesshould
type of memory is to allow individuals to simulate or be conceptualized as patterns of features in which
imagine future episodes, happenings and scenarios. different features represent different facets of encoded
As we discuss later, a number of investigators have experience, including outputs of perceptual systems
recently articulated a broad view of memory that not that analyse specific physical attributes of incoming
onlyconsiderstheabilityofindividualstore-experience information and interpretation of these attributes by
past events, but also focuses on the capacity to conceptualorsemanticsystemsanalogoustoBartlett’s
imagine, simulate or pre-experience episodes in the schemas.Inthisview,constituentfeaturesofamemory
future (Tulving 1983, 2002, 2005; Suddendorf & aredistributedwidelyacrossdifferentpartsofthebrain,
Corballis 1997; Atance & O’Neill 2001, 2005; such that no single location contains a literal trace or
Klein & Loftus 2002; Suddendorf & Busby 2003, engram that corresponds to a specific experience (cf.
2005;D’Argembeau&VanderLinden2004;Dudai& Squireetal.2004;Thompson2005).Retrievalofapast
Carruthers 2005; Hancock 2005; Buckner & Carroll experience involves a process of pattern completion
2007; Schacter & Addis 2007). This latter ability has (Marr 1971; McClelland et al. 1995; Norman &
beenreferredtobysuchtermsasprospection(Gilbert O’Reilly 2003), in which the rememberer pieces
2006; Buckner & Carroll 2007) and episodic future together some subset of distributed features that
thinking (Atance & O’Neill 2001, 2005). Since the comprise a particular past experience, including
futureisnotanexactrepetitionofthepast,simulation perceptualandconceptual/interpretiveelements.
offuture episodes may require a system that can draw Since a constructive memory system is prone to
on the past in a manner that flexibly extracts and error, it must solve many problems to produce
recombines elements of previous experiences—a con- sufficientlyaccuraterepresentationsofpastexperience.
structiverather thanareproductivesystem.Ifthisidea For example, the disparate features that constitute an
hasmerit,thenthereshouldbeconsiderableoverlapin episodemustbelinkedorboundtogetheratencoding;
the psychological and neural processes involved in failuretoadequatelybindtogetherappropriatefeatures
remembering the past and imagining the future. We can result in the common phenomenon of source
consider some recent cognitive, neuropsychological memoryfailure,wherepeopleretrievefragmentsof an
and neuroimaging evidence that is consistent with episode but do not recollect, or misrecollect, how or
thishypothesis. whenthefragmentswereacquired,resultinginvarious
kindsofmemoryillusionsanddistortions(e.g.Johnson
et al. 1993; Schacter 1999). Furthermore, bound
2.CONSTRUCTIVE MEMORY: FROM COGNITIVE episodes must be kept separate from one another in
PSYCHOLOGY TOCOGNITIVE NEUROSCIENCE memory: if episodes overlap extensively with one
Anydiscussionofconstructivememorymustacknowl- another, individuals may recall the general similarities
edge the pioneering ideas of Bartlett (1932), who or gist (Brainerd & Reyna 2005) common to many
rejected the notion that memory involves a passive episodes,butfailtorememberdistinctiveitem-specific
replayofapastexperienceviatheawakeningofaliteral information that distinguishes one episode from
copyofexperience.AlthoughBartlettdidnotadvocate another,resultinginthekindsofgist-baseddistortions
the extreme position sometimes ascribed to him that that Bartlett (1932) and many others have reported.
memory is alwaysinaccurate (Ost &Costall 2002), he Similarly, retrieval cues can potentially match stored
clearly rejected the importance of reproductive mem- experiences other than the sought-after episode, thus
ory: ‘the first notion to get rid of is that memory is resultingininaccuratememoriesthatblendelementsof
primarilyorliterallyreduplicative,orreproductive.Ina different experiences (McClelland 1995), so retrieval
world of constantly changing environment, literal often involves a preliminary stage in which the
recall is extraordinarily unimportant.if we consider rememberer forms a more refined description of the
evidence rather than supposition, memory appears to characteristicsoftheepisodetoberetrieved(Burgess&
be far more decisively an affair of construction rather Shallice1996;Norman&Schacter1996).Breakdowns
than one of mere reproduction’ (Bartlett 1932, inthisprocessofformulatingaretrievaldescriptionasa
pp. 204–205). Bartlett emphasized the dependence of resultofdamagetothefrontalcortexandotherregions
remembering on schemas, which he defined as ‘an can sometimes produce striking memory errors,
active organization of past reactions, or of past including confabulations regarding events that never
experiences’ (p. 201). Though usually adaptive for happened (e.g. Burgess & Shallice 1996; Dab et al.
the organism, the fact that remembering relies heavily 1999;Ciaramelliet al.2006;Gilboa et al.2006).
on construction via a schema also has a downside: During the past decade, research in cognitive
‘condensation, elaboration and invention are common neuroscience has made use of neuroimaging and
features or ordinary remembering, and these all very neuropsychological approaches to address questions
often involve the mingling of materials belonging concerningmemoryerrorsanddistortionsthatbearon
originallyto different ‘schemata’’(p. 205). constructive aspects of memory (for a review, see
Bartlett’s (1932) ideas have influenced countless Schacter & Slotnick 2004). We do not attempt an
modern attempts to conceive of memory as a exhaustive review here, but instead focus on two lines
constructive rather than a reproductive process. For ofresearchthataremostrelevanttoourbroaderclaims
example,Schacteretal.(1998a)describeda‘construc- regarding a possible functional basis for constructive
tivememoryframework’thatlinksideasaboutmemory aspects of memory. First, we will consider research
construction from cognitive psychology with various concerning false recognition in patients with memory
Phil.Trans.R.Soc.B(2007)
reduced false recognition in dementia and amnesia
disorders that provides evidence indicating that false word(e.g.sleep).Onasubsequentold–newrecognition
recognition–rather than reflecting the operation of a testcontainingstudiedwords(e.g.tiredanddream),new
malfunctioning or flawed memory system– is some- words that are unrelated to the study list items (e.g.
times amarkerof ahealthymemory system, such that butter) and new words that are related to the study list
damagetothesystemcanreduce,ratherthanincrease, items(e.g.sleep),participantsfrequentlyclaimthatthey
the incidence of this memory error. Second, we previously studied the related lure words. In many
consider neuroimaging studies that provide insight instances,false recognition of the related lure wordsis
into the extent to which accurate and inaccurate indistinguishable from the true recognition rate of
memories depend on the same underlying brain studied words (for review of numerous DRM studies,
regions. A growing body of evidence indicates that seeGallo2006).
there is indeed extensive overlap in the brain regions Anumberof studies haveconsistently revealed that
that support true and false memories, at least when amnesicpatientswithdamagetothehippocampusand
falsememoriesarebasedonwhatwerefertoasgeneral related structures in the medial temporal lobe (MTL)
similarityor gist information. show significantly reduced false recognition of non-
studied lure words that are either semantically or
perceptually related to previously studied words
3.FALSE RECOGNITION INAMNESIA (figure 1; Schacter et al. 1996c, 1997, 1998b; Melo
AND DEMENTIA et al. 1999; Ciaramelli et al. 2006). This false
As noted earlier, patients with damage to regions of recognition ‘deficit’ roughly parallels patients’ true
prefrontal cortex and related brain areas sometimes recognition deficit and occurs even though amnesics
exhibitthememorydistortionknownasconfabulation. typically show similar or even increased levels of false
Such patients also sometimes show pathological levels recognition to unrelated lure words. Amnesics also
of false recognition, claiming incorrectly that novel show reduced false recognition of non-studied visual
information is familiar (e.g. Delbecq-Derouesne´ et al. shapes that are perceptually similar to previously
1990;Schacteretal.1996a;Wardetal.1999).Thefact presented shapes (Koutstaal et al. 1999). Parallel
thatbraindamagecanincreasetheincidenceofmemory studieshavebeenreportedinpatientswithAlzheimer’s
distortion leads naturally to the view that recollective disease (AD), who typically have neuropathology that
errorsreflecttheoperationofadiseasedormalfunction- includes, but is not limited to, MTL regions. Like
ing system. By contrast, however, two related lines of amnesics, AD patients show reduced false recognition
research that have emerged during the past decade oflureitemsthatareeithersemanticallyorperceptually
indicatethatsometypesofmemorydistortionreflectthe related to previously studied items (Balota et al. 1999;
adaptiveoperationofahealthymemorysystem.These Budsonet al.2000,2001,2003).
studies of amnesic and demented patients have One interpretation of this pattern of results is that
examined the incidence of robust false recognition healthy controls form and retain a well-organized
effects, in which healthy people exhibit high levels of representation of the semantic or perceptual gist of a
false alarms after studying a series of semantically list of related study items. Related lures that match
orperceptuallyrelatedwordsorpictures.Forexample, semantic or perceptual features of this representation
intheDeese–Roediger–McDermott(DRM)paradigm are likely to be falsely recognized, while unrelated
(Deese 1959; Roediger & McDermott 1995), parti- words that do not match it are likely to be correctly
cipants study lists of words (e.g. tired, bed, awake, rest, rejected.AsaresultofMTLdamage,amnesicandAD
dream, night, blanket, doze, slumber, snore, pillow, peace, patients mayform and retain only aweak or degraded
yawnanddrowsy)thatarerelatedtoanon-presentedlure gistrepresentationandthusmakefewerfalsealarmsto
noitroporp
Constructivememoryin thehuman brain D. L.Schacter & D.R. Addis 775
older adults
AD patients
recognition accuracy related false alarms
Figure1.PerformanceofpatientswithamnesiaandAlzheimer’sdiseaseontheDeese–Roediger–McDermott(DRM)paradigm
(Roediger&McDermott1995).Participantsstudylistsofwords(e.g.tired,bed,awake,rest,dream,night,etc.)thatarerelatedto
anon-presentedlureword(e.g.sleep).Asubsequentold–newrecognitiontestcontainsstudiedwords(e.g.tired,dream),new
wordsthatareunrelatedtothestudylistitems(e.g.butter)andnewwordsthatarerelatedtothestudylistitems(e.g.sleep).Both
patientgroupsshowsignificantlyreducedrecognitionaccuracy(i.e.hits—falsealarmstonewunrelatedwords)andalsomake
fewerrelatedfalsealarms(i.e.falsealarmstonewrelatedwords—falsealarmstonewunrelatedwords)relativetoage-matched
controls.Notethatthe‘controls’weretheage-matchedcontrolgroupfortheamnesicpatients(dataforcontrolsandamnesics
areobtainedfromSchacteretal.1996c)andthe‘olderadults’weretheage-matchedcontrolgroupforAlzheimer’spatients(data
forolderadultsandAlzheimer’spatientsareobtainedfromBudsonetal.2000).AD,Alzheimer’sdisease.
Phil.Trans.R.Soc.B(2007)
776 D. L.Schacter& D.R. Addis Constructive memoryin thehuman brain
semantic associates or perceptually similar items than 4.NEUROIMAGING STUDIES OF TRUE
docontrols.Supportforthisinterpretationcomesfrom AND FALSE RECOGNITION
a study that used a modified version of the DRM In a number of studies using positron emission
semantic associates procedure (Verfaellie et al. 2002). tomography(PET)andfunctionalmagneticresonance
Participantswereinstructedtocall‘old’anyitemthatis imaging (fMRI), subjects studied lists of DRM
semanticallyrelatedtothethemeorgistofapreviously semantic associates and were later scanned while
studiedlist,eveniftheitemitselfhadnotappearedon making judgements about old words, related lures
the list. Evidence from the healthy controls suggests and unrelated lures. Consistent with the results from
that such a task provides a more direct probe of gist amnesic and AD patients, these studies have revealed
information than a standard old/new recognition task significant and comparable levels of activation in the
(Brainerd & Reyna 1998; Schacter et al. 2001). MTL, including the hippocampus, during both true
Verfaellie et al. (2002) reported that even in this andfalserecognitionofrelatedlures(e.g.Schacteretal.
meaning test, amnesic patients provided fewer ‘old’ 1996b;Cabezaetal.2001;formoredetailedreview,see
responses to semantically related lure words than do Schacter &Slotnick 2004).
controls,therebysupportingtheideaofadegradedgist More recent neuroimaging studies of gist-based
representation. Budson et al. (2006) reported similar false recognition using paradigms other than the
resultsinpatientswithAD,usingaparadigminwhich DRM procedure have replicated and extended these
participants studied categorized pictures and were results. Slotnick & Schacter (2004) used a prototype
given a version of a ‘meaning test’ in which they were recognition paradigm in which the critical materials
instructed to respond ‘yes’, when either a studied or wereabstract,unfamiliarshapes;allshapesinthestudy
non-studied picturecame from astudied category. list were visually similar to a non-presented prototype
In the foregoing studies, involving meaning tests, (figure 2). Participants made significantly more ‘old’
participantswereaskedtorememberexplicitly aspects responsestostudiedshapesthantonewrelatedshapes
ofpreviouslypresentedmaterials;itiswellknownthat andalsomadesignificantlymore‘old’responsestonew
both amnesic and AD patients exhibit deficits on related shapes (i.e. prototypes) than to new unrelated
explicit memory tasks. Thus, it is conceivable that shapes. This latter result confirms the presence of a
patients do form and retain a normal gist represen- false recognition effect that was presumably driven by
tation, but do not express this information on explicit memory for the ‘perceptual gist’ of the studied
tests. Since amnesic patients can show intact priming exemplars that resembled the prototype. Slotnick &
effectsonvariousimplicitorindirectmemorytasks(for Schacter documented that a number of regions
review,seeSchacteretal.2004),Verfaellieetal.(2005) previously implicated in true recognition, including
examined whether use of an implicit task might reveal MTL, fusiform cortex, lateral parietal cortex and
intact retention of gist information in amnesics. They multiple regions in dorsolateral and inferior prefrontal
did so by having patients and controls study lists of cortex, showed significant and comparable levels of
semanticassociates(e.g.resort,sun,beach,parties,etc.) activity during false recognition of new related shapes
thatwereallassociatedtoanon-presentedrelatedlure and true recognition of studied shapes (figure 2).
word (e.g. vacation). On the subsequent stem com- Garoff-Eatonetal.(2006)alsousedabstractshapes
pletion test, participants were provided three-letter as target items in a slightly different experimental
word beginnings that had multiple possible com- paradigm that focused on the relationship between
pletions; some could be completed with previously processesunderlyingrelatedandunrelatedfalserecog-
studiedwords(e.g.bea___)andsomewithrelatedlures nition. In both types of false recognition, subjects
(e.g. vac___). Previous research using a similar respond ‘old’ to new items. However, in related false
paradigm with healthy subjects revealed the existence recognition,semanticorperceptualoverlapbetweenthe
of a ‘false priming’ effect: compared with a baseline newitemandapreviouslystudieditemdrivesthefalse
condition, participants were more likely to complete recognition response, whereas the basis for ‘old’
stemsofrelatedlureswiththelureitemfollowingstudy responsetounrelateditemsisunclear.Standardsignal
of a list of semantic associates (not surprisingly, detectionmodelsofmemorytypicallydonotdistinguish
priming was also observed for previously studied between related and unrelated false alarms: both are
words, e.g. McDermott 1997; McKone & Murphy seen to result from a single underlying process that
2000). Verfaellie et al. reported that amnesic patients supports familiarity or memory strength sufficient to
showed intact priming for previously studied words, surpassasubject’scriterionforsaying‘old’(e.g.Miller&
replicating earlier results, but showed no priming for Wolford 1999; Slotnick & Dodson 2005; but see,
related lures. By contrast, controls showed significant Wixted&Stretch2000).However,datafromstudiesof
primingforbothstudiedwordsandrelatedlurewords. false recognition in amnesic patients reviewed earlier
These results further strengthen the idea that pointtowardsdifferentmechanismsunderlyingrelated
impairedfalserecognitionofsimilarwordsandobjects and unrelated false recognition, because amnesics
inamnesicandADpatientsreflectsanimpoverishedor typically show reduced related false recognition
diminished gist representation, while suggesting that comparedwithcontrols,togetherwitheitherincreased
the deficit extends beyond the strict confines of or unchangedunrelatedfalse recognition.
episodic memory. They also support the idea that this In the experiment by Garoff-Eaton et al. (2006),
typeofmemoryerrorincontrolpopulationsreflectsthe subjects studied abstract shapes drawn from the same
normal operation of healthy adaptive memory pro- set as those developed by Slotnick & Schacter (2004).
cesses. This latter conclusion is also supported by the Onasubsequent recognitiontest,theywerepresented
results offunctional neuroimaging studies. eitherwiththesameshapefromthestudylist,arelated
Phil.Trans.R.Soc.B(2007)
hippocampal responses
dorsal view prefrontal coronal view
BA 45/46/47
true recognition
test phase
0 4 8 12 16
true recognition (old hits > new CRs) BA 7/39/40
new false recognition (related FAs > new CRs) false recognition
conjunction of true and false recognition
((old hits and related FAs) > new CRs)
shape that was visually similar to one of the studied recognition. Of course, we do not wish to imply that
shapes or a new unrelated shape. Participants were gist-based false recognition is neurally indistinguish-
instructed to respond ‘same’ when a test shape was ablefromtruerecognition.AnumberofPETandfMRI
identicaltoapreviouslystudiedshape,‘similar’whena studies have provided evidence that brain activity can
new shape was visually similar to a previously studied distinguish between true recognition and related false
one and ‘new’ to unrelated novel shapes. Behavioural recognition(forreview,seeSchacter&Slotnick2004).
datarevealedsignificantlymore‘same’responses(0.59) SomeofthesestudieshavesupportedwhatSchacter&
to same shapes than to either new related or new Slotnick (2004) termed the sensory reactivation
unrelated shapes, and significantly more ‘same’ hypothesis, which holds that true memories contain
responses to related (0.31) than to unrelated (0.20) more sensory and perceptual details than do related
shapes. A conjunction analysis of the fMRI data that false memories (e.g. Mather et al. 1997; Norman &
assessed common neural activity during true recog- Schacter 1997). Slotnick & Schacter (2004; see also
nition (i.e. ‘same’/same) and related false recognition Kahn et al. 2004) provided some of the strongest
(i.e.‘same’/relatednew)comparedwithunrelatedfalse evidence for this hypothesis: they showed increased
recognition (i.e. ‘same’/new) indicated significant activation in early visual areas, when subjects made
activity in a network of regions previously associated recognition decisions about previously studied shapes
with episodic remembering, including hippocampus/ compared with related new shapes. Interestingly, this
MTL, several regions within prefrontal cortex, medial earlyvisualareaactivityforoldshapesoccurredequally
and inferior parietal lobes and ventral temporal/ strongly when subjects responded ‘old’andwhen they
occipital regions. In striking contrast, a conjunction responded‘new’tothestudiedshapes,suggestingthat
analysis that assessed common activity during related this putative sensory reactivation effect reflected some
andunrelatedfalserecognition,incomparisonwithtrue type of non-conscious or implicit memory(Slotnick &
recognition,showednosignificantactivityinanyregion. Schacter 2004; for further evidence, see Slotnick &
Whencontrastingunrelatedfalserecognitionwithtrue Schacter 2006).
recognition and related false recognition, significant In summary, both neuropsychological and neuro-
activity was observed in regions of left superior and imagingstudiesofgist-basedfalserecognitionsupport
middle temporal gyri (BA 22/38), regions previously theideathatthistypeofmemoryerrorreflects,toavery
associated with language processing. Unrelated false large extent, the healthy operation of constructive
recognition may have occurred when subjects mis- processes that support the ability to remember what
takenlyappliedaverballabelgeneratedduringthestudy has actually happened in the past.
list to a novel shape, whereas related false recognition
was driven largely by perceptual similarity between
studiedshapesandrelatednewshapes. 5.REMEMBERING THE PAST AND IMAGINING
Overall, these data strengthen the argument that THE FUTURE:WHAT KIND OF OVERLAP?
relatedorgist-basedfalserecognitiondependsonmany The foregoing research provides not only insights into
of the same neural processes as true recognition and the constructive nature of episodic memory, but also
shares relatively little in common with unrelated false some clues regarding the functional basis of
egatnecrep
Constructivememoryin thehuman brain D. L.Schacter & D.R. Addis 777
regions active during both true and false recognition
paradigm cortical responses
Figure2.Neuralregionsengagedduringbothtrueandfalserecognition(adaptedfromSlotnick&Schacter2004).Aprototype
recognition paradigmwasemployed;allstimuli presentedduringstudy wereabstract,unfamiliar shapes.During recognition
testing,participantsmaderecognitionjudgementsaboutoldstudiedshapes,newprototypicalshapesvisuallyrelatedtostudied
shapesandnewshapesunrelatedtostudiedshapes.Anumberofregionspreviouslyimplicatedintruerecognition,including
hippocampus,lateralparietalcortex,anddorsolateralandinferiorprefrontalcortex,showedsignificantandcomparablelevelsof
activityduringfalserecognitionofnewrelatedshapes(i.e.prototypes)andtruerecognitionofstudiedshapescomparedwith
correctrejectionsofnewunrelatedshapes.Thepercentageofsignalchangedextractedfromtheleftlateralparietalcortexisalso
shown.BA,Brodmannarea;CR,correctrejection;FA,falsealarm.
Phil.Trans.R.Soc.B(2007)
778 D. L.Schacter& D.R. Addis Constructive memoryin thehuman brain
constructive memory processes. Although memory job of simulating future happenings. Such a system
errorssuchasfalserecognitionmayatfirstseemhighly can draw on elements of the past and retain the
dysfunctional, especially given the havoc that memory general sense or gist of what has happened. Critically,
distortions can wreak in real-world contexts (Loftus itcanflexiblyextract,recombineandreassemblethese
1993; Schacter 2001), we have seen that they some- elements in a way that allows us to simulate, imagine
times reflect the ability of a normally functioning or ‘pre-experience’ (Atance & O’Neill 2001) events
memorysystem tostore andretrievegeneral similarity that have never occurred previously in the exact form
or gist information, and that false recognition errors in which we imagine them. We will refer to this idea
often recruit some of the same processes that support as the constructive episodic simulation hypothesis: the
accuratememorydecisions.Indeed,severalresearchers constructivenatureofepisodicmemoryisattributable,
have argued that the memory errors involving forget- at least in part, to the role of the episodic system
ting or distortion serve an adaptive role (cf. Bjork & in allowing us to mentally simulate our personal
Bjork 1988; Anderson & Schooler 1991; Schacter futures (for similar perspectives, see Suddendorf &
1999, 2001). For example, Anderson & Schooler Corballis 1997; Suddendorf & Busby 2003; Dudai &
(1991) contend that memory is adapted to retain Carruthers 2005).
information that is most likely to be needed in the The constructive episodic simulation hypothesis
environment in which it operates. Since we do not does not imply that the only function of episodic
frequentlyneedtorememberalltheexactdetailsofour memory is to allow us to simulate future events, nor
experiences, an adapted system need not slavishly do we believe that its role in simulation of the future
preserve all such details as a default option; instead, it constitutes the sole reason why episodic memory
shouldrecordandpreservesuchdetailsover timeonly is primarily constructive rather than reproductive.
when circumstances indicate that they are likely to be Episodicmemoryalsofunctionstohelpusmakesense
needed, as human memory tends to do. Similarly, of the past and the present. Furthermore, consider-
memory for gist, which is sometimes responsible for ationssuchaseconomyofstoragearenodoubtrelevant
false recognition, is also crucial for such adaptive to understanding why the system does not simply
capacities as categorization and comprehension and preserve rote records of all experience: compressing
may facilitate transfer and generalization across tasks information into agist-likerepresentation mayprotect
(McClelland 1995). the memory system from overload (Schacter 2001).
We attempt to build on this type of argument by WenonethelessendorseSuddendorf&Busby’s(2003,
suggesting that the constructive nature of episodic p. 393) suggestion that ‘episodic reconstruction is just
memory is highly adaptive for performing a major an adaptive feature of the future planning system’.
functionofthissystem:todrawonpastexperiencesina Moreover, exploring the possible link between
way that allows us to imagine and simulate episodes constructive aspects of memory and simulation of the
that might occur in our personal futures. Thinking future may help to provide fresh perspectives on such
about the future plays a critical role in mental life fundamentalquestionsaswhyimaginationissometimes
(Gilbert 2006), and students of brain function have confused with memory and, more generally, why
long recognized the important role offrontal cortex in memoriescanbebadlymistaken.
allowingindividualstoanticipateorplanforthefuture If the constructive episodic simulation hypothesis
(e.g. Ingvar1985;Stuss &Benson 1986;Fuster 1989; has merit, then remembering the past and imagining
Shallice & Burgess 1996; Mesulam 2002). Tulving the future should show a number of similar charac-
(1983, 2002, 2005) has argued that episodic memory teristics and depend on some of the same neural
affords the ability to engage in ‘mental time travel’, substrates. We next consider cognitive, neuropsycho-
whichinvolvesprojectingoneselfintoboththepastand logical,psychopathologicalandneuroimagingdatathat
the future. From this perspective, representations of bear on this hypothesis.
bothpastandfutureeventsmayberichlydetailed,vivid
and contextually specific. Furthermore, a number of
investigators have recognized that information about 6.COGNITIVE STUDIES OFPASTANDFUTURE
past experiences is useful only to the extent that it EVENTS
allows us to anticipate what may happen in the future In contrast to the extensive cognitive literature on
(e.g. Atance & O’Neill 2001, 2005; Suddendorf & episodic memory of past experiences, there is little
Busby2003,2005;Hancock2005;Buckner&Carroll evidenceconcerningsimulationoffutureepisodesanda
2007).Indeed,Anderson&Schooler’s(1991)analysis virtualabsenceofdirectcomparisonsbetweenremem-
of adaptive forgetting supports the idea that infor- bering the past and imagining the future. While there
mationaboutthepastisretainedwhenitislikelytobe hasbeenagreatdealofresearchconcerningprospective
useful in the future. memory—rememberingtodothingsinthefuture(e.g.
However, future events are rarely, if ever, exact Brandimonteetal.1996)—thislineofresearchhasbeen
replicas of past events. Thus, a memory system that concerned with such topics as the formulation and
simply stored rote records of what happened in the retention ofintentions (e.g. Goschke &Kuhl1993)or
past would not be well suited to simulating future differences between event-based versus time-based
events, which will probably share some similarities prospective memory (e.g. Einstein & McDaniel 1990)
with past events while differing in other respects. We andhasnotfocusedspecificallyonepisodicsimulation
think that a system built along the lines of the and imagining offuture events. Research on the topic
constructive principles that we and others have of affective forecasting—which examines how people
attributed to episodic memory is better suited to the predict, and often mispredict, future happiness
Phil.Trans.R.Soc.B(2007)
Constructivememoryin thehuman brain D. L.Schacter & D.R. Addis 779
(Gilbert 2006)—has revealed important interactions Much less is known about the capacity of amnesic
between memory of past events and predictions of patients to imagine future experiences. However,
future happiness. For example, Morewedge et al. consistent with the constructive episodic simulation
(2005) found that people sometimes base predictions hypothesis, the existing evidence indicates that at least
offuturehappinessonatypicalpastexperiencesthatare some amnesics have great difficulty imagining their
highly memorable but not highly predictive of what is personal futures. Some early observations along these
likelytooccurinthefuture. lines were reported concerning patient K. C., who
More directly related to the constructive episodic sufferedfromtotallossofepisodicmemoryasaresultof
simulationhypothesis,D’Argembeau&VanderLinden closedheadinjurythatproduceddamagetoanumberof
(2004) directly compared ‘re-experiencing’ past brainregions,includingthemedialtemporalandfrontal
episodesand‘pre-experiencing’episodesinthefuture. lobes (Tulving et al. 1988; Rosenbaum et al. 2005).
They investigated how the valence of events and their K.C.wasunabletoprovideadescriptionofhispersonal
temporal distance from the present affect phenomen- futureforanytimeperiodaskedabout:‘thisafternoon’;
ological qualities of past and future autobiographical ‘tomorrow’; or ‘next summer’. Instead,K. C. provided
events. Subjects were asked to either remember a thesameresponsewhenaskedtothinkaboutanypartof
specific event from their past or imagine a specific hispersonalfutureorpast,describinghismentalstateas
eventthatcouldplausiblyhappentotheminthefuture. ‘blank’(Tulving1985;Tulvingetal.1988).
For each of several past and future events that A later investigation in another patient, D. B., who
participantsprovided,theyratedanumberofphenom- became amnesic as a result of cardiac arrest and
enological qualities using a variant of the memory consequentanoxiarevealedthathe,likeK.C.,exhibited
characteristics questionnaire (Johnson et al. 1988), deficits in both retrieving past events and imagining
including perceptual details, valence and intensity of futureevents(Klein&Loftus2002).KleinandLoftus
emotions involved, and clarity of spatial information. developeda10-itemquestionnaireinwhichtheyprobed
Participants also indicated the nature of their visual pastandfutureeventsthatwerematchedfor temporal
perspective on the event: observer (i.e. they ‘saw’ distance from the present (e.g. What did you do
themselvesintheirrepresentationoftheevent)orfield yesterday?Whatareyougoing todotomorrow?).One
(i.e. they saw the scene from their own perspective). problemwithassessingresponsestoquestionsaboutthe
Subjectswerealsoaskedtodatepasteventsandestimate personal future is that it is not entirely clear what
thetemporalproximityoffutureevents. constitutesacorrectanswer.KleinandLoftusevaluated
D’Argembeau and van der Linden found that D.B.’sresponsesinlightofinformationprovidedbyhis
remembered past events were associated with richer family.Thus,whenD.B.wasasked‘Whenwillbethe
and more vivid sensory and contextual details than nexttimeyouseeadoctor?’,hisresponse(‘Sometimein
were imagined future events, consistent with previous thenextweek’)wasjudgedcorrectbecausehisdaughter
observationsconcerningphenomenologicalqualitiesof confirmedthathedidhaveadoctors’appointmentthe
rememberedversusimaginedevents(e.g.Johnsonetal. next week. However, when D. B. was asked ‘Who are
1988).Importantly,however,theyalsoreportedseveral yougoingtoseethisevening?’,andindicatedthathewas
notable commonalities between remembering the past goingtovisithismother,thisresponsewasjudgedtobe
and imagining the future. When compared with confabulatorybecausehis mother had died nearlytwo
negative events, positive events were associated with decadesearlier.
subjective ratings of greater re-experiencing for past D. B. was highly impaired on both the past and
events and greater pre-experiencing for future events. future versions of thistask. Infact, he providedonly2
Temporally close events in either the past or future of 10 responses on the future task that were judged
included more sensory and contextual details, and correct by family members, providing five confabula-
wereassociatedwithgreaterfeelingsofre-experiencing toryresponsesandthree‘don’tknow’responsestothe
and pre-experiencing, than temporally distant events other items. Control subjects provided correct
(cf. Trope & Liberman 2003). Furthermore, partici- responses to all questions regarding their personal
pants were more likely to adopt a field than observer pasts and futures. D. B.’s deficit in thinking about the
perspective for temporally close than temporally future seemed specific to his personal future: he had
distant events in both the past and the future. More little difficulty imagining possible futuredevelopments
recently, D’Argembeau & Van der Linden (2006) in the public domain (e.g. political events and issues),
extended these results by showing that individual performingsimilar tocontrolsubjects.Note,however,
differences in imagery ability and emotion regulation that many of the items concerning the public domain
strategiesaresimilarlyrelatedtopastandfutureevents. did not inquire about specific events, so the evidence
Overall,these results are consistent with the construc- forapersonal/publicdistinctionissomewhatequivocal.
tive episodic simulation hypothesis inasmuch as they Moreover, little information was provided concerning
highlight strong similarities between remembering the the precise location of D.B.’s lesion.
past and imagining the future. A more recent study by Hassabis et al. (2007)
examined the ability offive patients with documented
bilateral hippocampal amnesia to imagine new experi-
7.PASTANDFUTUREEVENTSINNEUROPSYCHO- ences.Patientsandmatchedcontrolsubjectswerecued
LOGICALANDPSYCHOPATHOLOGICALPATIENTS to construct everyday imaginary experiences such as
It is well known that patients with damage to the ‘Imagine you are lying on a white sandy beach in a
hippocampus and related structures in the MTL have beautiful tropical bay’. Subjects were specifically
impairmentsofepisodicmemory(e.g.Squireetal.2004). instructed not to provide a memory of a past event,
Phil.Trans.R.Soc.B(2007)
780 D. L.Schacter& D.R. Addis Constructive memoryin thehuman brain
buttoconstructsomethingnew.Participantsdescribed
elaboration of past and future events
their imaginaryscenariosinthepresenceofacuecard
to remind them of the task, and experimenters
occasionally probed subjects for further details and
elaboration. Protocols were scored based on the
content, spatial coherence and subjective qualities of
the participants’ imagined scenarios. Overall, the
constructionsofthehippocampalpatientsweregreatly
reduced in richness and content when compared with
those of controls. The impairment was especially past events future events
pronounced for the measure of spatial coherence,
indicating that the constructions of the hippocampal Figure 3. Common and distinct regions engaged by the
constructionandelaborationofpastandfutureevents(Addis
patients tended to consist of isolated fragments of
et al. 2007). A conjunction analysis of activity during the
informationrather than connected scenes.Fourofthe
constructionofpastandfutureeventsrevealedafewregions
fivepatientsshowedanimpairedabilitytoimaginenew
exhibiting common activity, such as left hippocampus and
experiences; the one patient who performed normally
right occipital gyrus (BA 19). Contrast analyses identified a
exhibited some residual hippocampal sparing that number of regions exhibiting differentially more activity for
might havesupported intact performance. future events, including the right frontal pole and hippo-
Inarelatedlineofresearch,DallaBarbaetal.(1997, campus.Theelaborationphasewasmarkedbystrikingoverlap
1999)havefoundthatpatientswhoconfabulateabout betweenpastandfutureevents,includinglefthippocampus,
their personal pasts also confabulate about their left temporal pole, bilateral parietal lobule (BA 39) and
personalfutures.Takentogether,thepatternofdeficits retrosplenialcortex.Plotsofpercentsignalchangeduringthe
in these patients suggests that imagining personal pastevent,futureeventandcontrol(semanticandimagery)
tasksarealsoshown.BA,Brodmannarea.
futureeventsmayinvolveprocesses aboveandbeyond
the general processes involved in constructing non-
wasevidenceofcommonMTLactivity,andOkudaetal.
personal events and generating images, and shares
interpreted this outcome as reflecting the retrieval of
common processeswith episodic remembering.
past eventsduring both tasks;as explicitly required by
Studies of another population exhibiting episodic
the past event task, and as arguably necessary for the
memory impairments—suicidally depressed individ-
uals—alsorevealcommonalitiesbetweenremembering simulation of future episodic events. The effect of
the past and imagining the future (Williams et al. temporaldistanceonneuralactivityinthesetworegions
1996).Whengivenwordcuesandinstructiontorecall wasalsoexamined,andremarkably,ineightoutofthe
an episode from the past or imagine a future episode, ninefocithesameneuralresponsetotemporaldistance
depressed patients showed reduced specificity in their (i.e. either an increase or a decrease with increasing
retrieval of both past and future autobiographical distance) was evident for both past and future events.
events. Importantly, the reduction in specificity of The only region exhibiting an interaction between
past and future events was significantly correlated. temporaldirection(i.e.pastversusfuture)anddistance
Moreover, Williams and colleagues demonstrated that (i.e. near versus distant) was an inferior region in left
in healthy individuals, manipulations that reduced the parahippocampalgyrus(BA36).Despitethesemarked
specificity of past events (e.g. instructions or cues similarities,Okudaetal.(2003)alsodemonstratedthat
whichinduceageneralretrievalstyle)alsoreducedthe right frontopolar activity exhibited strong positive
specificityof subsequently generated future events. correlationswiththeamountofintentionalinformation
producedduringthefuturetask,consistentwithstudies
implicatingthisregioninprospectivememory(Bechara
8.NEUROIMAGING OF PAST AND FUTURE etal.1994;Okudaetal.1998;Burgessetal.2001b).
EVENTS Although participants in this study talked about
Cognitive and patient studies provide evidence, theirpersonalpastorfuture,itisunclearwhetherthese
suggesting that retrieving past events and simulating events were episodic in nature, i.e. unique events
future eventsrelyon commonprocesses.Three recent specific in time and place (Tulving 1983), rather than
neuroimagingstudieshavedemonstratedthatpastand reflecting general or semantic information about one’s
future events engage common neural regions (Okuda past or future. Moreover, even if specific episodic
et al. 2003; Addis et al. 2007; Szpunar et al. 2007), eventswerelocalizablewithinaparticipant’snarrative,
providingfurthersupportfor theconstructiveepisodic the use of a block design, as necessitated by PET,
simulationhypothesis. prevented analysis of neural activity associated with
In the first of these studies, Okuda et al. (2003) specific events. Given that others have shown that
instructedparticipantstotalkfreelyabouttheirpastor specificityofpasteventscanalterneuralactivityduring
futureduringaPETscan,withtheonlyconstraintbeing retrieval(Addisetal.2004),thespecificityofeventsin
thetimeperiodtoreporton:eitherthenear(i.e.thelast Okuda et al.’s study, or lack thereof, may have
ornextfewdays)orthedistant(i.e.thelastornextfew influenced the pattern of results.
years)pastorfuture.Regardlessoftimeperiod,boththe More recent fMRI studies have attempted to
past and future conditions elicited shared activity in overcome this limitation using event-related designs
bilateralfrontopolarcortex,probablyreflectingtheself- to yield information regarding the neural bases of
referentialnatureofbothtypesofeventrepresentations specific past and future events. For instance, Szpunar
(Craiketal.1999;Gusnardetal.2001).Further,there et al. (2007) instructed participants to remember
Phil.Trans.R.Soc.B(2007)
commonalities
commonalities
R. BA 19 L. hippocampus
differences
L. BA 39 L. retrosplenial
R. frontal poleR. hippocampus
past event task future event task semantic and imagery control tasks
specific past events, imagine specific future events or during which participants generated as much detail as
imagine specific events involving a familiar individual possible about the event (for related evidence from an
(Bill Clinton) in response to event cues (e.g. past electrophysiological study of remembered and ima-
birthday, retirement party). Again, there was striking ginedeventsthatalsodistinguishedbetweenconstruc-
overlap in activity associated with past and future tion and elaboration phases, see Conway et al. 2003).
events in the bilateral frontopolar and MTL regions We argued that specific cognitive processes contribut-
reported by Okuda et al. (2003), as well as posterior ing to the completion of such past and future tasks
cingulate cortex. Importantly, these regions were not could be differentially engaged during the different
activated to the same magnitude when imagining phases of the task. Thus, if a particular neural
events involving Bill Clinton, demonstrating a neural difference between past and future events is only
signaturethatisuniquetotheconstructionofeventsin evidentduringonephase,collapsingacrossbothphases
one’s personal past or future and is not shared by the in a block design or sampling neural activity during
constructionofeventrepresentationsperse.Thisresult another phase in an event-related design could
dovetailswiththesuggestivefindingsconsideredearlier potentially obscure such differences. The same logic
from amnesic patients who cannot remember or alsoappliestothesearchforcommonneuralactivity,if
imagine events in their personal past or future despite the common network is engaged during only one, but
some ability to remember and imagine non-personal not another, phase of the task. Furthermore, we
information.Together,thesedatasuggestthatthereisa confirmed that past and future events were of
core network of neural structures that commonly equivalent phenomenology with both objective and
supports the generation of event representations from subjectivemeasures,thusenablingtheinterpretationof
one’s personal past or future, in line with the past–future differences as reflecting differences in
constructiveepisodicsimulation hypothesis. temporal orientation and engagement of task-specific
A direct comparison of activity associated with past processes. We compared activity during the past and
and future events identified several regions that were future tasks with control tasks that required semantic
significantly more active for future relative to past and imageryprocessing,respectively.
events, including bilateral premotor cortex and left Consistentwiththeconstructiveepisodicsimulation
precuneus. The authors argue that this pattern of hypothesis, there was indeed striking overlap between
findings may reflect a more active type of imagery the past and future tasks. This overlap was most
processing required by future events. One must not apparent during the elaboration phase, when partici-
only construct and maintain the image, but also pants are focused on generating details about the
manipulate the image to create anovel scenario. remembered or imagined event (figures 3 and 4). For
In a study from our laboratory, Addis et al. (2007) instance,botheventtypeswereassociatedwithactivity
dividedthepastandfuturetasksintotwophases:(i)an in left anterior temporal cortex, a region thought to
initial construction phase during which participants mediateconceptualandsemanticinformationaboutthe
generatedapastorfutureeventinresponsetoanevent self and one’s life (e.g. familiar people, common
cue (e.g. ‘dress’) and made a button press when they activities, Graham et al. 2003; Addis et al. 2004).
had an event in mind and (ii) an elaboration phase Event representations also contained episodic and
egatnecrep
egatnecrep
egatnecrep
egatnecrep
Constructivememoryin thehuman brain D. L.Schacter & D.R. Addis 781
common and distinct neural regions engaged by past and future events
construction phase elaboration phase
L. temporal pole L. hippocampus
Figure4.Sagittalslice(xZK4)illustratingthestrikingcommonalitiesinthemedialleftprefrontalandparietalregionsengaged
when (a) remembering the past and (b) imagining the future (adapted from Addis et al. 2007). These marked similarities of
activation were also evident in areas of the medial temporal lobe (bilateral parahippocampal gyrus) and lateral cortex (left
temporalpoleandleftbilateralinferiorparietalcortex).Thisextensivepatternofcommonactivitywasnotpresentduringthe
constructionofpastandfutureevents(figure4);itonlyemergedduringtheelaborationoftheseevents(shownhere,relativeto
elaborationphaseofasemanticandanimagerycontroltask).
Phil.Trans.R.Soc.B(2007)
782 D. L.Schacter& D.R. Addis Constructive memoryin thehuman brain
contextual imagery, perhaps related to activation of simulatingfutureeventsspecificallyreflecttherequire-
precuneus (e.g. Fletcher et al. 1995) and parahippo- ment to imagine a future event, as opposed to general
campal/retrosplenial cortices (e.g. Bar & Aminoff imaginings that are not linked to a particular time
2003), respectively. There was commonactivity in the frame? A critical task for research in this area is to
left frontopolar cortex, reflecting the self-referential attempt to distinguish between the specifically
natureofpastandfutureevents(e.g.Craiketal.1999), temporal component of episodic simulations and
and in the left hippocampus, possibly reflecting the more general imaginative activity.
retrieval and/or integration of additional event details
into the representation. Interestingly, this common
past–future network is remarkably similar to the net- 9.CONCLUDING COMMENTS
workconsistentlyimplicatedintheretrievalofepisodic Muchresearchhasfocusedonelucidatingtheconstruc-
tivenatureofepisodicmemory,andagrowingnumberof
memories of past autobiographical events (Maguire
recentinvestigationshaverecognizedthecloserelation-
2001), again consistent with the constructive episodic
ship between remembering the past and imagining the
simulationhypothesis.
future. However, the possible relationship between
The construction phase was associated with some
constructive memory and past–future issues remains
common past–future activity in posterior visual
almost entirely unexplored. A major purpose of the
regions and left hippocampus, which may reflect the
present paper is to emphasize that this relationship
initial interaction between visually presented cues and
constitutes a promising area for research (see also,
hippocampally mediated pointers to memory traces
Suddendorf & Corballis 1997; Dudai & Carruthers
(Moscovitch 1992). Even so, this phase was charac-
2005; Hassabis et al. 2007). For example, according to
terizedbyconsiderableneuraldifferentiationofpastand
theconstructiveepisodicsimulationhypothesis,itshould
future events. In particular, higher levels of activity
bepossibletodocumentadirectlinkbetweenprocesses
during the future task were evident in the right
underlying memory distortion and those underlying
frontopolar cortex, consistent with the association of
mental simulations of the future. It is already well
this region with prospective memory (Burgess et al.
known that imagining experiences can result invarious
2001b; see also Burgess et al. 2007), and in the left
kinds of memory distortions (e.g. Johnson et al. 1988,
inferior frontal gyrus, a region mediating generative
1993; Garryetal. 1996; Goff & Roediger 1998; Loftus
processing (Poldrack et al. 1999). Furthermore, the
2003); we think it will be quite informative to focus
right hippocampus was differentially engaged by the
specificallyonthelinkbetweenimaginingfutureevents
futureeventtask,whichmayreflectthenoveltyoffuture
andmemorydistortion.Indeed,thescopeofthisresearch
eventsand/oradditionalrelational processing required
is probably even broader than that covered here. In a
when one must recombine disparate details into a
thoughtful review that elucidates the relationship
coherent event. This latter finding fits nicely with the
between,andneuralbasisof,rememberingthepastand
observations noted earlier from Hassabis et al.(2007),
thinking about the future, Buckner & Carroll (2007)
indicating that hippocampal amnesics have difficulty
point out that neural regions that show common
imaginingnewexperiences:thehippocampusmayplay
activation for past and future tasks closely resemble
akeyroleinrecombiningdetailsofpreviousexperiences
those that are activated during ‘theory of mind’ tasks,
intoacoherentnewimaginedconstruction.
where individuals simulate the mental states of other
Notably, in all regions exhibiting significant past–
people(e.g.Saxe&Kanwisher2003).Buckner&Carroll
future differences, future events were associated with
note that such findings suggest that the commonly
more activity than past events, as also observed by
activated regions may be ‘specialized for, and engaged
Szpunar et al. (2007). We propose that this apparent
by, mental acts that require the projection of oneself in
regularityacrossneuralregionsandacrossstudiesreflects
another time, place, or perspective’, resembling what
the more intensive constructive processes required by
Tulving(1985)referredtoasautonoeticconsciousness.
imaginingfutureeventsrelativetoretrievingpastevents.
Such observations highlight the importance ofthinking
Bothpastandfutureeventtasksrequiretheretrievalof
broadly about the functions of episodic memory in
information from memory, engaging common memory
constructingourpersonalandsocialworlds.
networks. However, only the future task requires that
eventdetailsgleanedfromvariouspasteventsareflexibly
Preparation of this paper was supported by grants from the
recombined intoa novel futureevent and, further, that NIA(AG08441)andNIMH(MH060941).WethankMoshe
this event is plausible given one’s intentions for the Bar,RandyBuckner,DanGilbert,ItamarKahn,JasonMitchell
future. Thus, additional regions supporting these andGaganWigforcommentsonthepaper,andAlanaWongfor
processesarerecruitedbythefutureeventtask. invaluableaidinpreparationofthemanuscript.
Many questions remain to be addressed regarding
the nature of brain activity related to past and future REFERENCES
events.Forexample,someoftheregionsthatwefound Addis,D.R.,McIntosh,A.R.,Moscovitch,M.,Crawley,A.P.
to be strongly activated when people imagine future & McAndrews, M. P. 2004 Characterizing spatial and
temporal features of autobiographical memory retrieval
events, including hippocampus and parahippocampal
networks:apartialleastsquaresapproach.Neuroimage23,
cortex,havebeenlinkedwithimageryforspatialscenes
(e.g. Burgess et al. 2001a; Byrne et al. in press).
Addis, D. R., Wong, A. T. & Schacter, D. L. 2007
According to the constructive episodic simulation
Rememberingthepastandimaginingthefuture:common
hypothesis, the adaptive nature of such activity is and distinct neural substrates during event construction
But to what extent do the activations associated with 1016/j.neuropsychologia.2006.10.016)
Phil.Trans.R.Soc.B(2007)
Constructivememoryin thehuman brain D. L.Schacter & D.R. Addis 783
Anderson, J. R. & Schooler, L. J. 1991 Reflections of the Burgess,P.W.,Sam,J.G.&Dumontheil,I.2007Function
Atance, C. M. & O’Neill, D. K. 2001 Episodic future rstb.2007.2095)
S1364-6613(00)01804-0) thepastandimaginingthefuture:aneuralmodelofspatial
Atance, C. M. & O’Neill, D. K. 2005 The emergence of memoryandimagery.Psychol.Rev.
episodic future thinking in humans. Learn. Motiv. 36, Cabeza, R., Rao, S. M., Wagner, A. D., Mayer, A. R. &
Balota, D. A., Cortese, M. J., Duchek, J. M., Adams, D., distinguish true from false? An event-related fMRI study
Roediger, H. L., McDermott, K. B. & Yerys, B. E. of veridical and illusory recognition memory. Proc. Natl
adults and in dementia of the Alzheimer’s type. Cogn. 081082698)
380834) When true memory availability promotes false memory:
Bar, M. & Aminoff, E. 2003 Cortical analysis of visual evidence from confabulating patients. Neuropsychologia
(03)00167-3) 02.008)
Bartlett, F. C. 1932 Remembering. Cambridge, UK: Conway,M.A.,Pleydall-Pearce,C.W.,Whitecross,S.E.&
CambridgeUniversityPress. Sharpe,H.2003Neurophysiologicalcorrelatesofmemory
forexperiencedandimaginedevents.Neuropsychologia41,
Bechara,A.,Damasio,A.R.,Damasio,H.&Anderson,S.W.
1994 Insensitivity to future consequences following
Craik, F. I., Moroz, T. M., Moscovitch, M., Stuss, D. T.,
damage to human prefrontal cortex. Cognition 50, 7–15.
Winocur, G.,Tulving, E. & Kapur, S. 1999 In search of
the self: a positron emission tomography study. Psychol.
Bjork,R.A.&Bjork,E.L.1988Ontheadaptiveaspectsof
retrieval failure in autobiographical memory. In Practical
Dab, S., Claes, T., Morais, J. & Shallice, T. 1999
aspects of memory: current research and issues (eds M. M.
Confabulationwithaselectivedescriptorprocessimpair-
Gruneberg,P.E.Morris&R.N.Sykes).Chichester,UK:
Wiley.
026432999380771)
Brainerd, C. J. & Reyna, V. F. 1998 When things that were
DallaBarba,G.,Cappelletti,Y.J.,Signorini,M.&Denes,G.
never experienced are easier to “remember” than things
1997 Confabulation: remembering “another” past, plan-
9280.00089)
1093/neucas/3.6.425)
Brainerd,C.J.&Reyna,V.F.2005Thescienceoffalsememory.
DallaBarba,G.,Nedjam,Z.&Dubois,B.1999Confabula-
NewYork,NY:OxfordUniversityPress.
tion, executive functions, and source memory in Alzhei-
Brandimonte,M.,Einstein,G.O.&McDaniel,M.A.1996
Prospective memory: theory and applications. Mahwah, NJ:
1080/026432999380843)
Erlbaum.
D’Argembeau,A. &Vander Linden, M. 2004Phenomenal
Buckner,R.L.&Carroll,D.C.2007Self-projectionandthe
characteristicsassociatedwithprojectingoneselfbackinto
thepastandforwardintothefuture:influenceofvalence
2006.11.004)
and temporal distance. Conscious. Cogn. 13, 844–858.
Budson,A.E.,Daffner,K.R.,Desikan,R.&Schacter,D.L.
2000 When false recognition is unopposed by true
D’Argembeau, A. & Van der Linden, M. 2006 Individual
recognition: gist-based memorydistortioninAlzheimer’s
differences in the phenomenology of mental time travel.
4105.14.2.277)
2005.09.001)
Budson,A.E.,Desikan,R.,Daffner,K.R.&Schacter,D.L.
Deese,J.1959Onthepredictionofoccurrenceofparticular
2001 Perceptual false recognition in Alzheimer’s disease.
verbal intrusions inimmediate recall. J. Exp.Psychol. 58,
15.2.230) Delbecq-Derouesne´,J.,Beauvois,M.F.&Shallice,T.1990
Budson, A. E., Sullivan, A. L., Daffner, K. R. & Schacter, Preserved recall versus impaired recognition. Brain 113,
D.L.2003Semanticversusphonologicalfalserecognition 1045–1074.
in aging and Alzheimer’s disease. Brain Cogn. 51, Dudai, Y. & Carruthers, M. 2005 The Janus face of
Budson,A.E.,Todman,R.W.&Schacter,D.L.2006Gist Einstein,G.O.&McDaniel,M.A.1990Normalagingand
memoryinAlzheimer’sdisease:evidencefromcategorized prospective memory. J. Exp. Psychol. Learn. Mem. Cogn.
0894-4105.20.1.113) Fletcher,P.,Frith,C.,Baker,S.C.,Shallice,T.,Frackowiak,
Burgess, P. W. & Shallice, T. 1996 Confabulation and the R. S. & Dolan, R. 1995 The mind’s eye—precuneus
Burgess, N., Becker, S., King, J. A. & O’Keefe, J. 2001a Fuster, J. M. 1989 The prefrontal cortex: anatomy, physiology,
Memoryforeventsandtheir spatialcontext:modelsand andthefrontallobe.NewYork,NY:RavenPress.
experiments. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B 356, 1493–1503. Gallo, D. A. 2006 Associative illusions of memory. New York,
Burgess,P.W.,Quayle,A.&Frith,C.D.2001bBrainregions Garoff-Eaton, R. J., Slotnick, S. D. & Schacter, D. L. 2006
involvedinprospectivememoryasdeterminedbypositron Notallfalsememoriesarecreatedequal:theneuralbasis
Phil.Trans.R.Soc.B(2007)
784 D. L.Schacter& D.R. Addis Constructive memoryin thehuman brain
Garry, M., Manning, C. G.,Loftus, E.F. &Sherman, S. J. Maguire, E. A. 2001 Neuroimaging studies of autobiogra-
1996 Imagination inflation: Imagining a childhood event phical event memory. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B 356,
208–214. Mather,M.,Henkel,L.A.&Johnson,M.K.1997Evaluating
Gilbert, D. T. 2006 Stumbling on happiness. New York, NY: characteristics of false memories: remember/know judg-
AlfredA.Knopf. mentsandmemorycharacteristicsquestionnairecompared.
Gilboa, A., Alain, C., Stuss, D. T., Melo, B., Miller, S. & Mem.Cogn.25,826–837.
Moscovitch, M. 2006 Mechanisms of spontaneous Marr,D.1971Simplememory:atheoryforarchicortex.Phil.
distortions:aparallel-distributedprocessingapproach.In
Goff,L.M.&Roediger,H.L.1998Imaginationinflationfor
Memorydistortion:howminds,brainsandsocietiesreconstruct
action events: repeated imaginings lead to illusory
thepast(ed.D.L.Schacter),pp.69–90.Cambridge,MA:
recollections.Mem.Cogn.26,20–33.
HarvardUniversityPress.
Goschke, T. & Kuhl, J. 1993 The representation of
McClelland, J. L., McNaughton, B. L. & O’Reilley, R. C.
intentions: persisting activation in memory. J. Exp.
1995 Why there are complementary learning systems in
the hippocampus and neocortex: insights from the
1037/0278-7393.19.5.1211)
successesandfailuresofconnectionistmodelsoflearning
Graham,K. S.,Lee,A.C.,Brett,M.&Patterson,K.2003
The neural basis of autobiographical and semantic
0033-295X.102.3.419)
memory: new evidence from three PET studies. Cogn.
McDermott, K. B. 1997 Priming on perceptual implicit
Affect.Behav.Neurosci.3,234–254.
memory test can be achieved through presentation of
Gusnard, D. A., Akbudak, E., Shulman, G. L. & Raichle,
associates.Psychon.Bull.Rev.4,582–586.
M. E. 2001 Medial prefrontal cortex and self-referential
McKone, E. & Murphy, B. 2000 Implicit false memory:
mental activity: relation to a default mode of brain
effects of modality and multiple study presentations on
function. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 98, 4259–4264.
long lived semantic priming. J. Mem. Lang. 43, 89–109.
Hancock, P. A. 2005 Time and the privileged observer. Melo, B., Winocur, G. & Moscovitch, M. 1999 False
8744) effects of selective and combined lesions to the medial
Hassabis, D., Kumaran, D., Vann, S. D. & Maguire, E. A. temporal lobe/diencephalon and frontal lobe structures.
new experiences. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 104, 999380825)
Ingvar,D.H.1985‘Memoryofthefuture’:anessayon the ing the default mode through contingent encoding. In
temporal organization of conscious awareness. Hum. Principles offrontal Lobe function (eds D. T. Stuss & R. T.
Neurobiol.4,127–136. Knight), pp. 8–30. New York, NY: Oxford University
Johnson, M. K. 1991 Reality monitoring: evidence from Press.
confabulation in organic brain disease patients. In Miller,M.B.&Wolford,G.L.1999Theroleofcriterionshift
issues(edsG.P.Prigatano&D.L.Schacter),pp.176–197. 1037/0033-295X.106.2.398)
NewYork,NY:OxfordUniversityPress. Morewedge,C.K.,Gilbert,D.T.&Wilson,T.D.2005The
Johnson,M.K.,Foley,M.A.,Suengas,A.G.&Raye,C.L. least likely of times: how remembering the past biases
ceived and imagined autobiographical events. J. Exp. 1111/j.1467-9280.2005.01585.x)
Moscovitch,M.1992Memoryandworking-with-memory:a
componentprocessmodelbasedonmodulesandcentral
117.4.371)
systems.J.Cogn.Neurosci.4,257–267.
Johnson,M.K.,Hashtroudi,S.&Lindsey,D.S.1993Source
Moscovitch, M. 1995 Confabulation. In Memory distortion:
howminds,brains,andsocietiesreconstructthepast(ed.D.L.
2909.114.1.3)
Schacter), pp. 226–254. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
Kahn, I., Davachi, L. & Wagner, A. D. 2004 Functional-
UniversityPress.
neuroanatomiccorrelatesofrecollection:implicationsfor
Moulin,C.J.A.,Conway,M.A.,Thompson,R.G.,James,
models of recognition memory. J. Neurosci. 24,
N. & Jones, R. W. 2005 Disordered memory awareness:
recollective confabulation in two cases of persistent deja
Klein, S. B. & Loftus, J. 2002 Memory and temporal
experience: the effects of episodic memory loss on an
j.neuropsychologia.2004.12.008)
amnesic patient’s ability to remember the past and
Norman, K. A. & O’Reilly, R. C. 2003 Modeling hippo-
campal and neocortical contributions to recognition
1521/soco.20.5.353.21125)
memory: a complementary learning systems approach.
Koutstaal,W.,Schacter,D.L.,Verfaellie,M.,Brenner,C.&
Jackson,E.M.1999Perceptually-basedfalserecognition 110.4.611)
of novel objects in amnesia: effects of category size and Norman, K. A. & Schacter, D. L. 1996 Implicit memory,
similarity toprototype. Cogn. Neuropsychol. 16, 317–342. explicit memory, and false recollection: a cognitive
Loftus, E. F. 1993 The reality of repressed memories. Am. nition (ed. L. M. Reder), pp. 229–257. Hillsdale, NJ:
518) Norman,K.A.&Schacter,D.L.1997Falserecognitionin
Loftus,E.F.2003Make-believememories.Am.Psychol.58, young and older adults: exploring the characteristics of
Phil.Trans.R.Soc.B(2007)
Constructivememoryin thehuman brain D. L.Schacter & D.R. Addis 785
Okuda, J., Fujii, T., Yamadori, A., Kawashima, R., Schacter, D. L., Cendan, D. L., Dodson, C. S. & Clifford,
Tsukiura, T., Fukatsu, R., Suzuki, K., Itoh, M. & E. R. 2001 Retrieval conditions and false recognition:
Fukuda, H. 1998 Participation of the prefrontal cortices testing the distinctiveness heuristic. Psychon. Bull. Rev.
in prospective memory: evidence from a PET study in 8, 827–833.
S0304-3940(98)00628-4) Specificity of priming: a cognitive neuroscience perspec-
roles of the frontal pole and the medial temporal lobes. nrn1534)
(03)00179-4) adaptation of thought to ongoing reality. Nat. Rev.
1348/000712602162562) processes and the temporal organization of behaviour.
Glover, G. H. & Gabrieli, J. D. 1999 Functional 1996.0124)
specialization for semantic and phonological processing Slotnick, S. D. & Dodson, C. S. 2005 Support for a
intheleftinferiorprefrontalcortex.Neuroimage10,15–35. continuous(single-process)modelofrecognitionmemory
Roediger, H. L. & McDermott, K. B. 1995 Creating false Slotnick, S. D. & Schacter, D. L. 2004 A sensory signature
memories: remembering words not presented in lists.
thatdistinguishestruefromfalsememories.Nat.Neurosci.
1037/0278-7393.21.4.803)
Slotnick, S. D. & Schacter, D. L. 2006 The nature of
Rosenbaum,R.S.,Kohler,S.,Schacter,D.L.,Moscovitch,
memory related activity in early visual areas. Neuropsy-
M., Westmacott, R., Black, S. E., Gao, F. & Tulving, E.
2005 The case of K. C.: contributions of a memory-
2006.06.021)
impaired person to memory theory. Neuropsychologia
Squire,L.R.,Stark,C.E.&Clark,R.E.2004Themedial
1146/annurev.neuro.27.070203.144130)
Saxe, R. & Kanwisher, N. 2003 People thinking about
Stuss,D.T.&Benson,D.F.1986Thefrontallobes.NewYork,
thinkingpeople.Theroleofthetemporo-parietaljunction
NY:RavenPress.
Suddendorf, T. & Busby, J. 2003 Mental time travel in
1016/S1053-8119(03)00230-1)
Schacter,D.L.1999Thesevensinsofmemory:insightsfrom
S1364-6613(03)00187-6)
psychology and cognitive neuroscience. Am. Psychol. 54,
Suddendorf,T.&Busby,J.2005Makingdecisionswiththe
future in mind: developmental and comparative identifi-
Schacter,D.L.2001Theseven sinsofmemory:how themind
cation of mental time travel. Learn. Motiv. 36, 110–125.
forgets and remembers. Boston, MA; New York, NY:
HoughtonMifflin.
Suddendorf,T.&Corballis,M.C.1997Mentaltimetravel
Schacter,D.L.&Addis,D.R.2007.Theghostsofpastand
and the evolution of the human mind. Genet. Soc. Gen.
Psychol.Monogr.123,133–167.
Schacter, D. L. & Slotnick, S. D. 2004 The cognitive
Szpunar, K. K., Watson, J. M. & McDermott, K. B. 2007
neuroscienceofmemorydistortion.Neuron44,149–160.
Neural substrates of envisioning the future. Proc. Natl
Schacter, D. L., Curran, T., Galluccio, L., Milberg, W. &
0610082104)
Bates, J. 1996a False recognition and the right frontal
Thompson, R. F. 2005 In search of memory traces. Annu.
1016/0028-3932(95)00165-4)
091103.070239)
Schacter, D. L., Reiman, E., Curran, T., Sheng Yun, L.,
Trope,Y.&Liberman,N.2003Temporalconstrual.Psychol.
Bandy, D., McDermott, K. B. & Roediger, H. L. 1996b
Neuroanatomical correlates of veridical and illusory Rev.110,401–421.
recognition memory: evidence from positron emission Tulving, E. 1983 Elements of episodic memory. Oxford, UK:
6273(00)80158-0) Tulving, E.1985 Memory and consciousness. Can. Psychol.
Schacter, D. L., Verfaellie, M. & Pradere, D. 1996c The 26,1–12.
neuropsychology of memory illusions: false recall and Tulving, E. 2002 Episodic memory: from mind to brain.
Schacter,D.L.,Verfaellie,M.&Anes,M.D.1997Illusory Tulving, E. 2005 Episodic memory and autonoesis:
memoriesinamnesicpatients:conceptualandperceptual uniquely human? In The missing link in cognition:
1037/0894-4105.11.3.331) & J. Metcalfe), pp. 3–56. New York, NY: Oxford
Schacter,D.L.,Norman,K.A.&Koutstaal,W.1998aThe University Press.
cognitive neuroscience of constructive memory. Annu. Tulving, E., Schacter, D. L., McLachlan, D. R. &
49.1.289) graphical knowledge: a case study of retrograde
When true recognition suppresses false recognition: (88)90035-8)
evidence from amnesic patients. J. Cogn. Neurosci. 10, Verfaellie,M.,Schacter,D.L.&Cook,S.P.2002Theeffect
Phil.Trans.R.Soc.B(2007)
786 D. L.Schacter& D.R. Addis Constructive memoryin thehuman brain
nature of the gist memory impairment in amnesia. people: “Seeing film stars everywhere”. Cogn. Neuropsy-
3932(02)00074-X) Williams,J.M.,Ellis,N.C.,Tyers,C.,Healy,H.,Rose,G.&
Verfaellie,M.,Page,K.,Orlando,F.&Schacter,D.L.2005 MacLeod,A.K.1996Thespecificityofautobiographical
Impairedimplicitmemoryforgistinformationinamnesia. memory and imageability of the future. Mem. Cogn. 24,
19.6.760) Wixted,J.T.&Stretch,V.2000Thecaseagainstacriterion-
Ward,J.,Parkin,A.J.,Powell,G.,Squires,E.J.,Townshend, shiftaccountoffalsememory.Psychol.Rev.107,368–376.
Phil.Trans.R.Soc.B(2007)