]ics-lrtm.tam-dnoc[
1v30300.6051:viXra
The AFLOW Standard for High-Throughput Materials
Science Calculations
CamiloE.Calderon1,JoseJ.Plata1,CormacToher1,CoreyOses1,OhadLevy1,†,
MarcoFornari2,AmirNatan3,MichaelJ.Mehl4,GusHart5,MarcoBuongiorno
Nardelli6,StefanoCurtarolo7,⋆
1DepartmentofMechanicalEngineeringandMaterialsScience,DukeUniversity,Durham,North
Carolina27708,USA
2DepartmentofPhysics,CentralMichiganUniversity,MountPleasant,MI48858,USA
3DepartmentOfPhysicsAndElectricalEngineering&Electronics,FacultyofEngineering,Tel
AvivUniversity,TelAviv69978,Israel
4CenterforComputationalMaterialsScience,NavalResearchLaboratory,Washington,DC
20375-5345,USA
5DepartmentofPhysicsandAstronomy,BrighamYoungUniversity,Provo,Utah84602,USA
6DepartmentofPhysicsandDepartmentofChemistry,UniversityofNorthTexas,DentonTX
7MaterialsScience,ElectricalEngineering,PhysicsandChemistry,DukeUniversity,DurhamNC,
†OnleavefromthePhysicsDepartment,NRCN,Israel
⋆corresponding:stefano@duke.edu
The Automatic-Flow (AFLOW) standard for the high-throughput construction of
materials science electronic structure databases is described. Electronic structure
calculations ofsolidstatematerialsdependonalargenumberofparameterswhich
must be understood by researchers, and must be reported by originators to ensure
reproducibilityandenablecollaborativedatabaseexpansion. Wethereforedescribe
standardparametervaluesfork-pointgriddensity, basissetplanewavekineticen-
ergy cut-off, exchange-correlation functionals, pseudopotentials, DFT+Uparame-
ters,andconvergence criteria usedinAFLOWcalculations.
Keywords: High-throughput, materialsgenomics, AFLOWLIB,VASP
PreprintsubmittedtoComputationalMaterialsScience June2,2015
1. Introduction
The emergence of computational materials science over the last two decades
has been inextricably linked to the development of complex quantum-mechanical
codesthatenableaccurateevaluationoftheelectronicandthermodynamicproper-
ties of a wide range of materials. The continued advancement of this field entails
the construction of large open databases of materials properties that can be eas-
ily reproduced and extended. One obstacle to the reproducibility of the data is
the unavoidable complexity of the codes used to obtain it. Published data usually
includes basic information about theunderlying calculations that allows rough re-
production. However, exact duplication depends on many details, that are seldom
reported, andistherefore difficulttoachieve.
Thesedifficultiesmightlimittheutilityofthedatabasescurrentlybeingcreated
by high-throughput frameworks, such as AFLOW[1–3] and the Materials Project
[4,5]. Formaximalimpact,thedatastoredintheserepositories mustbegenerated
and represented in a consistent and robust manner, and shared through standard-
ized calculation and communication protocols. Following these guidelines would
promoteoptimaluseoftheresultsgenerated bytheentirecommunity.
The AFLOW (Automatic FLOW) code is a framework for high-throughput
computational materials discovery [1–3, 6], using separate DFT packages to cal-
culate electronic structure andoptimize theatomic geometry. TheAFLOWframe-
work workswiththeVASP[7–10]DFTpackage, and integration withtheQuantum
ESPRESSOsoftware[11]iscurrentlyinprogress. TheAFLOWframeworkincludes
preprocessing functions for generating input files for the DFT package; obtaining
theinitialgeometricstructuresbyextractingtherelevantdatafromcrystallographic
informationfilesorbygenerating themusinginbuiltprototypedatabases, andthen
transforming them into standard forms which are easiest to calculate. It then runs
andmonitorstheDFTcalculations automatically, detecting andresponding tocal-
culationfailures,whethertheyareduetoinsufficienthardwareresourcesortorun-
timeerrorsoftheDFTcalculation itself. Finally, AFLOWcontains postprocessing
routines to extract specific properties from the results of one or more of the DFT
calculations, suchasthebandstructure orthermalproperties [12].
The AFLOWLIB repository [2, 3, 6] was built according to these principles
of consistency and reproducibility, and the data it contains can be easily accessed
througharepresentationalstatetransferapplicationprogramminginterface(REST-
API) [3]. In this paper we present a detailed description of the AFLOW standard
for high-throughput (HT) materials science calculations by which the data in this
repository wascreated.
2. AFLOWCalculationTypes
TheAFLOWLIBconsortium[2]repository isdivided intodatabases containing
calculatedpropertiesofover625,000materials: theBinaryAlloyProject,theElec-
tronic Structure database, theHeusler database, andtheElementsdatabase. These
are freely accessible online via the AFLOWLIB website[6], as well as through the
API[3]. TheElectronicStructuredatabaseconsistsofentriesfoundintheInorganic
CrystalStructuresDatabase, ICSD[13,14],andwillthusbereferredtoas“ICSD”
throughout thispublication. TheHeusler database consists ofternary compounds,
primarily based on the Heusler structure but with other structure types now being
added.
The high-throughput construction of these materials databases relies on apre-
defined set of standard calculation types. These are designed to accommodate
the interest in various properties of a given material (e.g. the ground state ionic
configuration, thermodynamic quantities, electronic and magnetic properties), the
program flow of the HT framework that envelopes the DFT portions of the cal-
culations, aswellasthepractical need forcomputational robustness. TheAFLOW
standardthusdealswiththeparametersinvolvedinthefollowingcalculationtypes:
i. RELAX.GeometryoptimizationsusingalgorithmsimplementedwithintheDFT
package. This calculation type is concerned with obtaining the ionic config-
uration and cell shape and volume that correspond to a minimum in the total
energy. It consists of two sequential relaxation steps. The starting point for
thefirststep,RELAX1,canbeanentrytakenfromanexternalsource,suchasa
libraryofalloyprototypes[15,16],theICSDdatabase,orthePaulingFile[17].
Theseinitialentriesarepreprocessed byAFLOW,andcastintoaunitcellthat
is most convenient for calculation, usually the standard primitive cell, in the
formatappropriatefortheDFTpackageinuse. Thesecondstep,RELAX2,uses
thefinalionicpositions fromthefirststepasitsstarting point, andservesasa
type ofannealing step. Thisis used forjumping outof possible local minima
resultingfromwavefunction artifacts.
ii. STATIC. A single-point energy calculation. The starting point is the set of
final ionic positions, as produced by the RELAX2 step. The outcome of this
calculation is used in the determination of most of the thermodynamic and
electronic properties included in the various AFLOW databases. It therefore
applies amoredemanding setofparameters thanthose usedontheRELAXset
ofruns.
iii. BANDS. Electronic band structure generation. The converged STATIC charge
density and ionic positions are used as the starting points, and the wavefunc-
tionsarereoptimizedalongstandardized highsymmetrylinesconnecting spe-
cialk-points intheirreducible Brillouin zone(IBZ)[18].
These calculation types are performed in the order shown above (i.e. RELAX1
→ RELAX2 → STATIC → BANDS) on all materials found in the Elements, ICSD,
and Heusler databases. Those found in the Binary Alloy database contain data
producedonlybythetwoRELAXcalculations. Setsofthesecalculationtypescanbe
combinedtodescribemorecomplexphenomenathancanbeobtainedfromasingle
calculation. Forexample, sets ofRELAXandSTATICcalculations fordifferent cell
volumesand/oratomicconfigurationsareusedtocalculatethermalandmechanical
properties by the AGL [12] and APL [1] methods inplemented within the AFLOW
framework. In the following, we describe the parameter sets used to address the
particular challenges ofthecalculations included ineachAFLOWrepository.
3. TheAFLOWstandardparameterset
The standard parameters described in this work are classified according to the
wide variety of tasks that a typical solid state DFTcalculation involves: Brillouin
zone sampling, Fourier transform meshes, basis sets, potentials, self-interaction
error (SIE) corrections, electron spin, algorithms guiding SCF convergence and
ionicrelaxation, andoutputoptions.
Due to the intrinsic complexity of the DFT codes it is impractical to specify
the full set of DFT calculation parameters within an HT framework. Therefore,
the AFLOW standard adopts many, but not all, of the internal defaults set by the
DFTsoftwarepackage. ThisismostnotableinthedescriptionoftheFouriertrans-
form meshes, which rely on a discretization scheme that depends on the applied
basis and crystal geometry forits specification. Thoseinternal default settings are
cast aside when error corrections offailed DFTruns, anintegral part ofAFLOW’s
functionality, take place. Thesettings described inthis workare nevertheless pre-
scribed as fully as is practicable, in the interest of providing as much information
aspossibletoanyoneinterested inreproducing orbuilding onourresults.
3.1. k-pointsampling
Two approaches are used when sampling the IBZ: the first consists of uni-
formly distributing a large number of k-points in the IBZ, while the second relies
on the construction of paths connecting high symmetry (special) k-points in the
IBZ. Within AFLOW, the second sampling method corresponds to the BANDS cal-
culationtype,whereastheothercalculationtypes(non-BANDS)areperformedusing
thefirstsamplingmethod.
Samplinginnon-BANDScalculationsisobtainedbydefiningandsettingN ,
the number of k-points per atom. This quantity determines the total number of k-
points in the IBZ, taking into account the k-points density along each reciprocal
latticevectoraswellasthenumberofatomsinthesimulationcell,viatherelation:
N ≤ min N ×N (1)
i a
N isthenumberofatomsinthecell, andthe N factors correspond tothenumber
of sampling points along each reciprocal lattice vector, b~, respectively. These
factorsdefinethegridresolution,δkkb~k/N ,whichismadeasuniformaspossible
under the constraint of Eqn. 1. The k-point meshes are then generated within the
Monkhorst-Pack scheme[19],unless thematerialbelongs tothehP,orhRBravais
lattices, inwhichcasethehexagonal symmetryispreservedbycentering themesh
attheΓ-point.
Default N values depend on the calculation type and the database. The
N values used for the entries in the Elements database are material specific
and set manually due to convergence of the total energy calculation. The defaults
applied to the RELAX and STATIC calculations are summarized in Table 1. These
defaults ensure proper convergence of the calculations. They may be too strin-
gentforsomecasesbutenable reliable application withintheHTframework, thus
presenting apracticable balance betweenaccuracy andcalculation cost.
Database STATIC RELAX
BinaryAlloy N.A. 6000
Heusler 10000 6000
ICSD 10000 8000
Table1: Default N valuesusedinnon-BANDScalculations.
For BANDS calculations AFLOW generates Brillouin zone integration paths in
the manner described inaprevious publication[18]. Thek-point sampling density
is the line density of k-points along each of the straight-line segments of the path
in the IBZ. The default setting of AFLOW is 128 k-points along each segment
connecting high-symmetry k-points in the IBZ for single element structures, and
20k-pointsforcompounds.
Theoccupancies attheFermiedge inallnon-RELAX typerunsarehandled via
the tetrahedron method with Blöchl corrections [20]. This involves the N
parameter, as described above. In RELAX type calculations, where the determina-
tionofaccurate forcesisimportant, sometypeofsmearing mustbeperformed. In
caseswherethematerialisassumedtobeametal,theMethfessel-Paxtonapproach
[21]isadopted,withasmearingwidthof0.10eV.Gaussiansmearingisusedinall
othertypesofmaterials, withasmearingwidthof0.05eV.
3.2. Potentialsandbasisset
Theinteractions involving thevalence electron shells arehandled withthepo-
tentialsprovidedwiththeDFTsoftwarepackage. InVASP,theseincludeultra-soft
pseudopotentials (USPP)[22, 23] and projector-augmented wavefunction (PAW)
potentials[24,25],whichareconstructed according totheLocalDensityApproxi-
mation(LDA)[26,27],andtheGeneralizedGradientApproximation(GGA)PW91[28,
29] and PBE[30, 31] exchange-correlation (XC) functionals. The ICSD, Binary
Alloy and Heusler databases built according to the AFLOW standard use the PBE
functional combined with the PAW potential as the default. The PBE functional
is among the best studied GGA functionals used in crystalline systems, while the
PAWpotentials arepreferred duetotheiradvantages overtheUSPPmethodology.
Nevertheless, defaults havebeendefinedforanumberofpotential /XCfunctional
combinations, and in the case of the Elements database, results are available for
LDA, GGA-PW91 and GGA-PBE functionals with both USPP and PAW poten-
tials. Additionally, there are a small number of entries in the ICSD and Binary
Alloy databases (less than 1% of the total) which have been calculated with the
GGA-PW91 functional using either the USPP or PAW potential. The exact com-
bination of exchange-correlation functional and potential used for aspecific entry
in the AFLOWLIB database can always be determined by querying the keyword
dft_typeusingtheAFLOWLIBREST-API[3].
DFTpackagesoftenprovidemorethanonepotentialofeachtypeperelement.
The AFLOW standardized lists of PAW and USPP potentials are presented in Ta-
bles 2 and 3, respectively. The “Label” column in these tables corresponds to the
namingconventionadoptedbyVASP.Thechecksumofeachfilelistedinthetables
isincludedintheaccompanying supplement forverificationpurposes.
Each potential provided with the VASPpackage has two recommended plane-
wave kinetic energy cut-off (E ) values, the smaller of which ensures the relia-
bility of a calculation to within a well-defined error. Additionally, materials with
more than one element type willhave twoor more sets of recommended E val-
ues. IntheAFLOWstandard, theapplied E valueisthelargest foundamongthe
recommendations for all species involved in the calculation, increased by a factor
of1.4.
It is possible toevaluate the the non-local parts of the potentials in real space,
rather than inthemore computationally intensive reciprocal space. Thisapproach
ispronetoaliasing errors, andrequires theoptimization ofreal-space projectors if
these are to be avoided. The real-space projection scheme is most appropriate for
larger systems, e.g. surfaces, and is therefore not used in the construction of the
databases foundintheAFLOWLIBrepository.
3.3. Fouriertransform meshes
Asmentioned previously, itis not practical todescribe the precise default set-
tings that are applied by the AFLOW standard in the specification of the Fourier
transform meshes. We shall just note that they are defined in terms of the grid
spacing along each of the reciprocal lattice vectors, ~b. These are obtained from
thesetofrealspacelatticevectors,~a,via[~b ~b ~b ]T = 2π[~a ~a ~a ]−1. Adistancein
i 1 2 3 1 2 3
reciprocal spaceisthendefinedbyd = kb~k/n,wherethesetofn arethenumber
of grid points along each reciprocal lattice vector, and where the total number of
pointsinthesimulationisn ×n ×n .
TheVASPpackagereliesprimarilyontheso-calleddualgridtechnique,which
consists of two overlapping meshes with different coarseness. The least dense
of the two is directly dependent on the applied plane-wave basis, E , while the
second is a finer mesh onto which the charge density is mapped. The AFLOW
standardreliesonplacingsufficientpointsinthefinermeshsuchthatwrap-around
("aliasing") errorsareavoided. Intermsofthequantity d,definedabove,thefiner
grid is characterized by d ≈ 0.10 Å−1, while the coarse grid results in d ≈ 0.15
Å−1. These two values are approximate, as there is significant dispersion in these
quantities acrossthevariousdatabases.
3.4. DFT+Ucorrections
Extended systems containing d and f block elements are often poorly repre-
sented within DFT due to the well known self interaction error (SIE)[27]. The
influence that the SIE has on the energy gap of insulators has long been recog-
nized, andseveralmethodsthataccountforitareavailable. Theseinclude theGW
approximation[32],therotationally invariant approach introduced byDudarev[33]
andLiechtenstein[34](denotedhereasDFT+U),aswellastherecentlydeveloped
ACBN0pseudo-hybrid densityfunctional[35].
The DFT+U approach is currently the best suited for high-throughput inves-
tigations, and is therefore included in the AFLOW standard for the entire ICSD
database, andisalsousedforcertainentriesintheHeuslerdatabasecontainingthe
elementsO,S,Se,andF.ItisnotusedfortheBinaryAlloydatabase. Thismethod
has a significant dependence on parameters, as each atom is associated with two
numbers,thescreenedCoulombparameter,U,andtheStonerexchangeparameter,
J. Theseareusuallyreportedasasinglefactor,combinedviaU = U−J. Theset
of U values associated with the d block elements[18, 36] are presented in Table
4,towhichtheelementsInandSnhavebeenadded.
Element Label Element Label Element Label
H H Se Se Gd‡ Gd_3
He He Br Br Tb Tb_3
Li Li_sv Kr Kr Dy Dy_3
Be Be_sv Rb Rb_sv Ho Ho_3
B B_h Sr Sr_sv Er Er_3
C C Y Y_sv Tm Tm
N N Zr Zr_sv Yb Yb
O O Nb Nb_sv Lu Lu
F F Mo Mo_pv Hf Hf
Ne Ne Tc Tc_pv Ta Ta_pv
Na Na_pv Ru Ru_pv W W_pv
Mg Mg_pv Rh Rh_pv Re Re_pv
Al Al Pd Pd_pv Os Os_pv
Si Si Ag Ag Ir Ir
P P Cd Cd Pt Pt
S S In In_d Au Au
Cl Cl Sn Sn Hg Hg
Ar Ar Sb Sb Tl Tl_d
K K_sv Te Te Pb Pb_d
Ca Ca_sv I I Bi Bi_d
Sc Sc_sv Xe Xe Po Po
Ti Ti_sv Cs Cs_sv At At
V V_sv Ba Ba_sv Rn Rn
Cr Cr_pv La La Fr Fr
Mn Mn_pv Ce Ce Ra Ra
Fe Fe_pv Pr Pr Ac Ac
Co Co Nd Nd Th Th_s
Ni Ni_pv Pm Pm Pa Pa
Cu Cu_pv Sm† Sm U U
Zn Zn Sm‡ Sm_3 Np Np_s
Ga Ga_h Eu Eu Pu Pu_s
As As Gd† Gd
Table 2: Projector-Augmented Wavefunction (PAW)potentials, parameterized for
theLDA,PW91,andPBEfunctionals, includedintheAFLOWstandard.ThePAW-
PBE combination is used as the default for ICSD, Binary Alloy and Heusler
databases.
†:PBEpotentialsonly. ‡:LDAandPW91potentialsonly.
Element Label Element Label Element Label
H H_soft As As Tb Tb_3
He He Se Se Dy Dy_3
Li Li_pv Br Br Ho Ho_3
Be Be Kr Kr Er Er_3
B B Rb Rb_pv Tm Tm
C C Sr Sr_pv Yb Yb
N N Y Y_pv Lu Lu
O O Zr Zr_pv Hf Hf
F F Nb Nb_pv Ta Ta
Ne Ne Mo Mo_pv W W
Na Na_pv Tc Tc Re Re
Mg Mg_pv Ru Ru Os Os
Al Al Rh Rh Ir Ir
Si Si Pd Pd Pt Pt
P P Ag Ag Au Au
S S Cd Cd Hg Hg
Cl Cl In In_d Tl Tl_d
Ar Ar Sn Sn Pb Pb
K K_pv Sb Sb Bi Bi
Ca Ca_pv Te Te Po Po
Sc Sc_pv I I At At
Ti Ti_pv Xe Xe Rn Rn
V V_pv Cs Cs_pv Fr Fr
Cr Cr Ba Ba_pv Ra Ra
Mn Mn La La Ac Ac
Fe Fe Ce Ce Th Th_s
Co Co Pr Pr Pa Pa
Ni Ni Nd Nd U U
Cu Cu Pm Pm Np Np_s
Zn Zn Sm Sm_3 Pu Pu_s
Ga Ga_d Eu Eu
Ge Ge Gd Gd
Table 3: Ultra-Soft Pseudopotentials (USPP), parameterized for the LDA and
PW91functionals, included intheAFLOWstandard.
A subset ofthe f-block elements canbe found among thesystems included in
the AFLOWLIBconsortium databases. Wearenotawareofthe existence ofasys-
tematicsearchforthebestsetofU and J parametersforthisregionoftheperiodic
table,sowehavereliedonanin-houseparameterization[18]intheconstruction of
the databases. The values used are reproduced in Table 5. Note that by construc-
tion the SIE correction must be applied to a pre-selected value of the ℓ-quantum
number, and all elements listed in Table 4correspond to ℓ = 2, while those found
inTable5correspond toℓ = 3.
Element U Element U
Sc[37] 2.9 W[38] 2.2
Ti[39] 4.4 Tc[38] 2.7
V[40] 2.7 Ru[38] 3.0
Cr[41] 3.5 Rh[38] 3.3
Mn[41] 4.0 Pd[38] 3.6
Fe[42] 4.6 Ag[43] 5.8
Co[40] 5.0 Cd[44] 2.1
Ni[40] 5.1 In[44] 1.9
Cu[41] 4.0 Sn[45] 3.5
Zn[44] 7.5 Ta[38] 2.0
Ga[46] 3.9 Re[38] 2.4
Sn[45] 3.5 Os[38] 2.6
Nb[38] 2.1 Ir[38] 2.8
Mo[38] 2.4 Pt[38] 3.0
Ta[45] 2.0 Au 4.0
Table4: U parametersapplied tod orbitals.
Element U J Element U J
La[47] 8.1 0.6 Dy[48] 5.6 0.0
Ce[49] 7.0 0.7 Tm[50] 7.0 1.0
Pr[51] 6.5 1.0 Yb[52] 7.0 0.67
Nd[53] 7.2 1.0 Lu[47] 4.8 0.95
Sm[53] 7.4 1.0 Th[54] 5.0 0.0
Eu[53] 6.4 1.0 U[55] 4.0 0.0
Gd[56] 6.7 0.1
Table5: U and J parameters appliedtoselectedf-block elements.
3.5. Spinpolarization
ThefirstofthetwoRELAXcalculationsisalwaysperformedinacollinearspin-
polarized fashion. Theinitial magnetic moments inthis steparesettothenumber
of atoms in the system, e.g. 1.0 µB/atom. If the magnetization resulting from
the RELAX1 step is found to be below 0.025 µB/atom, AFLOW economizes com-
putational resources by turning spin polarization off in all ensuing calculations.
Spin-orbit coupling isnot used inthe current AFLOWstandard, since it isstill too
expensive toincludeinaHTframework.
3.6. Calculation methodsandConvergence criteria
Two nested loops are involved in the DFT calculations used by AFLOW in
the construction ofthe databases. Theinner loop contains routines that iteratively
optimizetheelectronicdegreesoffreedom(EDOF),andfeaturesanumberofalgo-
rithmsthatareconcerned withdiagonalizing theKohn-Sham(KS)Hamiltonian at
eachiteration. Theouterloopperformsadjustments tothesystemgeometry(ionic
degreesoffreedom,IDOF)untiltheforcesactingonthesystemareminimized.
Theconvergenceconditionforeachloophasbeendefinedintermsofanenergy
difference, δE. If successive energies resulting from the completion of a loop are
denotedasE andE ,thenconvergenceismetwhentheconditionδE > E −E
i−1 i i i−1
isfulfilled. NotethatE caneitherbetheelectronicenergyresultingfromtheinner
loop, or the configurational energy resulting from the outer loop. The electronic
convergence criteria will be denoted as δE , and the ionic criteria as δE . The
AFLOW standard relies on δE = 10−5 eV and δE = 10−4 eV for entries in
the Elements database. All other databases include calculations performed with
δE = 10−3 eVandδE = 10−2 eV.
Optimizations ofthe EDOFdepend on sets ofparameters that fall under three
general themes: initial guesses, diagonalization methods, and charge mixing. The
outer loop (optimizations of the IDOF) is concerned with the lattice vectors and
theionicpositions, andisnotasdependent onuserinputastheinnerloops. These
aredescribed inthefollowingparagraphs.
3.6.1. Electronic degreesoffreedom
The first step in the process of optimizing the EDOF consists of choosing a
trial charge density and a trial wavefunction. In the case of the non-BANDS-type
calculations, the trial wavefunctions are initialized using random numbers, while
the trial charge density is obtained from the superposition of atomic charge den-
sities. The BANDS calculations are not self-consistent, and thus do not feature a
charge density optimization. In these cases the charge density obtained from the
previously performed STATIC calculation is used in the generation of the starting
wavefunctions.
Two iterative methods are used for diagonalizing the KS Hamiltonian: the
Davidson blocked scheme (DBS)[57, 58], and the preconditioned residual mini-
mizationmethod–directinversion intheiterativesubspace (RMM–DIIS)[10]. Of
the two, DBS is known to be the slower and more stable option. Additionally,
the subspace rotation matrix is always optimized. These methods are applied in a
mannerthatisdependent onthecalculation type:
i. RELAX calculations. Geometry optimizations contain at least one determina-
tion of the system forces. The initial determination consists of 5 initial DBS
steps, followed by as many RMM-DIIS steps as needed to fulfill the δE
condition. Later determinations of system forces are performed by a similar
sequence, but only a single DBS step is applied at the outset of the process.
AcrossalldatabasestheminimumofnumberofelectroniciterationsforRELAX
calculations is2. Themaximum number issetto120 forentries intheICSD,
and60forallothers.
ii. non-RELAX calculations. In STATIC or BANDS calculations, the diagonaliza-
tionsarealwaysperformedusingRMM–DIIS.Theminimumnumberofelec-
troniciterations performed during non-RELAX calculations is2,andthemaxi-
mumis120.
If the number of iterations in the inner loop somehow exceed the limits listed
above,thecalculationbreaksoutofthisloop,andthesystemforcesandenergyare
determined. IftheδE convergence condition isnotmetthecalculation re-enters
theinnerloop,andproceeds normally.
Charge mixing is performed via Pulay’s method[59]. The implementation of
this charge mixing approach in the VASP package depends on a series of parame-
ters, ofwhich allbut themaximum ℓ-quantum number handled bythe mixerhave
beenleftintheirdefaultstate. Thisparameterismodifiedonlyinsystemsincluded
intheICSDdatabase whichcontain theelementslistedinTables4and5. Inprac-
tical terms, the value applied in these cases is the maximum ℓ-quantum number
foundinthePAWpotential, multiplied by2.
3.6.2. Ionicdegreesoffreedomandlatticevectors
The RELAX calculation type contains determinations of the forces acting on
the ions, as well as the full system stress tensor. The applied algorithm is the
conjugate gradients (CG)approach[60],whichdepends onthese quantities forthe
fulloptimizationofthesystemgeometry,i.e. theionicpositions,thelatticevectors,
as well as modifications of the cell volume. The implementation of CG in VASP
requires minimal user input, where the only independent parameter is the initial
scaling factor which is always left at its default value. Convergence of the IDOF,
asstatedabove,dependsonthevaluefortheδE parameter,asappliedacrossthe
various databases. Theadopted E (see discussion on “Potentials and basis set”,
section 3.2)makescorrections forPulaystresses unnecessary.
Forcesactingontheionsandstresstensor aresubjected toHarris-Foulkes[61]
corrections. Molecular dynamics based relaxations are not performed in the con-
struction of the databases found in the AFLOWLIB repository, so any related set-
tingsarenotapplicable tothiswork.
3.7. Outputoptions
The reproduction of the results presented on the AFLOWLIB website also de-
pends on aselect fewparameters that govern the output of the DFTpackage. The
densityofstatesplotsaregeneratedfromtheSTATICcalculation. Statesareplotted
with a range of -30 eV to 45 eV, and with a resolution of 5000 points. The band
structures are plotted according to the paths of k-points generated for a BANDS
calculation[18]. All bands found between -10 eV and 10 eV are included in the
plots.
4. Conclusion
The AFLOW standard described here has been applied in the automated cre-
ation of the AFLOWLIB database of material properties in a consistent and re-
producible manner. The use of standardized parameter sets facilitates the direct
comparison of properties between different materials, so that specific trends can
be identified to assist in the formulation of design rules for accelerated materials
development. Following this AFLOW standard should allow materials science re-
searchers to reproduce the results reported bythe AFLOWLIBconsortium, as well
as to extend on the database and make meaningful comparisons with their own
results.
5. Acknowledgments
We thank Dr. Kesong Yang for various technical discussions. We would like
to acknowledge support by the by DOD-ONR (N00014-13-1-0635, N00014-11-
1-0136, N00014-09-1-0921), and CT, JJP and SC acknowledge support from the
DOE (DE-AC02- 05CH11231), specifically the Basic Energy Sciences program
under Grant # EDCBEE.The AFLOWLIB consortium would like to acknowledge
theDukeUniversityCenterforMaterialsGenomicsandtheCRAYcorporationfor
computational support.