460 Missionalia 43:3 (460–477)
The rebirth of Kairos Theology
and its implications for Public Theology
and Citizenship in South Africa
Clint Le Bruyns1
This article explores the relationship between kairos theology and public theology,
placing a particular emphasis on kairos aspects such as contextuality, criticality and
change. The article draws from and reflects on the dialogue between South African
and Palestinian kairos theologies, the more recent Kairos South Africa movement
and the shackdwellers' movement Abahlali baseMjondolo in order to describe a
public theology marked by responsibility and contextuality.
Keywords: Kairos; Public Theology; Palestine; Abahlali baseMjondolo
1. Kairos Theology?
Kairos theology is rightly noted as a brand of liberation theology in and beyond South
Africa. Vuyani Vellem puts it well: “Black Theology in South Africa, Kairos Theology,
Black Theology in America, Latin American Liberation Theology, Minjung, Dalit, Femi-
nist Theology, African Theology, Contextual Theology and Womanist Theology – all
use the category of liberation to define their task, purpose and methodology. All of
them, originating from different contexts, symbolize a global, ‘worldly’ expression of
the liberation motif for another possible world.”2 He employs the notion of “libera-
tive expectancy” to refer to the importance of the symbol of the Kairos in public life.3
1 Clint Le Bruyns is Director and Senior Lecturer: Theology and Development Programme, within the
School of Religion, Philosophy and Classics at the University of KwaZulu-Natal, South Africa. His major
areas of expertise are in public theology, economic ethics, theology of work, ethical leadership, and
the role of the church in development praxis. In addition to the publication of various popular and
scholarly articles, he co-edited two books: The Humanization of Globalization (Germany, 2008) and
Ragbag Theologies (South Africa, 2009). He is currently co-editing a book on Pedagogical Liberati-
on? Shifting Perceptions on Palestine-Israel. E-mail: lebruns@ukzn.ac.za
2 Vuyani S Vellem, The Symbol of Liberation in South African Public Life: A Black Theological Perspec-
tive. Unpublished PhD thesis, University of Pretoria, April 2007, 83. Available online [internet] at:
[accessed 18/03/2012].
3 Vellem, The Symbol of Liberation in South African Public Life, 99. For a more complex discussion,
see also Vuyani S Vellem, “Prophetic Theology in Black Theology, with special reference to the Kairos
hts.v66i1.800.
The rebirth of Kairos Theology 461
In South Africa, kairos theology tends to be relegated to the apartheid era. It is
a prophetic theology for a time of struggle. John de Gruchy describes South African
theology as comprising ‘theologies of the struggle’ and ‘post-apartheid theologies’.4
He places the kairos paradigm under ‘prophetic theology’ as one of the key theolo-
gies of the struggle for liberation.5
Its liberational orientation, however, cannot be limited to the South African
struggle against apartheid. As we celebrate the South African Kairos Document
of 1985/1986,6 it is clear what a tremendous impact this theological tradition
has exerted on various other settings and situations.7 It facilitated prophetic
praxis in relation to different spheres of public life – politics, economics, civil
society, and public opinion formation.8 Most recently, it is a theological tradi-
tion which resulted in the Palestinian Kairos Document of 2009.9 Against the
background of the kairos documents, coupled with many reflections on the na-
ture and meaning of kairos theology, for me it is a theological tradition (rather
than a theology itself) in which the dimensions of contextuality, criticality and
change are specially discernible.10
4 John de Gruchy, “South African Theology” in William Dyrness and Veli-Matti Kärkkäinen (eds), Global
Dictionary of Theology (Downer’s Grove: IVP, 2008), 841-845.
5 De Gruchy, “South African Theology”, 843.
6 See The Kairos Document. Challenge to the Church: A Theological Comment on the Political Crisis in
South Africa, Second Edition (September 1986).
7 For a compilation of all kairos documents to date, see Gary S D Leonard (2010): Available online
cessed 09/10/2010], 1-378. For a synopsis of its content and scope of application around the
world, see Gerald West, “Kairos Documents: Mapping the Terrain” (Pietermaritzburg: Ujamaa Centre
for Biblical and Theological Community Development Research), 1-24. Available online [internet] at:
ros_documents.sflb.ashx [accessed 18/03/2012].
8 See Dirkie Smit, “What does ‘public’ mean? Questions with a view to public theology” in Len Hansen
(ed.), Christian in Public: Aims, Methodologies and Issues in Public Theology. Beyers Naudé Centre
Series on Public Theology, Vol. 3 (Stellenbosch: African SUN Media, 2007), 11-46.
9 A moment of truth: A word of faith, hope, and love from the heart of Palestinian suffering (Kairos
25/01/2010].
10 See Robert McAfee Brown, Kairos: Three Prophetic Challenges to the Church (Grand Rapids: Eerd-
mans, 1990), 9-12, who identified the following ten characteristics vis-à-vis the kairos documents:
They are written out of a sense of urgency; they are the result of a group process; they begin by analy-
sing the present situation of oppression and pain; they accept the claim of theology as ‘a second act’,
preceding an active engagement with and commitment to the poor and oppressed; they are informed
theologically by social analysis; they are self-critical; they take the role of the church very seriously;
they venture forth to name the enemy in order to locate major sources of sin and destruction in its pu-
blic domain; they affirm hope as a major contribution of the gospel despite the heaviness of the social
context; and, they conclude with great specificity in a variety of calls to action, pointing to immediate
and practical steps that need to be taken.
462 Missionalia 43:3 Clint Le Bruyns
2. Kairos Theology – and the public good?
When I reflect on public theology, it is a way of drawing attention to the inherent
public nature of Christian faith, the concern for the public dimension of Christian
theology, the potential relevancy of theology beyond the ecclesial domain, and the
intentionally public role of churches – indeed all notable components of our multi-
faceted perspectives and practices of public theology. In my understanding, the
public theology discourse engages with the question of public responsibility amidst
a history of overwhelming contradictions, ambiguities and complexities.11
The notion of ‘public’ in public theology should arguably not be reduced to sim-
ply meaning the opposite of ‘private’. Nor ought it merely to become synonymous
with ‘social’. There is a fundamental sense of public theology lost when it receives
these kinds of reductionisms, as being nothing more than ‘relational theology’ or
‘social theology’.12 Another reductionist tendency has to do with ‘public’ being used
interchangeably with ‘contextual’. Public theology is indeed concerned with rela-
tionality, with sociality, and with contextuality – but it need not be reduced to any
of these aspects, as important as they are concerning the nature and role of public
theology. Perhaps a fourth reductionist issue relates to public theology being viewed
as ‘particularistic’ in the same way liberation, political, black, feminist, womanist,
African, minjung, dalit, and other so-called particularistic theologies are stereotypi-
cally regarded with particularity in mind. In this regard, some can mistakenly re-
duce public theology to being a particular North American discourse, while others
can reduce it to being a particular theology in conflict with the relevant concerns
of Latin American liberation theology or African womanist theology and the like.
Against the background of such forms of conceptual confinement, the notion
of ‘public’ is important in my understanding and practice of public theology along
two fronts. In the first place, I concur with those who underline the philosophical
content behind what we today refer to as ‘the public sphere’, influenced in no small
measure by the insights of Jürgen Habermas, who discusses the public sphere as a
11 The following discussion draws from an earlier piece: Clint Le Bruyns, “Public Theology? On respon-
com/2011/05/public-theology-on-responsibility-for-the-public-good-%E2%80%93-by-clint-le-
bruyns [accessed 25/05/2011].
12 For example, cf. an unpublished paper by Steve de Gruchy, “Introducing the Methodology of Social
Theology” (June 2006). My criticism relates to at least two points. Firstly, he describes as ‘social theo-
logy’ what many of us functioning within the public theological discourse would understand as ‘public
theology’ and, secondly, he describes as ‘public theology’ what many of us functioning within the
public theological discourse would regard as a narrow – even fundamentalistic – conception of public
theology. Regarding the latter point, he simply describes public theology as follows: “The study of an
issue of public concern with a view to speaking to the ‘public square’ rather than the church, and that
requires engagement with contemporary discourse in a secular and religiously pluralistic world. (e.g.
Responding to ‘gay marriages’, teaching evolution, the death penalty).”
The rebirth of Kairos Theology 463
distinctive, modern dimension of societal life characterised by communicative ac-
tion through rational, participatory, transformational discourse.13 Appreciating this
philosophical texture concerning ‘the public sphere’ helps direct our attention in
public theology not in general to relationality, sociality, contextuality or particular-
ity, but more specifically to this ‘public sphere’.
In the second place, then, this notion of ‘public’ helps us reflect more carefully
on the concrete engagement of theology with the public sphere. Theology is in
contact and conversation with concrete realms of public life – political, economic,
civil society and public opinion.14 There are thus inevitable implications for un-
derstanding the agenda and mode of public theology. It is a way of understanding
and practising theology which must contribute in constructive, dialogical, enrich-
ing and transforming ways to ‘the public good’.15 For example, without dissolving
the theoretical integrity of theological content, public theology demands of us a
developing expertise in other disciplines of knowledge matched by a commitment
to participate in conversations and exercises beyond the borders of a congregation
or theological seminary.
Those of us schooled in such traditions as black theology or liberation theology
affirm the agenda of ‘the common good’ as encapsulated in the role of theology in
society. Others read this phrase narrowly as a Marxist ideological taint. Albert Nolan
talks about “the coming of God’s kingdom, God’s reign on earth” as “the object of
Christian hope” and, without losing perspective of the language of transcendence,
talks about it more plainly than we typically do as theologians.16 “Our hope,” he
assumes, “is that God’s will be done on earth” – and then concludes: “What God
wills is always the common good. What God wants is whatever is best for all of us
together, whatever is best for the whole of creation”.17
The kairos theological tradition offers the South African and broader, global
community a resourceful and challenging case study of the ambiguity that tends to
characterise our theological perspectives and practices in relation to the common
good. In reality we do not find it easy to appreciate what is best for everyone, con-
cedes Nolan, since what we may often hope for are “too often selfish and self-serv-
13 For a very detailed, critical discussion of this philosophical Habermasian content, see Smit, “What
does ‘public’ mean?” 11-46. A more critical reflection on the reception of Habermas is part of ongoing
discussion in places such as Brazil, South Africa, etc.
14 See Smit, “What does ‘public’ mean?” 11-46. Also Nico Koopman, “Some Comments on Public Theo-
logy Today” in Journal of Theology for Southern Africa 117 (November 2003), 9-10.
15 For example, it “has more of a dialogical, cooperative and constructive approach”, though one “that
does not imply Constantinianism or patriotism”. See Koopman, “Some Comments on Public Theology
Today”, 7.
16 Albert Nolan, Hope in an Age of Despair (New York: Orbis, 2009), 7.
17 Nolan, Hope in an Age of Despair, 7-8.
464 Missionalia 43:3 Clint Le Bruyns
ing, egocentric and narrow-minded: hopes for a better future for myself, my family,
my own country at the expense of other people; hopes for economic growth and a
higher standard of living for some, regardless of others”.18 “But if our attempts are
to do, as far as possible, with whatever is for the common good, then we are doing
God’s will, and to that extent God’s will is being done on earth”.19
While public theology, drawing deeply from its different theological wells, at-
tends to the agenda of the common good, I would suggest a more specific emphasis
around this agenda, that of ‘the public good’. This is to help us maintain the con-
nection between theology and the public sphere with its political, economic, civil
society and public opinion domains.20 The challenge of public theology is to assist
us in humble and ambitious ways for taking responsibility to contribute meaning-
fully and concretely to the public good. Perusing the theological literature during
South Africa’s post-apartheid era, kairos theology as a brand of liberation theology
does not appear to feature significantly in contributing to a liberation theology for
our democratic society. Perhaps I could phrase it as such: kairos theology was im-
portant for the common good in the quest for liberation in the struggle against
apartheid, but is arguably found greatly wanting in its resourcefulness for the
public good in the quest for reconstruction and transformation in contempo-
rary struggles.
3. The rebirth of kairos theology?
It is now a platitude to point out the fact that something happened to our theologi-
cal paradigms during the post-apartheid era. Questions have been raised about our
theological context, content, methodology and application. Some coin provocative
18 Nolan, Hope in an Age of Despair, 8.
19 Nolan, Hope in an Age of Despair, 8.
20 Commenting on these realms and its implications for theological participation in the public discourse,
Koopman provides the following summary statements: “The political sphere of the public focuses on
themes relating to the relationship between theology and for example the state, government, political
power and the control and regulating of public life. The economic sphere focuses on themes relating to
the relationship between theology and for example the so-called autonomous market-economy, glo-
balisation, ecology, science and technology. Civil society … constitutes the third area of the modern
public. This area focuses on themes relating to the relationship between theology and, for example,
the institutions, organisations, associations and movements of civil society which, independently
from the state and economy, strive to enhance the quality of life, satisfy the needs and foster the
interests of people, change the nature of society and build the common good, that is life of quality
for all. Schools, legal bodies, cultural and sports clubs and the neighbourhood are all institutions of
civil society. … public opinion as the fourth sphere of the modern public … focuses on themes relating
to the relationship between theology and the pluralistic public discourse on, for example, the nature
of society, common foundational values for society, common challenges and common priorities for
society. The ensuing public opinion paves the way for jointly striving towards the common good”. See
Koopman, “Some Comments on Public Theology Today”, 9-10.
The rebirth of Kairos Theology 465
phrases to draw attention to some of these shifts. Steve de Gruchy suggested we
moved from ‘church struggle to church struggles’.21 Charles Villa-Vicencio argued
we moved from theologies of liberation to those of reconstruction.22 Etienne de
Villiers talked about the move towards an ethics of responsibility.23 McGlory Speck-
man emphasised the move towards development.24 Isabel Phiri talked about a new
concern for theologies of life.25
The post-apartheid theological discourse in South Africa alerts us to the pos-
sibility (at least), or the reality (more frankly-speaking), that our theologies in the
new South Africa may not necessarily be as appropriate and responsive as we would
like for the kind of public impact and critical participation that the times demand. I
think this is why in various quarters in more recent years we are revisiting the South
African Kairos Document and our kairos theological tradition. We do not appear
to be fully confident that we have a public theology evidencing these much-needed
dimensions of contextuality, criticality and change.
In December 2009 the Palestinian Kairos Document was released. It stood in
line within this great kairos theological tradition, itself inspired by the South African
Kairos Document.26 Palestinian Christians cried out to the ecumenical church and
international community about their ongoing suffering under Israeli occupation
and apartheid coupled with the deafening silence of the international community of
believers and nations.27 They drew special attention to the destructive public impact
of the ways in which biblical and theological resources were being employed.28
A month later a group of South African church leaders and theologians began the
process of formulating a document that could serve as a South African response to
the Palestinian struggle with its issues of occupation, apartheid and Zionism. As part
21 See Steve de Gruchy, “From church struggle to church struggles” in John de Gruchy with Steve de Gru-
chy, The Church Struggle in South Africa. 25th Anniversary Edition (London: SCM, 2004), 223-260.
22 See Charles Villa-Vicencio, A Theology of Reconstruction: Nation Building and Human Rights (Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press, 1992); “Beyond Liberation: A New Theology for South Africa” in
Challenge Magazine (1993), 24-25; “Liberation and Reconstruction” in C Rowland (ed.), The Cam-
bridge Companion to Liberation Theology (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1999), 153-175.
23 See, for example: Etienne de Villiers, “A Christian Ethics of Responsibility: Does it provide an adequate
theoretical framework for dealing with issues of public morality?” in Scriptura 82 (2003), 23-38; D
E De Villiers, “Human rights and moral responsibility: Their relationship in the present South African
society” in Ned-Geref Teologiese Tydskrif 141: 3&4 (2000), 212-224.
24 For example, see: McGlory T Speckman, A Biblical Vision for Africa’s Development? (Pietermaritzburg:
Cluster Publications, 2007).
25 As an example, see Isabel Apawo Phiri, “HIV/AIDS: An African Theological Response in Mission” in
Kwok Pui-lan (ed.), Hope Abundant: Third World and Indigenous Women’s Theology (New York: Orbis,
2010), 219-228.
466 Missionalia 43:3 Clint Le Bruyns
of this group I recall how much this process of reading the Palestinian Kairos Docu-
ment and attempting a South African response forced us to ask questions about our
own life-situation and the public role of theology and church. It pushed us to revisit
our own Kairos Document and the quality of public theology for liberation, justice
and dignity it envisaged and called for. I remember how much the Palestinian Kairos
Document seemed to be helping us reconnect with our South African context and
to review the state of prophetic public theology in the church, academy and society.
The process underlined these aspects of contextuality, criticality and change. In the
end we submitted a response to Kairos Palestine in April 2010, at the time of Easter,
with the support of more than 60 key church leaders and theologians.29
A month later, in May 2010, the South African Council of Churches held a con-
sultation in Kempton Park on the Palestinian Kairos Document. A number of stal-
warts of the kairos theological tradition were present, including Frank Chikane and
Allan Boesak. I, along with several others, presented critical input on the situation
in Palestine-Israel, the Palestinian Kairos Document, and the need for solidarity
with Palestinians. In retrospect, our input did not generate much discussion about
Palestine-Israel itself – as it did about South Africa today. What the ecumenical
leaders and theologians really used the occasion to talk about was the kairos theo-
logical tradition and the need to revisit it for its relevance in regard to our public
challenges and public responsibility in South Africa.
A few months later, in October 2010, many of us gathered in Pietermaritzburg
for the 25th anniversary of the South African Kairos Document.30 Besides ‘looking
back’ during the commemoration, what resurfaced throughout were the aspects
of contextuality, criticality and change. People were fatigued, overwhelmed and
despairing of the numerous public challenges they confronted as persons in com-
munities. People were by no means politically-correct in their tone, view and as-
sessment of the political and other powers in public life; on the contrary, they were
frustrated, angry and critical. They were extremely critical of the church and theol-
ogy as public role-players for transformation in political, economic and cultural
life. There was indeed a deep sense of nostalgia (cf. painful longing) for the quality
of theological engagement as was evident in the kairos theological tradition. In
fact, among us were again some of the stalwarts of the kairos theological tradition,
29 “A South African Christian Response to the Palestine Kairos Document” (Easter 2010), 1-9. Available
Africa%20to%20Palestine.pdf [accessed 17/04/2010].
30 For a report of the commemoration and consultation, see “Report on the Ujamaa Centre’s 21st An-
niversary and Consultation – ‘A luta continua: connecting prophetic voices’. Available online [inter-
port_1.sflb.ashx [accessed 06/11/2010].
The rebirth of Kairos Theology 467
such as Itumuleng Mosala, who displayed much scepticism and negativity regarding
the public contribution of theology in contemporary South Africa. Others, such as
Albert Nolan and Allan Boesak, presented scathing criticisms of the political and
economic powers from a theological perspective. Discussion by these and other
thinkers assisted us around questions of social analysis and the weaknesses of the
churches and their theologies. In general, though, our deliberations offered less
direction around the future of theology and church as constructive role-players in
transforming public life for the common good.
There have been a number of related initiatives and events that I’ve participated
in since then. A common thread has been celebrating and revisiting our kairos
theological tradition. Progressively the question of an organised movement with a
‘kairos consciousness’31 surfaced. Eventually the establishment of ‘Kairos Southern
Africa’ was born early 2011.
These individual and collective initiatives have convinced me about the emerging
rebirth not so much of a kairos theology, but of a kairos theological tradition with
its kairos consciousness marked by contextuality, criticality and change. I would
suggest that those of us who are active role-players and thought leaders within vari-
ous theological paradigms – black theology, liberation theology, womanist theology,
feminist theology, confessing theology, African theology, public theology, etc. – must
take cognisance of this apparent ‘rebirth’ of kairos consciousness and seriously
consider what implications and responsibilities it presents to us in present-day
South Africa as public theologians in one way or another.
4. Kairos Theology – and the future of public responsibility?
It has become increasingly evident that a kairos consciousness needs to be regained
with its aspects of contextuality, criticality and change. As an example of this in
action, I want to direct our attention to the recent document of December 2011
submitted by Kairos Southern Africa to the African National Congress at the occa-
sion of the launch of its centenary celebrations.32 It takes the form of a letter, struc-
tured by way of 17 ‘words’ from the churches to the ruling party. At the time of its
submission, the letter was endorsed by about 100 church leaders, theologians and
concerned people, including those beyond the Christian or religious realm, who all
identified with the message of Kairos Southern Africa. As one who was consulted
about its contents and as a signatory, it is remarkable to observe how seriously this
letter was taken by the ANC and the strong support it has thus far received from
kairossouthernafrica.wordpress.com/kairos-consciousness [accessed 18/05/2011].
[accessed 14/01/2012].
468 Missionalia 43:3 Clint Le Bruyns
the public, with a 1-million-signature campaign presently in motion. The 17 words
of the letter could be reduced to 4 words: celebration, confession, collaboration,
critique. The Kairos Southern Africa letter holds importance as an attempt to regain
a kairos consciousness among ordinary people. There is the sense of an increasing
disconnect between the people and the powers, and between the people and demo-
cratic life together; this is being addressed to some extent in this letter.
The question of a participatory democracy or active citizenship remains a press-
ing matter for public theology in South Africa.33 The notion of ‘participatory democ-
racy’ or ‘active citizenship’ is in political vogue in and beyond South Africa today.
It has become a way of talking about the responsibility all people must assume
for the integrity and advancement of their life together. Initiatives of Theological
Projects such as Kairos Southern Africa34, the Beyers Naudè Centre for Public The-
ology at Stellenbosch University35, or the Theology and Development Programme at
the University of KwaZulu-Natal36, are all notable cases in point of an attempt at a
public or social theology embedded in a kairos consciousness directed towards a
responsible citizenship ethic.
5. An ethic of responsible citizenship?
The public discourse on citizenship revolves around important questions of identity
and human dignity, agency and power, and public responsibility.37
This notwithstanding, at least two preliminary points should be made. The first
issue is that we acknowledge that this discourse is neither neutral nor uncontested.
We should not be naïve and ignorant about its perceived ideological nature, how it
might be employed for specific political and economic agendas, and the possible
popular resistance to it. Moreover, an ideal of citizenship might not even be desir-
able; political and economic powers can deliberately discourage it.
A second issue has to do with the tendency of a conceptual narrowness in how
it is understood, an issue current literature on citizenship bemoans. The notion
of citizenship underlines the call for a new kind of politics, a different quality of
33 Some previous reflection on this subject can be found as follows: Clint Le Bruyns, “Responsabilidade
libertadora para a transformação moral? Sobre o papel dos movimentos sociais e suas implicações
para a teologia pública na África do Sul hoje” in Ronaldo Cavalcante and Rudolf von Sinner (Orgs.),
Teologia Pública: Em debate (São Leopoldo/RS, 2011), 85-105.
37 See the theological framework developed by Rudolf von Sinner, “Citizenship in the Brazilian Context –
theoretically, practically and theologically”, vis-à-vis dignity and rights; trust in the context of distrust;
the ambiguity of existence; liberty and service; and serving one God under two regiments. For more
extensive discussion, see Rudolf von Sinner, The Churches and Democracy in Brazil: Towards a Public
Theology Focused on Citizenship (Eugene: Wipf & Stock, 2012), especially 68-99 and 281-317.
The rebirth of Kairos Theology 469
life together. It is understandable why the idea of a more ‘critical’ citizenship is in
vogue. Literature on citizenship demands a more transcendent view of this concept,
a perspective that goes beyond such paradigms as ‘indigenous politics’, ‘party poli-
tics’, ‘state politics’, and ‘imperialist politics’. These aspects undergird the need for
an ethic of responsible citizenship.38
In order to offer some orientation and content to an ethic of responsible citizen-
ship, I want to propose the following framework: First, kairos consciousness as a
vision of change; second, kairos consciousness as a virtue of criticality; and third,
kairos consciousness as a practice of contextuality.
5.1 Public theology for responsible citizenship: Vision of change
A few years ago, on a beautiful Sunday afternoon, I took a stroll down the streets
of the university section of central Stellenbosch. At that time I was working in Sys-
tematic Theology at Stellenbosch University’s Faculty of Theology. As I walked past
the Faculty of Education building, a team of workers were positioning a very large
banner above the entrance of the building. It read: “Education…can change the
world.” I thought to myself, “How inspiring! And that’s something a theologian
would say.” Moments later I reached the Faculty of Law building. There another
team was hard at work with a similar banner, except that this time it read: “Law…
can change the world.” What was going on in Stellenbosch? Banners of this type
were being placed above the entrance to every Faculty building. Indeed, on reach-
ing my own Faculty, there was the banner: “Theology…can change the world.” I
could only imagine how surprised and intrigued these university students would
be as they rushed (or staggered!) to Monday morning classes the next day, to be
confronted with this critical connection between their particular science and the
life-giving agenda of social transformation and public responsibility.
José Galizia Tundisi in an essay on “The Advocacy Responsibility of the Scientist”
offers several statements about the interconnection between science (in a broad-
based sense) and social transformation.39
First, he emphasises the fundamental importance of knowledge in the world of
science, “that scientists from all walks of life have the task of promoting and in-
38 See Clint Le Bruyns, “The Church, Democracy and Responsible Citizenship” in Religion & Theology
19:1-2 (2012), 60-73; Clint Le Bruyns, “The Church, Democracy and Responsible Citizenship” in W
Bentley and DA Forster (eds), Between Capital and Cathedral: Essays on Church-State relationships
(Pretoria: Unisa, 2012), 57-71. These publications are based on my research that emerged out of
a research collaborative partnership between EST Faculdades (Brazil) and Stellenbosch University
(South Africa) during the period 2009-2012.
39 José Galizia Tundisi, “The Advocacy Responsibility of the Scientist” in Kathleen Dean Moore & Michael
P Nelson (eds), Moral Ground: Ethical Action for a Planet in Peril (San Antonio: Trinity University Press,
2010), 448-451.
470 Missionalia 43:3 Clint Le Bruyns
creasing knowledge through their professional activities”.40 Without deflecting from
an understanding of theology that is ‘lived’ and ‘experienced’, he indirectly reminds
us of a theology that is also ‘thought’ and ‘known’. It is thus quite appropriate –
even essential – that we still behold theology as a science, concerned with different
rationalities, conceptualisations and discourses.
Second, he contends that while the world of science readily contributed to social
progress in a variety of realms and ways during the past century, scientists in the
twenty-first century “face a different problem” and that “the world needs science and
scientists in a very different way”.41 Tundisi is thinking more specifically about the
ecological challenges confronting us today as that ‘different problem’. His implied
point is double-edged: On the one hand, the world of science continually makes us
aware of new challenges calling forth public responsibility; on the other hand, the
world of science continually needs to be open to modification and reform in order
to better advance social wellbeing. A credible world-affirming public theology would,
therefore, be one that continues the liberational paradigm of taking social analysis
and kairos consciousness seriously coupled with a self-critical, re-forming nature. We
need to think and do theology in ways that facilitate conscientisation about existential
realities and in ways always open to critique and reformation.
Third, Tundisi underlines the transformative responsibility within the world
of science. He asks: “Given this reality, this reality of which science has made us
aware, how can we scientists, we gatherers and disseminators of knowledge, help
to change this course of events? What is our role in remediation?”42 His line of
questioning disturbs the stereotypical myth of what I’d refer to as ‘a dusty con-
sciousness’ – a knowledge relegated to dusty bookshelves. On the contrary, his
expectation of science is that it must be responsive to that about which it has made
us aware. The quality of public theology required today cannot simply ‘pass on’ in
a ‘repetitive’ fashion dogmas of the past; rather, it must help us engage with and
change social realities for a better life for all being.
Fourth, it thus follows that “striving to understand the world and then disseminat-
ing our findings to the public is more important than ever”.43 He hereby picks up on
the necessity for public reception. It is not sufficient that the world of science attests
to these aforementioned features; it demands reception, ownership and participation
throughout the public arena where politics, economics, civil society and public opin-
ion interconnect. Science thus moves from vision to action. The relevance for public
theology is that, indeed, our theological capital for the constructive transformation
40 Tundisi, “The Advocacy Responsibility of the Scientist”, 448.
41 Tundisi, “The Advocacy Responsibility of the Scientist”, 448.
42 Tundisi, “The Advocacy Responsibility of the Scientist”, 449.
43 Tundisi, “The Advocacy Responsibility of the Scientist”, 449.
The rebirth of Kairos Theology 471
of life must not remain stuck within the ecclesial quarters or among the professional
elite of the churches, but must most certainly be ‘received’ by the broader community
of people. Furthermore, our theological contributions must transcend mere visionary
activity; it must extend to broader aspects of our life together, such as the domains of
public policy, international law, political practice, economic ideologies, and so on.
While an extremely complex and admittedly controversial arena of public theological
engagement, theology at its best envisions, embodies and advances the public good.
Fifth, Tundisi argues for science as “a method for social transformation” which
“can be an integral part of the noble work to improve the quality of life”.44 This
underlines the actual impact of science on everyday life. To what degree does it
impact life in actual, concrete, constructive ways? Similarly, the connection between
theology and social transformation must be actually experienced, as opposed to
merely sought after or anticipated. To the extent that churches and theologians
influence public policy or political law for the betterment of life for all, therein lies
its eventual nobility as a public science.
Sixth, Tundisi then concludes on a hopeful note: As an ecological scientist, he
says, “I am convinced that our moral responsibility and our engagement with so-
ciety can help to save our planet”.45 His essay, albeit modestly, appeals for a con-
sideration of a science of hope, or of scientists of hope. Theologies of hope feature
pre-eminently within the Christian theological tradition, and is receiving renewed
attention today in the light of a vast array of despairing challenges.46 Once again the
litmus test rests with ordinary people confronting social, existential realities who
will respond with either despair or hope based on what kind of public reception
and impact our theology brings to our life together.
5.2 Public theology for responsible citizenship: Virtue of criticality
The idea of public theology today is a contested notion. There is the obvious story of
ambiguous public theological conception and engagement during apartheid South
Africa; the South African Kairos Document of 1985 confronted us about this am-
bivalence and its very life-and-death implications. State Theology proponents exer-
cised destructive public theology, a legacy part and parcel of our continuing social
baggage. Church Theology representatives reflected an impotent, indifferent, self-
centred public theology, which preserved the status quo. Prophetic theology advo-
cates were committed to a prophetic public theology that could discern, confront,
44 Tundisi, “The Advocacy Responsibility of the Scientist”, 449.
45 Tundisi, “The Advocacy Responsibility of the Scientist”, 451.
46 For example, see Selina Palm, “Transforming Hope? A Theological-Ethical Vision, Virtue and Practice
for the Common Good” (Unpublished MTh thesis, Stellenbosch University, March 2012), at Internet:
472 Missionalia 43:3 Clint Le Bruyns
oppose, struggle, revolutionise, perhaps even transform.47 Against the background
of our historical narrative, it behoves us to indeed be discerning and cautious about
this idea of so-called public theology.
The narrative of Abahlali baseMjondolo is an intriguing, insightful and
instructive narrative for exploring the challenges of responsible citizenship, along
with the role of the churches in their various forms and manifestations.48 In a cur-
sory study, I would highlight the following findings for further reflection and delib-
eration:
1. The question has come up as to how Abahlali baseMjondolo (AbM) should
or could relate to the churches. So far, AbM has sometimes approached
churches, and more and more, AbM is being approached by church people
and church-based organisations. But the churches are complex, and they
might have their own, different agendas and possibilities in relation to
AbM’s struggle.
2. The discussions responded to the following 2 questions. First, “What are
our experiences of the church in our struggle so far?”, and second, “What
do we need from churches?”
3. So far, in the struggles of the AbM, there has only been a loose connection
with churches and it has not been well-defined. It has really only arisen
from time-to-time in response to incidences of tragedy.
4. But beyond these tragedies and crises, there has been no time really to
celebrate liturgy in our place together with church people, and nor have
we had a constructive workshop to talk about these things properly before
now. Because of this loose connection, the church doesn’t know about
our life in the shacks, it has no experience of it. Because it has not been
present, the church does not know about the difficulties that the people
go through and it does not know about the crises we face … and so, the
church does not feel our pain.
5. Because of this loose connection too, the church is not here with us to
pass on important moral principles that are about how it is to be human
beings - the church is not here with us.
6. This distance is not healthy. The tragedies that happen here in the shacks,
and the knocking down of people’s houses, can put people onto the streets.
Surely in these cases, the churches could even provide temporary shelter?
7. But more than that, church ministers are people that others are prepared
to listen to and so, if they were there with us, then it is possible that their
47 See Clint Le Bruyns, “Religion and the Economy? On Public Responsibility through Prophetic Intelli-
gence, Theology and Solidarity” in Journal of Theology for Southern Africa 142 (March 2012), 80-97.
The rebirth of Kairos Theology 473
presence could even stop demolitions from going ahead. And if we from
AbM and the churches grew closer together, it is possible that we might start
learning better about what they believe – for now, we don’t really know.
8. But even this weak connection that we are discussing, and what we have
said already, shows that we need each other and that we need to make our
voices stronger together because it is important to build a common strug-
gle. For a long time in our struggles, many people looked down on us be-
cause we are from the shacks, they think of us almost as if we are criminals
who prey on others. But our recent connection with the Bishop makes us
think that some people are thinking hard and seriously about our experi-
ences, and they do not just assume we are a bunch of worthless hooligans.
That our struggles are taken seriously by respected people is important.
9. In addition, these respected people in the churches have connections
overseas, and maybe they could help with some of the immediate crises of
poverty that affect people in the shacks.
10. Although we ask the question about ‘what do we need from the churches?’
we must start from the position that we must work together. We must
acknowledge that we are together actually because, inside the church,
we have women, children, people who are from the jondolos – so why do
we disconnect the ‘Sunday church’ from the day-to-day life and struggle
AbM? This ‘2-in-1’ division must be discussed and the two aspects must
be made to complement each other.
11. We acknowledge that the government is a very bad listener to the poor. But
it listens to the churches. So maybe we can use that to add to the strength
of our voice. Perhaps church leaders can use their status to persuade the
government on our issues. How would it be if church leaders joined us
in our marches – wouldn’t that make the government listen more? The
church leaders give their support to many important public awareness
campaigns (for example regarding the protection of children’s rights, or
the fight against crime) and this is because sometimes people are pre-
pared to listen when church people say things. Looking at the poster on
the wall of our meeting room here about the churches supporting the
call for an ‘HIV/AIDS free generation’, perhaps there is a challenge to the
churches to launch a new awareness campaign for a ‘shack-free genera-
tion’. We have seen in our experiences that, sometimes when people were
losing their rights – for example to their land – that some priests and
churches stepped in to stop it, or at least to provide help.
12. This discussion makes us think not only about the church out there. It is
starting to revive the religious person in us and we are beginning to wonder,
474 Missionalia 43:3 Clint Le Bruyns
‘what is our religious belief?’ - if we are God’s children, then what does this
mean for us living in the shacks? And what does it require us to do?
13. We know that church is the closest place to the people because a church is not
a church without people. And so the people know it as the most recognised
place – a place of safety, where there are no thieves and others who prey on us.
So we have this feeling about the church that everyone has a ‘willingness’ to
support and give dignity. We are nobody without the church. Somehow in this
way, the church can be a bridge between AbM and the government because it
will be seen that we are not animals. And then nothing is impossible.
14. In the history of South Africa, before 1994 and at the peak of mobilisation and
unrest, we saw some religious figures playing a role. But discrimination, rac-
ism and apartheid are not over! Now apartheid is between those who are rich
and those who are poor, and we see that this apartheid is getting worse. This
should make the church to be uncomfortable and therefore, the need for their
intervention is just as important now as it was then – and they cannot do it
on their own, they must work with the movements of the poor.
15. There is a perception that religious people are trustworthy. As we come
from the shacks, we are not trusted. Even our churches from the shacks
are not trusted.
16. When we look at charity and relief work like feeding schemes, it is better when
these come from churches than from political parties because when it comes
from the political parties it is actually like a ‘bait’, something is expected from
us in return. And also, if the churches were involved in this kind of work, then
they would know about how our life is, which is important.
17. There are statements in the Bible that are important.
18. Churches are meant to be agents of justice. They understand that unity
is important in some of their own work, and in different areas they are
joining together to work better. This approach should also apply in con-
nection with social movements and justice.
19. There seem to be many possibilities that can be developed between the
struggles of AbM and the churches. But, we are also not naïve about the
churches. We know that some parts of the church pray with the rich and
powerful people, that some parts of the church continue to give their
blessing to this government. But although the church has these problems,
we are sure that God is on the side of the poor.
Public theological engagement is myopic, fantasaic and impotent when it merely en-
gages with people, institutions and structures of power, as opposed to also engaging
with social movements and grassroots initiatives. This, I would argue, is a present
weakness in public theological engagement in South Africa through such initiatives
The rebirth of Kairos Theology 475
as Kairos Southern Africa and related public theological projects. In this way, a
‘critical edge’ is lost or veiled, to the detriment of the public witness of the church
and theology in advancing an ethic of responsible citizenship.
5.1 Public theology for responsible citizenship: Practice of contextuality
We cannot take it for granted that theologians in post-apartheid democratic South
Africa find it acceptable, or at the very least accept it uncritically. Whereas some
scholars embrace this notion quite explicitly for its appropriateness and resource-
fulness in how they conceive of the public nature, rationality and impact of theology
(for example, E de Villiers, N Koopman, C Le Bruyns, D Smit, V Vellem), others
engage with it more soberly and conditionally (for example: A Boesak, J Cochrane,
J de Gruchy, S de Gruchy, R Tshaka), while still others ignore or respectfully dismiss
it as not being a helpful or relevant way of making sense of theology and its role
in our social life together (for example: T Maluleke). The critical questions these
scholars raise are extremely important and thus indeed valid.
Broadly speaking I would venture to say that there tends to be two dominant cat-
egories of contestation. First, there is a disagreement or reservation on typological
grounds.49 Here scholars criticise a view of public theology narrowly restricted to
theologies of (re)construction following pre-liberation protest and struggle. A dis-
tinction is made between theologies of protest and theologies of reconstruction. It
implies that complex issues of protest and struggle are overcome or not as relevant
within a new democratic milieu. The new context has seemingly made oppositional
theologies unnecessary and inappropriate. Construction rather than confrontation
is the assumed mode of engagement. It is a public theological engagement which
ultimately makes space for those of high power and influence, and denies meaning-
ful participation by those limited or lacking in democratic public agency. The prob-
lem of this conception of public theology is its constricted model of publicness.
Second, there is a disagreement or reservation on ideological grounds.50 Here schol-
ars criticise a view of public theology oblivious to local, contextual, post-colonial dy-
namics. It speaks too abstractly, generally and universalistically about public theological
engagement, in so doing positing an overarching theological paradigm into which every-
thing must fit. It ignores the regional and parochial nature of theology, thereby painting a
“rather benign, metropolitan and even romantic” notion of public life. It dismisses local
theologies such as black theology, African theology, women’s theology, and liberation
49 James R Cochrane, “Against the Grain: Responsible Public Theology in a Global Era” in International
Journal of Public Theology 5 (2011), 44-62.
50 Tinyiko Sam Maluleke, “Reflections and Resources – The Elusive Public of Public Theology: A Response
to William Storrar” in International Journal of Public Theology 5 (2011), 79-89.
476 Missionalia 43:3 Clint Le Bruyns
theology. It dismisses critical historical dimensions such as postcoloniality. The problem
of this conception of public theology is its acontextual model of publicness.
In another essay, Maluleke underlines the fact that when we think of South Africa
simply as ‘a young democracy’ it is to our peril.51 It’s a misnomer, he contends. He
argues for a consciousness of post-colonial life as a life still grappling with life as
a colony. The complex and conflicting dynamics of power, identity and alienation
are ever-present. Maluleke appreciates the need for many in the public theology
domain to emphasise theories of reconstruction, but asserts that there can be no
meaningful constructive theory without a meaningful theory of resistance. I find his
contention valid. However, for the purposes of public theological engagement to-
wards social transformation, his argument is true in what it affirms but unhelpful in
what it denies. The post-colonial, post-apartheid, democratic South Africa demands
an ethics of resistance, but it must be conceived along with an ethics of reconstruc-
tion. It seems as if Maluleke reduces construction to co-option or uncritical co-
operation with the powers. Do we not need a public theological engagement that
can protest, resist and oppose at the same time as it seeks to contribute to the
reshaping of our life together? Or are we called to simply remain ‘watchdogs’ of
society, instead of critical, prophetic participants in public transformation as well?
A public theology expressive of such a sanitised and acontextual nature is a
public theology not worthy of its name. However, one of my contentions with these
scholars who contest the notion of public theology concerns the ironic fact that,
possibly unknowingly, they make voices outside of South Africa – in the ‘North’
– the determinants as to what public theology is all about. Their point of depar-
ture revolves around public theology advocates outside of South Africa. Advocates
of public theology within South Africa are then left to defend the charges. They
criticise North American and European representatives of public theology, but draw
general conclusions for us all about the meaning and appropriateness of public
theology. Why do they base their assessments simply on these sources? Should they
engage critically with sources within South Africa, would their assessment be the
same? Would they necessarily find public theology advocates who view public theol-
ogy as a replacement of liberation theology? Would they find us guilty of discarding
local historical, post-colonial dynamics of power and transformation? Would they
really discern a way of doing theology with no traces of a black liberation theology?
At the same time, it is on this point of contextuality that public theological en-
gagement must be examined for its relation to ordinary peoples’ movements, such
as Abahlali. A kairos consciousness is rooted in a people’s theology.
51 Tinyiko Sam Maluleke, “May the Black God Stand Please!: Biko’s Challenge to Religion” in Andile
Mngxitama, Amanda Alexander & Nigel C Gibson (eds), Biko Lives! Contesting the Legacies of Steve
Biko (New York: Palmgrave Macmillan, 2008), 115-126.
The rebirth of Kairos Theology 477
A concluding note
I conclude with a poem by Zolani Mkiva, an imbongi yesizwe, who hails from Idu-
tywa in the Eastern Cape. His poem “Son of the Soil” (1974) leaves us with the
challenge of rootedness in Africa and the option of transcendence.
I do not have perfumed lips
But I speak the truth
I do not have cat eyes
But I can see the true colours of the universe
I do not have donkey ears
But I can hear what make sense and what is a nuisance
I do not have a dog nose
But I can smell and distinguish between carbo-monoxide & oxygen
I do not have a big heart
But I do have passion for love and I love people
I do not have soft hands
But I can deliver my people from shame
I am the son of the soil
Like daughters of the land
I am the filament of freedom
I am the pistil of peace
I am the calyx of consciousness
I am the corolla of peoples cause
I am the pollen of prosperity
I am the anther of amicable solutions
I am the stem of our society
The son of the soil
The public theology to which I am committed is a public theological engagement
that seeks to draw from the African soil and to dream of overcoming all that op-
presses and dehumanises. All in all, a public theology embedded in a kairos con-
sciousness of contextuality, criticality and change towards the nurturing of a
responsible citizenship.