3v9917000/ht-peh:viXra
THE MAXIMAL KINEMATICAL INVARIANCE GROUP OF FLUID
DYNAMICS AND EXPLOSION-IMPLOSION DUALITY
L. O’Raifeartaigh(a) and V. V. Sreedhar(b)
School of Theoretical Physics
Dublin Institute for Advanced Studies
10, Burlington Road
Dublin 4, Ireland
It has recently been found that supernova explosions can be simulated in the labo-
ratory by implosions induced in a plasma by intense lasers. A theoretical explanation is
that the inversion transformation, (Σ : t → −1/t, x → x/t), leaves the Euler equations
of fluid dynamics, with standard polytropic exponent, invariant. This implies that the
kinematical invariance group of the Euler equations is larger than the Galilei group.
In this paper we determine, in a systematic manner, the maximal invariance group G
of general fluid dynamics and show that it is a semi-direct product G = SL(2,R)∧G,
where the SL(2,R) group contains the time-translations, dilations and the inversion Σ,
and G is the static (nine-parameter) Galilei group. A subtle aspect of the inclusion of
viscosity fields is discussed and it is shown that the Navier-Stokes assumption of con-
stant viscosity breaks the SL(2,R) group to a two-parameter group of time translations
and dilations in a tensorial way. The 12-parameter group G is also known to be the
maximal invariance group of the free Schr¨odinger equation. It originates in the free
Hamilton-Jacobi equation which is central to both fluid dynamics and the Schr¨odinger
equation.
DIAS-STP-00-16
(a) Deceased
(b) sreedhar@stp.dias.ie
Introduction
Considerable efforts are being devoted at present in centres such as the National
Ignition Facility at the Lawrence Livermore Laboratory, U.S.A., and the Laser Mega-
Joule in Bordeaux, France, to simulate astrophysical systems in the laboratory. The
motivation for this programme comes from observational evidence [1] that the dynamics
of the mixing of gases during a supernova explosion [2] is very similar to the turbulent
splashing and mixing of a plasma as a fusion capsule is bombarded by high intensity
laser beams [3]. Since the former physical situation deals with an explosion while the
latter concerns an implosion, and because the time and length scales involved in the
two cases are drastically different, it was a challenging task to produce a theoretical
explanation for the observed similarity.
In a recent paper [4], Drury and Mendon¸ca produced such an explanation by show-
ing that the Euler equations of fluid dynamics which govern both the systems are left
invariant by an inversion transformation Σ : t → −1/t, x → x/t. The discovery of
this transformation was inspired by similar transformations of the form x → f(t)x that
are used by cosmologists to factor out an arbitrary uniform expansion or contraction of
the system [5]. As is well-known, the Euler equations of fluid dynamics are invariant
under the Galilei group [6]. The results of [4] show that the maximal kinematical1 in-
variance group of fluid dynamics G is larger than the Galilei group [7]. In this paper we
determine, in a systematic manner, the structure of G for general fluid dynamics. We
also discuss subtleties associated with the inclusion of viscosity fields and show that the
Navier-Stokes assumption of constant viscosity leads to a reduction of G in a tensorial
manner.
1 Meaning transformations involving only space and time coordinates as opposed to
those involving internal or gauge degrees of freedom.
It will be shown that G is of the form
where G is the connected, static Galilei group which induces the transformations
x → Rx+a+vt, t → t (2)
and SL(2,R) is the group
which includes parity, time translations, dilations and the inversion Σ.
G is isomorphic to the Niederer group, which is the maximal invariance group of
the free Schro¨dinger equation [8]. The reason for this isomorphism is that the kinetic
part of the fluid-dynamic Lagrangian (see (17)) is of the free Hamilton-Jacobi form,
which is the classical limit of the Schr¨odinger operator.
The Strategy of Proof
The general fluid dynamic equations in n-dimensional space are [9]
where the convective derivative D and the viscosity terms V are defined by
i j j i i j ij k k i k k
(cid:16) (cid:17)
respectively. In the above equations ρ, u, p and ǫ stand for the density, the velocity
vector field, the pressure, and the energy density of the fluid respectively and η, ζ are
the shear and bulk viscosity fields. The above differential equations are augmented by
an algebraic condition called the polytropic equation of state which relates the pressure
to the energy density thus:
γ being a constant called the polytropic exponent. This equation may be used to
eliminate p from (4). Further, by making the substitution,
the original set of equations (4) reduces to
To find the maximal invariance group of these equations we first note that, for any sys-
tem (such as the above) for which there is no feedback from the fields to the space-time
transformations, the maximal invariance group G of the general class of configurations is
also an invariance group for any special sub-class of configurations; though not necessar-
ily a maximal one, since a restricted set of configurations could have a larger symmetry
group. Formally,
C ⊂ C ⇒ G ⊆ G (9)
where C denotes general configurations and C denotes a special class. Thus a general
strategy for finding maximal invariance groups is to first find a (tractable) sub-class of
configurations C for which the maximal invariance group G can be found, and then see
what conditions are imposed on G by the general configurations. This is the strategy
we shall adopt; except that in our case we choose a sub-class for which the generalisation
to arbitrary configurations imposes no further conditions i.e. G ≡ G. The tractable
sub-class we choose is obtained by making three simplifications, namely, ignoring the
effects of viscosity by tuning the viscosity fields η and ζ to zero, by setting χ = 1, and
by letting the velocity vector u be curl-free. The resulting sub-class is the configuration
of inviscid, isentropic and irrotational flows which are well-known in fluid dynamics.
The Sub-class of Inviscid, Isentropic, and Irrotational Fluids
The first simplification we consider is to ignore viscosity effects in which case (8)
reduces to
Second, we note that it is consistent with the field equations to set χ = 1, with u not
necessarily curl-free, in which case the equations in (10) reduce to,
The reason for making this simplification is that the system becomes a local Lagrangian
one. This can be seen by using the standard Clebsch parametrization [10]
for the vector-field u, in which case the local Lagrangian density is,
It will be convenient to write this Lagrangian density in the form
istheconvectivederivativeD restrictedtothecurl-freepartofu. Clearlyν isaLagrange
multiplier, and, by varying it, we obtain
Note that the first equation here is equivalent to Dθ = 0 since
(cid:16) (cid:17)
We now proceed to the third and last simplification mentioned.
The third simplification we make is to consider the curl-free case u = −∇φ or
ν = θ = 0. Then the Action corresponding to the Lagrangian density (13) reduces to
Note that the quantity in square brackets is just the Hamilton-Jacobi function for a
free particle. Following our strategy we now seek the maximal invariance group of the
Action (17).
The most general transformation involving the fields, as shown in the Appendix,
takes the linear, inhomogeneous form
where s is a constant. However, one sees at once that if µ 6= 0 the form invariance of
the Action is violated by inhomogeneous terms. Furthermore, since
we see that we obtain a term (∂φ ˜ /∂τ)2 unless
This means that the ∂φ/∂t term does not pick up an x-dependent factor relative to
∂φ/∂τ. Finally we note that under the transformations (18), the second term in the
Hamilton-Jacobi part of the Action (17) gives
2 ij ∂x ∂x 2 ij ∂ξ ∂ξ ij ∂x ∂x kl ij
i j i j k l
where h is the flat Euclidean metric. As is well-known, the most general transfor-
mations that have the above property are the special conformal transformations with
parameter b, for which Ω = (1+2b·x+b2x2)2, and the Euclidean transformations for
which Ω = 1. It is easy to see however that, for the Action in (17) to remain invariant,
the ∂φ/∂t part of the Hamilton-Jacobi function must transform in the same way as
the (∂φ/∂x)2 part. But since (20) forbids ∂φ/∂t to pick up an x-dependent factor, the
conformal transformations in (21) are not allowed. Thus the possible transformations
where s is a constant and M is Euclidean i.e. M = f(t)R(t), where f is a scale factor
and R(t) is a rotation matrix. In that case
j = ⇒ (23)
∂ ∂ ξ t i ∂ ∂ x ξ i j ! (cid:18) ξ ˙ i M ij (cid:19) (cid:18) detM 6= 0 (cid:19)
and the Action becomes
Invariance then requires that
(cid:16) (cid:17)
Equations (25) can be readily solved to get
The result for γ is in agreement with [4]; in particular in three-dimensional space,
n = 3, and γ = 5, as expected. Substituting these results in (26), and requiring that
it be satisfied for all ∂φ/∂ξ , splits it into
i = − and − = 0, where τ˙ = detM2 (28)
(cid:16) (cid:17)
Notice that the second equation is just the free Hamilton-Jacobi equation with Action
λ. The maximal invariance group can now be obtained by solving the above equations
for the functions ξ and λ. Thus the invariance group G is determined by the structure
of the Hamilton-Jacobi equation for a free particle. However, we will now show, even
before solving these equations, that the group of invariance remains the same when the
simplifications made in this section are relaxed and we return to the case of the general
fluid configurations.
Proof of Maximality for General Fluid Configurations
We first note that the first and last equations in (28) are exactly the conditions for
the restricted derivative D to transform covariantly since
i i i i i j k
(cid:16) (cid:17) (cid:16) (cid:17)
(cid:16) (cid:17) (cid:16) (cid:17) (29)
Let us now relax the assumption that u is curl-free, with χ = 1 still being true. From
the Lagrangian density for this case,
and the covariant transformations,
we see that (30) will be invariant under the given space-time transformations provided
only that ν and θ are scalars. Thus the case of general u puts no restrictions on the
space-time transformations but determines the transformation properties of the ν and θ
components of u. In particular we see that the full convective derivative D and u have
the transformation properties
(cid:16) (cid:17)
Notethat the inhomogeneous part of the u-transformationcomes from the curl-free part
of u. Furthermore we see that the G transformations do not preserve the condition of
incompressibility (∇·u = 0) and hence we need to consider general, compressible fluid
configurations.
All this is within the Lagrangian framework. In order to relax the χ = 1 simplifica-
tion, we need to allow for general fields χ. For this we must go outside the Lagrangian
framework and consider the field equations. But that is simple since the field equations
with χ = 1 are invariant and we see by inspection that the equations for general χ
remain invariant provided that χ transforms as a scalar. Thus the set of equations in
(10) is invariant with respect to the maximal invariance group provided ν, θ and χ
transform as scalars. Thus the maximal invariance group for ν = θ = 0, χ = 1 (cor-
responding to our sub-class without viscosity) is the maximal invariance group for all
inviscid configurations.
Finally we include viscosity effects. It is straightforward to verify that the viscosity
terms in (4b) are covariant only if ∇·u = 0 or ∇ ζ = 0. However, as already mentioned,
the former condition is not invariant under G transformations and hence covariance
requires that ζ is a constant in space (although not in time). In this case, the fluid
equations (4) would remain invariant if the viscosity fields transform as tensors of rank
n, where n is the space dimension i.e. η → detMnη and ζ → detMnζ. This in turn
implies that the equations would remain invariant under the Navier-Stokes assumption
of constant viscosity only if detM is a constant which breaks the G symmetry in a
tensorial way. Therefore the maximal invariance group of the Navier-Stokes equations
contains just the static Galilei group plus dilations and time translations corresponding
to detM being a constant, as will be clear when we solve for the G transformation
functions in the next section.
It is worth mentioning that the breakdown of G by the Navier-Stokes restriction
does not contradict (9) because, in contrast to the other restrictions η = ζ = 0, χ = 1,
∇×u = 0 that we have considered, this restriction has a feed-back effect on the non-
linear part of the space-time transformations.
The Solutions for the Transformation Functions
Returning to the equations in (28), it is first useful to note from the definition of ξ
in (22) that
i = A ξ +W where A ≡ M MT = f f −1+R RT and W = M (M −1w) (33)
ij j i τ τ τ
where the subscript τ denotes differentiation with respect to τ. Hence the first equation
in (28) becomes
(cid:16) (cid:17)
Here the equation in the brackets shows that A is a symmetric matrix. But since R
is a rotation matrix, R RT is in the Lie algebra of the rotation group and hence is
antisymmetric. Thus we have the result R = 0 and hence R is a constant (rigid)
rotation matrix.2
It then follows that detM = f and from (28) and (32) we have
(cid:16) (cid:17)
The definitions of A and W then simplify to
and W = f∂
(cid:16) (cid:17)
Integrating (34) with respect to ξ we have
Substituting this into the second equation in (28) we get
Comparing the coefficients of the powers of ξ breaks this into
∂A ∂W ∂ f ∂h W2
We can solve the second equation in (39) explicitly to get
i t i i i i
(cid:16) (cid:17)
where the v and a are constants. It follows that
i i i i i i
2 With this in mind, we suppress the matrix for convenience, and restore it later.
The third equation in (39) can then be written as
∂h v2 ∂h v2 v2
∂τ 2f2 ∂t 2 2
Since the transformations of the fields are given by ρ˜ = f
= φ + λ, we see
that everything is determined by the function f which satisfies
(cid:16) (cid:17) (cid:16) (cid:17)
Using τ˙ = f2, this is easily seen to be equivalent to
...
∂2f = 0 and − = 0 (44)
(cid:16) (cid:17)
The left hand side of the second equation is the Schwarzian derivative of τ and it follows
that the general solution of the above equation is
Thus the most general transformations of the time coordinate form an SL(2,R) group.
The second equation in (35) then reduces to
From (41) it also follows that
Returning to the general case, and using the inversions
(cid:16) (cid:17)
The case detM = f = a constant corresponds to letting γ = 0 and from (45) and (47) it
is clear that the group of transformations inthis case includes the staticGalileigroup G,
the dilations, the time translations and parity, but excludes time-reversal. As already
mentioned, this is the maximal invariance group of the Navier-Stokes equations. It is
also useful to consider the following two special cases.
I. β = γ = 0, α = 1: The Connected, Static Galilei Transformations: In this case, we
g : τ = t, ξ = Rx+a+vt (50)
where we have restored the rotations, and from (49) it follows
These equations describe connected, static Galilei transformations which exclude parity
and time-reversal.
II. a = v = 0, R = 1: The Inversion Transformations: In this case, we have
These are the SL(2,R) generalisations of the inversion transformations presented in [4].
For the transformations of the fields we have from (49)
The Maximal Invariance Group G
To understand the structure of the group, we study the relationship between the
SL(2,R) group and the connected static Galilei group G. Let us first consider a conju-
gation of a g ∈ G by a σ ∈ SL(2,R). By making three successive transformations of x
and t we find that
g(R,a ,v ) (54)
(cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18) (cid:19)(cid:18) (cid:19)
This shows that G is an invariant sub-group and so the group structure is
where ∧ denotes semi-direct product with G as invariant subgroup. More precisely, if
we recall that G itself takes the form
(cid:16) (cid:17)
where T and B are the translation and boost groups with parameters a and v respec-
tively, then we see that SL(2,R) commutes with R and mixes T and B in the manner
shown in (55).
The original inversion Σ is the special element of SL(2,R) for which (α, β, γ, δ) =
(0, −1, 1, 0). Note that Σ2 = P where P is the parity. Furthermore if we consider the
coset elements g (R, a, v) ≡ Σg(R, a, v), where g ∈ G, we have using (54) and the
standard property of Galilei transformations viz. g R,a,v)g(R,a ,v = g RR ,Ra +
a,Rv ′ +v , (cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:0)
g (R , a , v )g (R, a, v) = g (R R, R a−v , R v+a )
⇒ g2 (R, a, v) = g (R2,Ra−v,Rv+a)
where we have used the obvious notation g (R, a, v) = Pg(R, a,v). It follows from
the above equation that
(cid:16) (cid:17)
Since Ra−v and Rv+a are linearly independent, this shows that every connected
Galilei transformation is the fourth power of a coset transformation.
Extension to the Quantum Theory
If a classical system is described by the Galilei group G in (57) then, in the field
theoretic representation, there is a central extension of G; namely, the well-known one-
parameter mass group whose generator commutes with all the generators of G. Since
a quantum wavefunction can be thought of as a nonrelativistic field, the corresponding
quantum system is described by a central extension of the group of the form
(cid:16) (cid:17)
where the group (T,B) is no longer abelian, but is a Heisenberg-Weyl group of the form
T(a)B(v) =
and M is a central constant. It is obvious that this relation is invariant with respect
to the transformation (55) of the parameters a and v induced by SL(2,R). Thus G
remains a symmetry group of the quantised system.
Connection to the Free Schro¨dinger Equation
The fact that G is a covariance group of the Hamilton-Jacobi function ∂φ/∂t +
1/2(∇φ)2 shows that it is an invariance group of a free particle. The above discussion
of the quantum extension implies that it is also an invariance group of a quantised free
particle. Indeed it was shown in 1972 that G is the maximal invariance group of the
free particle Schro¨dinger equation [8]. Since the invariance under the Galilei group is
well-known, it suffices to verify that the Schr¨odinger equation
∂ψ ¯h2 ∂2ψ
remains form-invariant under the G. It is easily checked that this is accomplished by
the following transformation of the wavefunction
where λ is defined in (49). Note that at time τ = ∞, i.e. t = −δ, the wavefunction
becomes infinite, but this is precisely the singularity associated with the explosion.
Conclusions
We have investigated the maximal kinematical invariance group of general fluid
mechanics and have found that it is a semi-direct product of the form SL(2,R) ∧ G
where G is the static Galilei group. The incompressibility condition is not preserved
by the above transformations and hence the viscosity terms transform covariantly only
if the viscosity field ζ is constant in space (although not in time). In this case the
fluid dynamic equations remain invariant if the viscosity fields transform like tensors
of rank n, where n is the space dimension. The Navier-Stokes assumption of constant
viscosity breaks the SL(2,R) part of G to a two-parameter group of dilations and time
translations in a tensorial manner.
The inversion transformation Σ found in [4] is a special element of the SL(2,R)
and acts like the square root of parity. The transformations generated by the coset
elements g = Σg act like the fourth roots of connected Galilei transformations. It is
also pointed out that G is the Niederer group which is the maximal invariance group of
the free Schro¨dinger equation. The reason for this is that G is actually the invariance
group of the free Hamilton-Jacobi function, which is common to both fluid dynamics
and the classical limit of the Schr¨odinger equation. It is surprising that such a basic
result does not seem to be more widely known!
Inthisappendix weshow thatthelinear inhomogeneoustransformationsofthefield
variables considered in (18) are indeed the most general field transformations allowed.
In order to show this we begin by noting that the most general transformations can be
written as follows:
where φ ˜ and ρ˜ are a priori arbitrary functions of the old fields φ and ρ. Note that we
are not allowing the fields to mix, but this is reasonable since φ and ρ are really not on
the same footing; whereas φ appears in the Action (17) only through its derivatives, ρ
appears without any derivatives. Using the fact that x, t → ξ,τ, the Hamilton-Jacobi
function can be rewritten as follows:
(cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:1)
Now it follows from
We would now like to fix the form of F by requiring the covariance of the Hamilton-
Jacobi function i.e.
(cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:1)
Substituting (A4) on the right hand side of (A2), we notice that we get terms of the
form (∂φ ˜ /∂τ)2 unless ∂τ/∂x = 0 ⇒ τ ≡ τ(t). Equating the coefficients of ∂φ ˜ /∂τ and
−(1/2)(∂φ ˜ /∂ξ)2 because of covariance, we get
(cid:0) (cid:1)
Requiring the coefficient of the ∂φ/∂ξ term to vanish produces
(cid:0) (cid:1)
Similarly requiring the coefficient of the φ–independent terms to vanish we get
(cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:1)
Substituting this equation in (A6) gives, after some algebra,
(cid:0) (cid:1)
(cid:0) (cid:1)
From (A5) it follows that since φ is arbitrary, the left hand side changes whereas the
right hand side, for a given ξ,τ,x,t, is a constant in the field. Hence
is a constant in the field variable. Solving the above differential equation we
where λ ≡ −sλ ˜ . Further by taking a derivative of (A9) with respect to ξ we see that
Again from (A6) it is clear that the left hand side of the above equation is independent
and hence, s
is independent of ξ. Similarly, by appealing to (A7) we can show
that it is independent of τ. Hence s is a constant. A similar analysis may be carried
out to establish the generality of the ρ transformations in (18).
Acknowledgements
We thank Luke Drury for introducing us to this topic and for many useful discus-
sions, David Saakian for raising the question of viscosity, O. Jahn for his interest, and
R. Jackiw for valuable correspondence.