The GenoChip: A New Tool for Genetic Anthropology
Eran Elhaik1, Elliott Greenspan2, Sean Staats2, Thomas Krahn2, Chris Tyler-Smith3, Yali Xue3,
Sergio Tofanelli4, Paolo Francalacci5, Francesco Cucca6, Luca Pagani3,7, Li Jin8, Hui Li8,
Theodore G. Schurr9, Bennett Greenspan2, R. Spencer Wells10,* and the Genographic Consortium
1 Department of Mental Health, Johns Hopkins University Bloomberg School of Public Health,
615 N. Wolfe Street, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA
2 Family Tree DNA, Houston, TX 77008, USA
3 The Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Hinxton, UK
4 Department of Biology, University of Pisa, Italy
5 Department of Natural and Environmental Science, Evolutionary Genetics Lab, University of
Sassari, Italy
6 National Research Council, Monserrato, Italy
7 Division of Biological Anthropology, University of Cambridge, UK
8 Fudan University, Shanghai, China
9 University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA
10 National Geographic Society, Washington DC, USA
*Please address all correspondence to Spencer Wells at spwells@ngs.org
The Genographic Project is an international effort using genetic data to chart human migratory
history. The project is non-profit and non-medical, and through its Legacy Fund supports locally
led efforts to preserve indigenous and traditional cultures. While the first phase of the project
was focused primarily on uniparentally-inherited markers on the Y-chromosome and
mitochondrial DNA, the next is focusing on markers from across the entire genome to obtain a
more complete understanding of human genetic variation. In this regard, genomic admixture is
one of the most crucial tools that will help us to analyze the genetic makeup and shared history
of human populations. Although many commercial arrays exist for genome-wide SNP
genotyping, they were designed for medical genetic studies and contain medically related
markers that are not appropriate for global population genetic studies. GenoChip, the
Genographic Project’s new genotyping array, was designed to resolve these issues and enable
higher-resolution research into outstanding questions in genetic anthropology. We developed
novel methods to identify ancestry informative markers (AIMs) and genomic regions that may be
enriched with alleles shared with ancestral hominins. Overall, we collected and ascertained
AIMs from over 450 populations. Containing an unprecedented number of Y-chromosomal and
mtDNA SNPs and over 130,000 SNPs from the autosomes and X-chromosome, the chip was
carefully vetted to avoid inclusion of medically relevant markers. The GenoChip results were
successfully validated by genotyping more than 500 samples from the 1000 Genomes Project
and private collections. To demonstrate its capabilities, we compared the F distributions of
GenoChip SNPs to those of two commercial arrays for three continental populations. While all
arrays yielded similarly shaped (inverse J) F distributions, the GenoChip autosomal and X-
chromosomal distributions had the highest mean F (0.10 and 0.13, respectively), attesting to its
ability to discern subpopulations. In summary, the GenoChip is a dedicated genotyping platform
for genetic anthropology and promises to be the most powerful tool available for assessing
population structure and migration history.
Introduction
Apportionment of human genetic variation has long established that all living humans are related
via recent common ancestors who lived in sub-Saharan Africa about 200,000 years ago [1]. The
world outside Africa was settled over the past 50,000-100,000 years [2,3] when the descendents
of our African forebearers spread out to populate other continents [4]. While genome-wide data
depict a single major dispersal of modern humans from Africa, recent findings suggest at least
two archaic admixture (interbreeding) events with extinct hominins, one with Neanderthals in
Eurasia and the second with Denisovans in Southeast Asia [5,6]. The recurrent interbreeding,
admixture, and migration events shaped modern populations into mosaics of ancient and recent
haplotypes – varying only by the proportion of their ancestral genetic blocks, not in the building
blocks themselves. Passed down the sex lines nearly unaltered from one generation to the next,
these blocks carry the story of our most recent common ancestors' journeys. Although highly
similar, the subtle genetic differences between populations are like breadcrumbs allowing us to
trace human past through mixing events and migrations.
The advent of next-generation sequencing technology that enabled the rapid genotyping of
hundreds of thousands of genetic markers revolutionized genetic anthropology and launched
several human sequencing projects, in the process broadening our understanding of genetic
diversity and migration history [e.g., 7,8,9,10]. The rapidly escalating interest in ancestral
histories of foreign continents and geographical regions, and the greater antiquity of populations
from Africa [11], India [12], the Americas [13], the Caucasus [14], and Oceania [15], have
already yielded deeper splits among these regions and complex patterns of past migration and
admixture events.
Despite this tremendous progress, many unresolved problems hinder progress in the field. First,
only a handful of the estimated 6,000 global population groups were genotyped and studied,
which limits the phylogeographic resolution of the findings. Second, the plethora of genetic
markers obtained from different genotyping platforms has resurrected the “empty matrix”
problem, whereby populations from different studies can barely be compared. Finally,
genotyping costs remained prohibitively high and unjustified as commercial genotyping
platforms do not accommodate crucial ancestry informative markers (AIMs) [16]. Furthermore,
these arrays are also enriched in trait- or disease-related markers, which prompts a host of
psychological, social, legal, political, and ethical concerns from the individual, population, and
global levels [17].
The first phase of the Genographic Project focused on reconstructing human migration through
the analysis of uniparentally-inherited markers on the Y-chromosome and mitochondrial DNA.
This phase yielded three dozen publications that described the population structure of modern
populations [e.g., 14], traced migration routes of ancient populations [e.g., 18], improved the
resolution of Y and mtDNA phylogenetic trees [e.g., 19,20,21], and attempted to identify genetic
relatedness to historical figures [e.g., 22,23]. The project has not only been successful in
inferring details of human migration histories, but also in attracting public participants interested
in testing their own DNA to better understand their genetic ancestry. As of December 2012, over
500,000 public participants from more than 130 countries have purchased Genographic public
participation kits, of which over 200,000 have submitted their results to an anonymous database
to be used for research purposes.
The success of the Genographic Project has also helped to spawn a broader interest in what has
been dubbed “genetic genealogy.” Unlike other fields of science where the knowledge and
excitement of new discoveries are often confined to members of the scientific community,
genealogy, and particularly genetic genealogy, has a very large, devoted, supportive, and highly
active public community. Since the 1970s, genealogy has become one of the most popular
avocations, enjoyed by millions of people around the world seeking to trace their ancestry and
learn about the geographical regions in which their ancestors lived [24]. While traditional
genealogy requires written records, which only extend several generations into the past at most,
genetic genealogy is easily available to everyone in the form of direct-to-consumer genetic
ancestry tests and friendly computational interfaces that visualize and explain the results [25].
The increasing fascination with genetics has prompted entrepreneurs to offer self-test kits and
provide information ranging from disease risk and life-style choices to genetic ancestry [26].
Some of the existing solutions have been criticized for making deceptive health-related claims
and for providing limited and imprecise answers regarding ancestry [17]. The concerns about
ancestry reporting were not unjustified, as these entrepreneurs adopted problematic commercial
genotyping platforms for assessing genetic background.
While the uniparental markers used in the first phase of the Genographic Project remain useful
for studies of human migration history, many questions cannot be answered without assessing
patterns of genetic variation in the rest of the genome. Legal and ethical obstacles often
hampered autosomal-driven studies due to the difficulty in discerning markers that are
informative for genetic anthropology from those having medical relevance. Since the launch of
the Genographic Project and similar endeavors, a growing number of individuals and populations
have expressed serious concerns about the sharing and potential exploitation of their medical
information [17,27]. Unfortunately, all commercially available genotyping platforms were
optimized for medical genetic work, making them unsuitable for population genetic studies due
to privacy concerns and biased allele frequencies. Even the exceptional Affymetrix Human
Origins array, which was also designed for population genetic studies [28], not only contains tens
of thousands of coding and medically-related markers, but was ascertained based on data from
only 12 populations, which may limit its applicability to study worldwide genetic diversity. To
reconcile the competing interests in investigating population genetic history and identifying
variants contributing to health, we decided to develop a novel SNP array – which we call the
GenoChip.
Our goals were to design, manufacture, validate, and test a state of the art SNP array dedicated
solely to genetic anthropology and to genotype a large number of samples and populations to
learn more about human history. The GenoChip is an Illumina HD iSelect genotyping bead array
designed with over 130,000 highly informative autosomal and X-chromosomal markers, ~12,000
Y-chromosomal markers, and ~3,300 mtDNA markers. As AIMs are invaluable tools in
population genetics and genetic anthropology for discerning subpopulations, we focused our
efforts in collecting the most informative ones [29]. The autosomal and X-chromosomal marker
sets comprised of over 75,000 AIMs were ascertained from over 450 worldwide populations,
making it the largest and most detailed AIMs panel ever constructed (Figure 1). Half of our
AIMs were culled from the literature and private data sets and the rest were calculated using
infocalc [30] and AIMsFinder. We applied these two methods on global panels comprised of
nearly 300 populations assembled from public and private data sets. Many of these populations
are unique to our project and have never before studied or searched for AIMs. We used infocalc
to identify AIMs in population panels organized by the source of the data, whereas AIMsFinder
was applied in a pairwise fashion over all populations. We excluded SNPs in high LD (r2>0.4)
in all populations, except for hunter-gatherer like the Hadza and Sandawe of Tanzania [31] and
Melanesian populations [10]. To determine the extent of gene flow from Neanderthal and
Denisovan to modern humans, we collected from the literature [5,32,33] SNPs and haplotypes
from genomic regions bearing evidence of interbreeding. In addition, we used a modified
version of IsoPlotter [34] to identify regions in which modern humans and Neanderthals share
the derived allele and chimpanzees and Denisovans share the ancestral allele. Using the same
approach, we identified SNPs within regions enriched for the Denisovan sharing derived alleles
with modern humans. Overall, nearly 30,000 SNPs were collected in these interbreeding
hotspots. We also included ~1,400 high-confidence Paleo-Eskimo Saqqaq SNPs [35] and over
13,000 high-confidence Aboriginal Australian SNPs [15]. Finally, we randomly selected 3,000
common HapMap III SNPs (minor allele frequency [MAF]>20%) and 4,500 1000 Genomes
Project SNPs with an allele frequency of at least 10% with at least one continental population.
To prevent false-positives, we included mostly SNPs observed in the HapMap III and the 1000
Genome Project data sets [7,9]. We further eliminated A/T and C/G SNPs to minimize strand
misidentification.
Overall, the GenoChip is highly compatible with other commercial arrays. Some 76% of our
SNPs overlap with those in the Illumina Human 660W-Quad array, 55% overlap with the
Illumina HumanOmni1-Quad, Illumina Express, and Affymetrix 6.0 arrays, and 40% overlap
with the Affymetrix 5.0 and Affymetrix Human Origins arrays. In addition, we constructed over
45,000 probes to identify SNPs defining all known Y-chromosome and mtDNA haplogroups,
many of which were not reported in the literature (Supplementary Texts 1-2). The resulting chip
has a SNP density of at least one per hundred kilobases over 92% of the assembled human
genome (hg19) (Figure 2), including regions uncharted by the HapMap (I-III) and HGDP
projects [9,10,36]. We further note that this choice of SNPs is particularly suitable for
imputation. We thus designed an array suitable to detect gene flow from ancient hominins into
modern humans as well as between the putatively oldest populations, such as hunter-gatherers
(e.g.,Khoi-San) and more recent populations, such as the Druze or European Jews [37]. In this
regard, the GenoChip differs from alternative solutions geared toward analyzing far fewer
populations and uniparental markers that may lack geographic specificity.
Several steps were taken to ensure that the genetic results would not be exploited for
pharmaceutical, medical, and biotechnology purposes. First, participant samples were
maintained in a completely anonymous status during GenoChip analysis. Second, no phenotypic
or medical data were collected from the participants. Third, we included only SNPs in
noncoding regions without any known functional association, as reported in dbSNP build 132.
Lastly, we filtered our SNP collection against a 1.5 million SNP data set containing all variants
that have potential, known, or suspected associations with diseases.
To construct this dataset, we extracted SNPs from multiple open-access databases including
NHGRI GWAS Catalog [40], The Genetic Association Database [41], MutaGeneSys [42],
GWAS Central [43], and SNPedia [44], as well as SNPs identified in the MHC region. We also
excluded SNPs reported to be associated with Phenotypic traits. Finally, to circumvent
imputation efforts toward inferring potential medical-relevant SNPs, we excluded SNPs that
were in high LD (r2>0.8) with any of the other SNPs included in our dataset. Overall, we
assembled nearly 170,000 SNPs dedicated for genetic anthropological and genealogical research
without any known health, medical, or phenotypic relevance (Table S1).
We validated the results of the GenoChip by genotyping 168 worldwide samples from the 1000
Genomes Project and cross-validating the autosomal genotypes. The concordance rate per
sample was over 99.5%. The marginal error rate was expected due to the low coverage of the
1000 Genomes Project data, particularly for rare alleles [7]. An additional 400 samples were
genotyped to test the ability of the GenoChip to infer Y-chromosome and mtDNA haplogroups.
The average success rates for the paternal and maternal haplogroups were 82% and 90%,
respectively (Figure 3). It is very likely that the GenoChip can capture many of the remaining
haplogroups that are missing from our reference set, and, for this reason, we are currently
conducting a larger genotyping effort to validate them. Overall, we confirmed that GenoChip
produces highly accurate results and has broad coverage for SNPs defining Y-chromosome and
mtDNA haplogroups.
To demonstrate that the GenoChip consists of highly informative SNPs suitable for population
genetic studies, we compared its performance to that of the Illumina Human660W and
Affymetrix Human Origins arrays. A comparison of the minor allele frequency (MAF)
distributions between the three arrays revealed gross differences in allele frequencies (Figure 4,
S1). Due to the high frequency of rare alleles in the HapMap dataset, none of the arrays
resembled the shape of the HapMap’s MAF distribution. Nonetheless, the commercial arrays
were enriched in rare autosomal SNPs compared to the GenoChip. Similar findings were
observed for X-chromosome SNPs, although to a lesser extent, as the GenoChip consists of a
higher fraction of extremely rare SNPs as well as common SNPs. The different MAF
distributions correspond to the choices of SNP ascertainment made in each project.
To assess the extent of genetic diversity that can be inferred among human subpopulation by the
different arrays, we next compared their F distributions [45,46,47]. F , measures the
differentiation of a subpopulation relative to the total population, and is directly related to the
variance in allele frequency between subpopulations, such that a high F corresponds to a larger
difference between subpopulations [48]. Elhaik [49] used 1 million markers that were genotyped
in eight HapMap populations (YRI, LWK, MKK, CEU, TSI, CHB, CHD, and JPT) to carry out a
two-level hierarchical F analysis. He showed that the greatest proportion of genetic variation
occurred within individuals residing in the same populations, with only a small amount (12%) of
the total genetic variation being distributed between continental populations and even a lesser
amount (1%) between intra-continental populations. An F distribution for three continental
populations employing 3 million HapMap SNPs yielded an even lower estimate (0.08) to the
proportion of genetic variation distributed between continental populations due to the large
number of rare alleles [49].
F distributions for three continental populations were similarly calculated for GenoChip and
the two commercial arrays. Although all F distributions were similar in shape to the HapMap
F distribution, they differed in their means (Figure 5, S2). For autosomes and X-chromosomal
SNPs, the mean F of both Illumina Human660W and Human Originals were lower than that of
the GenoChip due to the high fraction of rare uninformative SNPs in the two commercial arrays.
These results may suggest a reduced ability to infer common SNPs that are likely old and
correspond to ancient demographic and natural processes [50,51].
The Illumina Human 660W array had the highest fraction of low-F alleles, suggesting it is less
suitable for population genetic studies compared to the GenoChip and Human Origins. As only
half of the Human Origins SNPs could be tested, it is difficult to evaluate its performance.
However, we speculate that the large number of rare SNPs, along with those not studied, which
are also likely to be rare, may reflect the small number of populations used for its ascertainment
and the number of alleles private to these populations. Because the MAF and F were not used
as filtering criteria for the GenoChip SNPs, we can conclude that its enrichment toward high-F
SNPs mirrors the success of our ascertainment process, emphasizing its potential for population
genetic studies.
To summarize, we designed, developed, validated, and tested the GenoChip, the first genotyping
chip completely dedicated to genetic anthropology. The GenoChip will help to clarify the
genetic relationships between archaic hominins such as Neanderthal and Denisovan, and modern
humans, and provide a more detailed understanding of human migration history. We compared
the GenoChip to two commercially available arrays and demonstrated the superior ability of the
GenoChip to differentiate subpopulations within global data sets. For these reasons, we expect
the expanded use of the GenoChip in genetic anthropology research will yield important new
insights into the history of our species.
Acknowledgments
We are grateful to David Reich, Nick Patterson, Morten Rasmussen, Robert Hastings, and
Dienekes Pontikos for sharing their data with us and for fruitful discussions. We also thank Alon
Keinan and the Illumina development team for their feedback and support.
Supplementary Materials
Supplementary Note 1 – attached in this document
Supplementary Note 2 – attached in this document
Supplementary Table 1 – is available from
Materials and Methods
Genotype Data Retrieval
Genotyped samples for nearly 300 worldwide populations were obtained from 16 public and
private collections [7,8,9,10,12,15,35,52,53,54,55,56,57,58,59,60] and the FamilyTreeDNA
collection. To study gene flow from apes, ancient hominins, and modern humans, we used the
dataset of 257,000 high-quality autosomal SNPs assembled by Reich et al. [61].
Identifying AIMs
Ancestral informative markers (AIMs) were collected using different approaches. To begin with,
55,000 AIMs were harvested from the published literature
[2,16,62,63,64,65,66,67,68,69,70,71,72,73,74,75,76] and 12,000 AIMs were obtained from
private collections., We also employed two methods, infocalc [30] and AIMsFinder, to find
additional AIMs in our global multi-population panels. Because infocalc [77] does not estimate
the minimal number of AIMs necessary to distinguish populations from each other, but rather
ranks SNPs by their informativeness for inferring ancestry, we selected the top 1% of
infocalc results when applied on our population panels.
To find the minimal set of AIMs necessary to distinguish any two populations, we developed
AIMsFinder. AIMsFinder is a novel principal component (PC)-based approach that identifies the
most informative set of markers that can distinguish between two populations. To circumvent
biases caused by the comparison of uneven number of populations [78,79], we implemented
Elhaik’s [37] dual-population framework consisting of three “outgroup” populations that are
available in large sample sizes and are the least admixed with each other - Mbuti and Biaka
Pygmies (Africa), French Basques (Europe), and Han Chinese (Asia) - and two populations of
interest, all of equal sample sizes. This framework minimizes the number of significant PCs to
four or fewer (Tracy-Widom test, p<0.01) and maximizes the portion of explained variance to
over 20% for the first two PCs. Convex hulls were calculated using Matlab “convhull” function
and plotted around the cluster centroids. The relatedness between two populations of interest
was estimated by the commensurate overlap of their clusters. The AIMsFinder attempts to find a
minimal set of markers that reduces this overlap.
Principal components were calculated by first forming a matrix consisting of m subjects (rows)
and n SNPs (columns) and sorting each pair of bases alphabetically. Next, the genotype data
were transformed to an integer matrix A of the same size, where each entry is encoded as 0, 1, 2,
or empty based on the count of the left allele. In other words, if B and B were the bases to
appear in the j-th SNP (in alphabetical order), B homozygotes would be encoded as 0, B B
would be encoded as 1, and B homozygotes would be set to 2. Missing SNPs were removed
from all populations. Using the approach described by Paschou et al. [80], a singular value
decomposition (SVD) was applied on A in order to compute its singular vectors and values. The
SVD returns m nonnegative singular values s, m pairwise orthonormal eigenvectors u, and n
pairwise orthonormal eigenvectors v. The SVD of the mxn matrix A is given by suvT and can be
written as a sum of outer products:
A=∑siuiviT. (1)
The left singular vectors (ui) are the linear combinations of the columns (SNPs) of the matrix A
and are denoted eigenSNPs. In the dual-population framework, the number of significant
principal components k corresponding to the eigenSNPs is less than four and for simplicity was
set to two. The columns (SNPs) that correlate with the top eigenSNPs can be identified by
rearranging Eq. 1 such that the j-th column (SNP) of matrix A (denoted by A) can be expressed
where vi is the j-th element of the i-th right singular vector and Aj is the linear combination of
the top k left singular vectors and corresponding singular values. Finally, SNPs were scored by p
Paschou et al. [80] proposed to use all the inferred SNPs for further analysis, even though such a
strategy would yield a very large number of SNPs. AIMsFinder’s strategy is to rank the SNPs by
their score, iteratively select the top 50 SNPs, and test whether using only these SNPs will reduce
the overlap between the two populations in question. If so, then the process is repeated with an
additional 50 SNPs until either no further reduction is achieved or a threshold of 2,000 SNPs is
reached. We carried out these pairwise calculations on all populations within the same
continents for which genotype data were available. Less than 10% of these populations reached
the threshold. Both infocalc and AIMsFinder were applied on the multi-population panels
independently and collectively, and retrieved nearly 75,000 AIMs.
Identifying regions of potential gene flow from archaic hominins into modern humans
Several regions showing potential interbreeding between Neanderthals and Denisovan and
modern humans were identified from existing datasets and the literature. First, we obtained
~160,000 SNPs from the USCS table ntSssSNPs [5], in which at least four of six modern human
genomes (human reference, San, Yoruba, Han, Papuan, and French) have the derived allele while
all observed Neanderthal alleles have the ancestral form. Because these SNPs were highly
clustered (e.g., 89,000 SNPs are within 10,000 from one another), we pruned this dataset by
filtering SNPs in high LD (r2>0.8) and retaining only common SNPs (MAF >20%). Overall, we
collected ~26,000 such SNPs. An additional ~600 SNPs were collected from similar regions
identified by Noonan et al. [32]. We further included 200 SNPs within 13 candidate regions for
gene flow from Neanderthal to non-African modern humans [5] in which both Neanderthal and
Denisovan share the ancestral allele with non-African populations [61]. An additional 200
common (MAF >20%) SNPs embedded within and around these haplotypes, as well as 125
SNPs the X-chromosomal haplotype (B006) and its flanking regions [33], were also included.
New candidate regions enriched for alleles shared between Neanderthals and modern humans
were detected in the following way. First, we identified all SNPs in which Neanderthals had the
derived allele but chimpanzees and Denisovans carried the ancestral allele. Of these SNPs, we
filtered out those in which Melanesians carried a lower frequency of the derived allele compared
to all other populations. Next, we identified regions enriched for the Melanesian high frequency
derived allele by modifying IsoPlotter, originally designed to identify compositionally
homogeneous genomic domains [34]. In brief, if SNPs in the regions of interest are marked as
1’s and all other SNPs are marked as 0’s, then the algorithm finds clusters with high frequency of
1’s in an unbiased manner [34]. We retained regions in which the derived alleles were of high
frequency (>20%). The same analysis was carried out for the Melanesian low frequency derived
allele SNPs. We repeated these analyses for alleles shared between modern humans,
Denisovans, and chimpanzees. Overall, ~5,000 SNPs from candidate interbreeding regions were
collected, giving us a total of ~30,000 SNPs dedicated to studying gene flow from archaic
hominines to modern populations. In this regard, we emphasize that many SNPs are informative
for more than one type of analyses so that the actual number of SNPs used for each analysis is
higher.
SNP validation
To cross-validate the GenoChip’s autosomal genotypes, we genotyped 168 samples from 14
worldwide populations of the 1000 Genomes Project including: Americans of African ancestry
(Southwest USA), Americans of Mexican ancestry (Los Angeles, USA), Americans with
Northern and Western European ancestry (Utah, USA), British (England and Scotland), Finnish
(Finland), Gujarati Indians (Houston, USA), Han Chinese (Bejing, China), Iberian (Spain),
Italians (Tuscany, Italy), Japanese (Tokyo, Japan), Kinh (Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam), Luhya
(Webuye, Kenya), Peruvians (Lima, Peru), and Yoruba (Ibadan, Nigeria). We confirmed that at
least one of the alleles matched those reported by the 1000 Genomes Project. The concordance
rate between GenoChip and the 1000 Genomes Project genotypes was calculated as the
proportion of genotypes that were identical between the two datasets.
Comparing population genetic summary statistics between genotyping arrays
To compare the performances of the validated 130,329 autosomal and X-chromosomal SNPs of
the GenoChip array to commercial arrays, we obtained the list of SNPs for the Illumina
Human660W-Quad BeadChip (544,366 SNPs) from Illumina and Affymetrix Axiom Human
Origins array (627,719 SNPs) available at ftp://ftp.cephb.fr/hgdp_supp10/Harvard_HGDP-
CEPH/all_snp.map.gz. Because of the lack of overlap between these genotyping arrays, we used
subsets of data calculated for HapMap III populations. MAF and F estimates for African,
European, and Asians, were obtained from the “continental” HapMap dataset, as described in
Elhaik [49]. Briefly, genotype data of 602 unrelated individuals from eight populations (YRI,
LWK, MKK, CEU, TSI, CHB, CHD, and JPT) were downloaded from the International HapMap
Project web site (phase 3, second draft) [9], passed through rigorous filtering criteria, and finally
merged into continental populations (African (288), European (144), and Asian (170)). The final
continental data set consisted of SNPs genotyped in at least one population from each continent.
We followed Wright’s [45] method to calculate F . For each SNP, we calculated the
frequencies of both ancestral and derived alleles in each population. We then identified the allele
with the smallest global frequency (P) when calculated as a weighted average over all
populations such that
The frequency of that allele was considered the minor allele
frequency. Similarly, the variance of the minor allele frequency P was obtained and F ST was
calculated as:
The MAF and F values of the continental dataset for autosomal (2,823,367) and X-
chromosomal (86,449) SNPs were compared to those obtained from GenoChip (126,425 and
2,421 SNPs), Illumina Human660W (541,104 and 12,916 SNPs, respectively), and Affymetrix
Axiom Human Origins Array (308,949 and 2,984 SNPs, respectively).