The human genome and drug discovery after a decade.
Roads (still) not taken
Ruth Isserlin1 , Gary D. Bader1, Aled Edwards2 *, Stephen Frye3, Timothy Willson4, Frank
The Donnelly Centre, Faculty of Medicine, University of Toronto, 160 College Street,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5S 3E1
2University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario Canada, M5G 1L7
3Center for Integrative Chemical Biology and Drug Discovery, Eshelman School of
Pharmacy, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA
4GlaxoSmithKline, Research Triangle Park, North Caroline, USA 27709
5Neurobiology and Dental Research Institute, School of Dentistry, Seoul National
University, Seoul, South Korea, 110-749
* Corresponding authors: Aled Edwards – E-mail: aled.edwards@utoronto.ca
The draft sequence of the human genome became available almost a decade ago but
the encoded proteome is not being explored to its fullest. Our bibliometric analysis of
several large protein families, including those known to be “druggable”, reveals that,
even today, most papers focus on proteins that were known prior to 2000. It is evident
that one or more aspects of the biomedical research system severely limits the
exploration of the proteins in the 'dark matter' of the proteome, despite unbiased genetic
approaches that have pointed to their functional relevance. It is perhaps not surprising
that relatively few genome-derived targets have led to approved drugs.
The Harlow-Knapp Effect
The first significant analyses of the citation activity for human proteins were done for the
human protein kinome by Harlow (Grueneberg et al. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2008),
and then by Knapp (Fedorov et al. Nat Chem Biol 2010). The human protein kinome
comprises 518 members and has been the subject of intense research activity in the
public and private sectors (Grant Cell Mol Life Sci 2009). Harlow and colleagues
highlighted that a relatively small set of kinases garnered the majority of citations, and
that most essential protein kinases, as revealed by RNAi studies, remain relatively
unexplored in the scientific literature (Grueneberg et al. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2008).
Knapp and colleagues extended this observation to drug discovery by showing that the
same small fraction of the human protein kinases that garnered the most citations were
also the focus of most patents (Fedorov et al. Nat Chem Biol 2010). We thus define the
Harlow-Knapp (H-K) effect as the propensity of the biomedical and pharmaceutical
research communities to focus their activities, as quantified by the number of
publications and patents, on a small fraction of the proteome.
The existence of the H-K effect within the human kinome may derive from a number of
causes, including explicit or subliminal pressure within the biomedical enterprise to focus
in areas of communal interest, the order of discovery of a protein/gene, and/or the
availability of tools to study the proteins. If one of these reason(s) was the underlying
cause, the phenomenon would hold for more than the human kinome and it would be
resistant to change over time. In this article, we (1) examine the prevalence of the H-K
effect; (2) examine publication patterns to explore the H-K effect as a function of time;
(3) explore the hypothesis that the availability of reagents is one of the mediators of the
H-K effect; and (4) make recommendations as to how researchers and funders might
respond in lieu of these findings, particularly given the expectations of the public that the
human genome project will facilitate the development of new medicines.
Publication patterns pre- and post- the availability of the human genome
The H-K effect was discovered by analyzing the human protein kinome. To examine
whether the H-K effect is more broadly observable, we analyzed the citation patterns for
the nuclear hormone receptors (NR), which are the targets for many marketed drugs,
and found that most of the research activity in this family is also focused on 10% of the
family members (Figure 1). Similar patterns are observed for other “druggable” human
protein families, such as the human methyltransferases and bromodomain-containing
proteins (Supplemental material). We conclude that the H-K effect may be a
fundamental feature of research activity and not a protein family-specific phenomenon.
Figure 1: Human NR Citations (1950-2009)
Percentage of citations for 48 human NRs from 1950-2009 (116,552 total citations),
ordered by total citation count over that time frame (blue). Percentage of citations for the
year 2009 (11,140 total citations) is shown as a red line highlighting that the bulk of
citations from 2009 is still dominated by historically popular receptors.
How quickly are publication patterns changing?
The H-K effect was initially seen by examining the cumulative number of citations over
time (Grueneberg et al.; Federov et al.) for the set of protein kinases. It is possible that
the observed H-K effect simply reflects a “carry-over” from pre-genome citations, and
that present-day citation patterns are actually changing substantially to focus on the
newly discovered family members. To test this idea, we performed a similar citation
analysis of the protein kinase family but expanded it to include the distribution of
citations overtime time. For each of the protein kinases, we quantified their citations
before and after 2002, when the seminal paper charting the human kinome was
published (Manning et al. Science 2002). There were a total of ~80,000 citations prior
to 2002 and ~120,000 citations after. The normalized distribution of these citations is
shown in Figure 2. This analysis revealed that 84% of the citations to protein kinases in
1950-2002 were focused on only 10% of the kinome (50 kinases). Interestingly, the very
same kinases continued to garner most of the citations even long after the genome
information became widely available (77% of citations between 2003 and 2008, and 74%
of the citations in 2009). At the other end of the spectrum, the set of 300 kinases (60% of
the kinome) that were at the bottom of the citation list in 2002 remain poorly studied
today; in aggregate, they accrued only 5% of the kinase citations in 2009. These data
suggest that the availability of the genome sequence has not substantially influenced
biomedical research priorities. There are, however, indications that unbiased genome-
wide studies are slowly influencing publication trends. The three largest spikes in the
right hand side of the 2009 citation graph are BRAF (Entrez gene id: 673) (Davies et al.
Nature 2002), PTEN Induced Putative Kinase 1 (Entrez gene id : 65018 PINK1) (Valente
et al. Science 2004) and Leucine-Rich Repeat Kinase 2 (Entrez gene id : 120892
LRRK2) (Zimprich et al. Neuron 2004) – kinases that have been genetically linked to
human disease in the past decade.
Figure 2: Human Protein Kinase Publications 1950-2009
Percentage of citations in the years 1950-2002 (kinome publication date), 2003-2008
and 2009 for all human protein kinases. The majority of the publications in all three year
ranges, 84%, 77% and 74%, respectively, are associated with the top 50 kinases as
ranked by their popularity in 2002. Exceptions to the trend include BRAF, LRRK2 and
PINK1, three kinases with few publications in 2002 but substantial growth in 2009.
What underlies the H-K effect?
If we assume that the latest publication dealing with p38 kinase, currently one of the top
ten popular kinases from our bibliometric analysis, is less impactful on our understanding
of human health than the first studies of a novel kinase, then the H-K effect may reflect
an underlying condition that needs intervention. Therefore, it is important to understand
the basis for the H-K effect if society is to capture the most value from the human
genome sequence, as well as to advance more innovative targets into drug discovery
pipelines. We posit that the H-K effect likely derives from a combination of human
nature, the structure of the funding and peer-review systems and the availability of
research infrastructure and methods.
Human nature. Protein scientists often develop unique expertise within a system and
then strive to attain a deeper understanding of the underlying mechanisms. Indeed, the
complexity of biology is so rich that it is always possible to ask important questions about
even well-studied systems, and in those efforts uncover fascinating and sometimes
revolutionary biology (Guerrier-Takada et al. Cell 1983). Thus it is now well-accepted to
focus on systems that are well-described, in which questions can be well-formulated and
whose analysis will reveal fundamental principles that can hopefully be applied more
broadly. It is also true that such discoveries can often only be made by scientists with a
deep technical understanding of an experimental system. As Kornberg stated “scientists
love to fondle their problems” (Judson, “The Eighth Day of Creation”, Simon and
Schuster (1979)). Taken together, these considerations provide sufficient justification for
grant panels to support focused science; unfortunately the corollary is that proposing to
stray beyond one’s area of expertise is often criticized. In conclusion, the H-K effect
derives in part from the norms of curiosity-driven science and the accepted advantages
of gaining competence in a given field of research.
Organization of funding and review. The format of grant proposals alone encourages
research within well-described areas. Grant proposals require that the applicant explain
the rationale and significance of the work within the context of existing knowledge, and
also to present sufficient preliminary data to convince the reviewer that the proposed
research has a reasonable probability of success. These expectations and parameters
strongly bias researchers to work on well-studied systems, in which peer endorsement is
more likely and the path to results clearer.
Scientific success also depends on high quality publications – often assessed by the
number of citations or the perceived impact of the journal. Here the system also biases
toward well-studied systems because peer-reviewers of manuscripts are more
comfortable if work can easily be placed into the context of existing knowledge.
Compared with the analysis of a well-known protein, elucidating the function of a novel
protein to a level sufficient to be accepted into a “top” journal requires the investment of
significantly more effort and resources, and this is much riskier for scientists concerned
with timelines of grant renewals, student theses and tenure clocks.
The organization of grant applications also conspires against research of the proteome’s
dark matter. Given that the most important metrics used to score grants are: context
within existing knowledge; innovation; and probability of success/impact, proposals on
unstudied proteins are less competitive compared with proposals that are more well-
contextualized. Indeed, proposals on unstudied proteins are often damned with the
pejorative “fishing expedition” label. It is therefore quite understandable that many in the
scientific community elect to focus on scientific areas endorsed by their peers.
Lack of research tools and methods. The availability of research tools also has a
significant impact on the analysis of the human proteome. The field of genetics and
genomics show that scientists by nature are not averse to unbiased genome-wide
studies. Many current studies of biology exploit genome-wide tools as a matter of
routine, e.g. SNP arrays or whole genome RNAi sets. However, the in-depth analysis of
any protein that emerges from these screens depends on the availability of high quality,
protein-specific research tools, such as the purified protein, high quality antibodies
and/or high quality chemical probes. Such protein-specific reagents are not as readily
available, and thus it often falls to the investigator to develop the enabling tools. For any
laboratory or field, the generation of these tools presents a major and risky commitment
validation/biotechniques-300587.html). When the protein is directly linked to a large
disease, such as cancer or neurological disease, has a predicted biochemical function,
and has “druggable” properties, the risk appears worth the reward, as evidenced by the
rapid growth in publications for the disease-linked BRAF, PINK1 and LRRK2 kinases.
However, if a protein does not have these favourable features, it is more difficult to make
the case to take the time to generate the necessary research tools. As a result, in most
instances when presented with a range of “hits” from genome-wide genetic screens,
scientists are compelled to pursue the proteins for which there already exist useful
reagents - which de facto are already among those most well-studied - and set aside the
proteins of unknown function for which there are no research tools.
How to change the system?
Granting agencies are certainly aware of the difficulty in supporting innovative research,
and many have explored and are continuing to explore innovative models to fund riskier
science. The struggle in this effort stems from the peer-review system, which endorses
science within accepted bounds and is inherently risk-averse, and from scientists
themselves whose careers depend on performing within the system and within strict time
frames.
In this paper, we will explore the role that the availability of research tools plays in the
biomedical research endeavour and will conclude that one way to encourage a broader
range of studies down “roads not taken” would be to generate sets of high-quality
reagents for all human proteins.
The availability of research tools and publication patterns
Genetic studies have linked thousands of human genes to interesting phenotypes, yet
the publication records show that only some of the interesting proteins are pursued
vigorously by the community. It is likely that the choices about which proteins receive
attention are in part influenced by the availability of reagents for each protein.
We set out to test this idea by examining the retrospective publication trends in the 48-
member human NR family. NRs are transcription factors that directly bind small
molecule signaling ligands, such as steroids, hormones and cholesterol derivatives.
This family presents an ideal test case because: (1) many of the family members were
discovered at about the same time in the 1990’s, allowing us to compare publication
trends for a large number of related proteins; (2) when discovered, all members of the
family were considered “druggable”, of potential therapeutic relevance and thus
“exciting”, yet their biological roles and cognate ligands were unknown; (3) the research
community launched “ligand discovery” efforts contemporaneously and the dates at
which the resulting research tools, specifically chemical inhibitors and activators,
became available are known; (5) there is now an equal number of family members for
which tools are and are not available.
Industry became very interested in determining the functions of the orphan receptors
because it was thought that many would be drug targets, based on the druggability of
the set of receptors already known at the time. Among the strategies employed by the
companies to determine their function was one termed “reverse endocrinology”, in which
they attempted to develop potent and selective synthetic agonists and/or antagonists to
all the receptors so as to apply the “chemical probes” to cells and animals to perturb
their normal functions in cell physiology. These approaches were applied without bias,
and probes were discovered for some but not all NRs. This protein family therefore
provides the ideal set to analyze the effects of chemical probes on publication trends.
In analyzing the NR citation patterns over time, we found that the six NR’s (12.5% of the
family) that were the top cited in 1999 (Estrogen Receptor alpha (Entrez gene id:2099,
Era), Progesterone Receptor (Entrez gene id:5241, PR), Androgen Receptor (Entrez
gene id:367, AR), Glucocorticoid Receptor (Entrez gene id:2908, GR), Peroxisome
Proliferator-Activated Receptor alpha, and gamma (Entrez gene id:5465, PPARa, Entrez
gene id:5468, PPARg) remained the top cited in 2009. These six NR’s garnered 71% of
the NR citations in 1999, and a slightly greater fraction in 2009 (72%) – perhaps
because there are marketed drugs to each. Interestingly, in contrast to the protein
kinome, where over the past decade we observed a drifting away from the kinases of
historical interest, in the NR field, this is not occurring.
To examine the impact on the availability of chemical tools on publication trends, we
examined the citation rates of the orphan receptors since their discovery, and the
changes in the citation patterns once tools were made available. Prior to the availability
of chemical tools, the orphan receptors that most rapidly developed interest in the
literature were those that had genetic links to disease, such as HNF4a, SF1 and DAX1
(Muscatelli et al. Nature 1994; Yamagata et al. Nature 1996; Achermann et al. Nat
Genet 1999), or that had interesting knock-out phenotypes, such as NGF1-B (Lee et al.
Science 1995) (Supplementary Figure 1). This pattern appears common to protein
kinases (e.g. BRAF, PINK1 and LRRK2), NRs (e.g. HNF4) and ion channels (see
below); in each family, we can see that the community’s initial interest in a protein is
often spurred by a genetic link to a human disease. This observation highlights the
seminal role of human genetics and genomics in capturing the interests of the scientific
community. However, our analysis of the NR field suggests that, in the longer term,
ongoing research activity is influenced more by the availability of research tools than by
disease link.
Figure 3: Human NR Citations 1950-1995 vs. 2009
NR citation rates for 1950-1995 (when most NRs were discovered) and 2009 order by
total in 1950-1995. Starred receptors include PPARa, PPARg, PPARd, FXR, PXR,
LXRb, ERb, LXRa show drastic increase in citations comparing 1995 and 2009.
Prior to 1995, the NR’s that were most highly cited were those for which the natural
ligands were known, such as the steroid receptors including ERa, AR, PR, and GR.
These were followed by those orphan receptors with interesting disease links. However,
by 2009, there was a significant change in the focus of NR publications (Figure 3); eight
orphan receptors become major topics of research including PPARa, PPARg, PPARd,
Farnesoid X Receptor (Entrez gene id:9971, FXR), Pregnane X Receptor (Entrez gene
id:8856, PXR), Liver X Receptor alpha and beta (Entrez gene id: 10062, LXRa), (Entrez
gene id:7376, LXRb), and Estrogen Receptor beta (Entrez gene id: 2100, ERb). To our
knowledge, the only connection between each of these receptors is that for each there is
a commercially available, high quality chemical probe. Indeed, if one analyzes the
correlation between the research activity in 2009 and the availability of chemical tools,
one observes that of the top 19 cited receptors each of them had chemical tools
available, whereas only 2 of the bottom 29 had an available high-quality chemical tool
(Figure 4). Interestingly, it is not the existence of a chemical tool that is the most
important, but instead the fact that they were of high quality and commercially available.
Although there are chemical tools that have been described for many of the less well-
cited NRs, these molecules have either poor cellular activity, lack bioavailability or were
not commercially available. (Charpentier et al. J Med Chem 1995; Buijsman et al. Med
Chem Res 2004; Busch et al. J Med Chem 2004; Zuercher et al. J Med Chem 2005;
Whitby et al. J Med Chem 2006; Grant et al. ACS Chem Biol 2010; Wang et al. ACS
Chem Biol 2010).
In summary, ~30 orphan receptors were co-discovered in the mid-1990’s. A priori, there
was no reason to rank them by popularity in the order that developed over the past 15
years. Although many are linked with interesting genetic phenotypes, the ranking that
developed appears to correlate only with the availability of high quality reagents,
suggesting that post-genome academic research directions are heavily influenced by the
availability of research tools.
Figure 4: Chemical Tools associated with Human Nuclear Hormone Receptors
Percentage of citations for the 48 NRs for 2009. Receptors are annotated according to
chemical tools associated with them, (red check mark) high quality probes with
unrestricted availability, (?) with high quality probes might be available but are restricted,
(*) with high quality probes published but not released, and (-) with no probes reported.
The top cited 19 receptors have high quality probes with unrestricted availability, two
exceptions are Rev-erba and ERRg that have relatively few publications in 2009 in
comparison to the rest of the receptors with published chemical tools.
Causation or correlation?
Our hypothesis is that the availability of research tools in part drives the direction of
biomedical research. Although it is impossible to disentangle causation from correlation,
three observations about the NR field are consistent with this hypothesis. First, if one
examines the citations of each of the 48 NR’s over time, one finds a remarkable
temporal correlation between the release of a chemical probe and the increase in
publication intensity with respect to the other NR’s (Supplementary Figure 1 and 2 ).
Second, the papers that describe the first chemical probe for each NR are among the
most highly cited for that receptor; for example, for the PPARs, PXR, LXRs, FXR and
CAR, the initial probe paper(s) remains among the top 3 in total citations for that
receptor (Supplementary Table 1). In the case of PXR, now the tenth most-cited NR, the
top 3 cited papers each report a chemical probe (Supplementary Table 1). Third, of the
12 most highly cited papers for NR’s, two report the development of a probe and the
other 10 make use of the probe in the study (Supplementary Table 2).
Publications reporting chemical tools for protein kinases also have significant citation
For NR’s, we observed a strong correlation between the availability and timing of the
publication of a chemical probe and the relative publication activity, and also showed
that the 12 most highly-cited papers in the field either describe or exploit chemical
probes. To explore whether this was a more general phenomenon, we studied the
protein kinase family. First, we identified the most highly cited papers that contain the
terms “protein kinase” or “tyrosine kinase” in their titles, both over all time and over the
past 5 years, then examined them to find those that describe or use chemical tools and
finally assessed their impact using citation analysis.
Of the most-highly cited 20 papers that contain the term “protein kinase” or “tyrosine
kinase” in their titles, 7 describe the first use of a chemical inhibitor and 8 more make
use of an inhibitor in the study (Supplementary Table 3). The 15 papers that exploit
chemical tools garnered 73% of all the citations for the top 20; the seven probe-report
papers alone captured 36% of the top 20 citations.
Chemical probes for protein kinases continue to have a major impact on the literature.
We identified the Top 20 papers published from 2005 to 2010 with “protein kinase” or
“tyrosine kinase” in their title and, of these, 16 make use of chemical tools – garnering
66% of the “Top 20” citations. Six of the most highly cited 20 papers over the past 5
years described the clinical use of protein kinase inhibitors. Interestingly, 3 of the 4 “Top
20” papers that did not use chemical tools were DNA sequencing papers that linked
specific mutations to human cancers – demonstrating the impact of the human genome
sequence.
Ion channels. In the absence of tools, disease associations dominate.
Ion channels represent another protein family that is the subject of intense research
activity. And in this family, the H-K effect is evident; 10% of the most highly cited
channels in 2009 garnered 50% of the research activity (Supplementary Table 4). One
channel in particular, TRPV1, alone attracted almost 10% of the research activity in
2009. Like the protein kinases, the under-studied ion channels receive little attention.
The lowest 60% of the ion channels garnered only 12% of the citations, though there are
many examples of under-studied channels of great importance (Lafreniere et al. Nat
Med 2010).
Figure 5: Ion Channel Citations 1950-2000 vs. 2009
Percentage of Citations for ion Channels for 1950-2000 compared to 2009. Channels
are annotated if they have been shown to be mutated in human disease. Receptors
associated with disease often show increase citation rate if they are associated with
disease.
Within the ion channel family, there are many members that are mutated in human
disease, and many others that are linked to disease as a result of their knock-out
phenotype. For the ion channels, the publication trends seem to correlate well with
genetic evidence for disease relevance, somewhat in contrast to the NR and protein
kinase field, in which the availability of protein-selective chemical tools also had great
influence. For the ion channels, this may be explicable because there are still few
channel isoform-specific antagonists or agonists, either chemical or protein based. As a
result, research on specific channels is carried out using molecular biology approaches,
which are dependent only on the availability of the cDNA. The paucity of channel-
specific probes is interesting given that research in ion channels grew rapidly after it was
learned that toxins and chemicals could functionally differentiate various ion channel
classes (e.g. tetrodotoxin for voltage-gated sodium channels, tetraethylammonium for
voltage-gated potassium channels, Ba2+ for voltage-gated calcium channels).
Summary and future directions
Our bibliometric analysis of human protein families revealed that the Harlow-Knapp
effect is not restricted to protein kinases and that citation trends are slow to change,
likely due to inherent features of scientists and of peer-review systems. We also found
that genetic linkage to disease is a major driver of research trends, but that the
availability of research tools has a dominating influence. Linking a gene/protein to a
disease is not always enough to change publication patterns.
On the one hand, our analysis supports what many scientists have known intuitively; that
the peer-review system fosters conservative thinking. However, the analysis reveals a
solution – the reticence to explore the wider aspects of the genome diminishes greatly
as research tools become available. We conclude that the generation of research tools
in an unbiased way should be a major objective of the research enterprise, and there
should be a reward system in place for those scientists who contribute to this effort. We
also conclude that to have maximal impact, the tools must be made available from
commercial sources and with no restriction on use.
In summary, while funding researchers to generate deeper insights into the biology of
proteins highly precedented to be important in human biology and disease is important,
the current distribution of biomedical efforts, as observable in the H-K effect, is probably
out of balance relative to the opportunities hidden in the ‘dark matter’ of the genome.
Based on the trends revealed here, increased support for reagent generation in this
domain may have a broad and rapid impact on translational science as well as provide
the first foothold for more fundamental biological exploration.
For each protein family, including kinases, NRs and ion channels, a list of family
members consisting of either gene symbol or name was collated by experts. Using NCBI
Entrez utilities each symbol was used to query the Entrez gene database to get
additional symbols, aliases, and alternate names. Due to the query expansion feature in
PubMed, whereby quoted terms that are not found within the database are translated to
all combinations of the words in the quoted phrase, each additional name was searched
separately in PubMed to ascertain whether it exists in the database as is. If the name is
present in PubMed, as is, it was added to the list of query terms. The number of records
returned for each of these individual searches was stored for subsequent filtering,
discussed next.
In order to help reduce false positive PubMed results, additional restrictive terms were
added to each query. For kinase queries ‘and “kinase”’ was added, for NR queries ‘and
“receptor”’ was added, and for ion channels ‘and ("channel" OR "channels" OR
"currents" OR "conductance" OR "conductances")’ was added.
The constructed query was subsequently restricted to each of the years of interest. The
number of records returned by PubMed was collected for each member of the family,
summarized and further normalized based on the total number of records for the entire
family for the given time period. In order to further refine the results, initial rankings of
the genes were examined by experts to gauge the validity of the results. It was found
that many genes had names associated with them, such as “APE” or “MR”, that caused
spurious results. The number of results returned from the separate queries of each
individual name in PubMed were used to highlight names that were causing these false
positives. This resulted in an exclusion list of names for each of the families designed to
reduce false positive results. The above process was automated using Perl.