The OpenPicoAmp : an open-source planar lipid bilayer
amplifier for hands-on learning of neuroscience
Vadim Shlyonsky1, Freddy Dupuis2 & David Gall3
1Laboratoire de Physiologie et Physiopathologie, Universit´e Libre de Bruxelles,Bruxelles, Belgium.
2Service Ondes et Signaux, Universit´e Libre de Bruxelles, Bruxelles, Belgium.
3Laboratoire de Neurophysiologie, ULB Neuroscience Institute, Universit´e Libre de Bruxelles,Bruxelles, Belgium.
Neuroscienceeducationcanbepromotedbytheavailabilityoflowcostandengagingteach-
ing materials. To address this issue, we developed an open-source lipid bilayer amplifier, the
OpenPicoAmp, which is appropriate for use in introductory courses in biophysics or neuro-
sciencesattheundergraduatelevel,dealingwiththeelectricalpropertiesofthecellmembrane.
The amplifier is designed using the common lithographic printed circuit board fabrication
process and off-the-shelf electronic components. In addition, we propose a specific design
for experimental chambers allowing the insertion of a commercially available polytetrafluo-
roethylenefilm. Weprovideacompletedocumentationallowingtobuildtheamplifierandthe
experimental chamber. The students hand-out giving step-by step instructions to perform a
recording is also included. Our experimental setup can be used in basic experiments in which
students monitor the bilayer formation by capacitance measurement and record unitary cur-
rentsproducedbyionicchannelslikegramicidinAdimers. Usedincombinationwithalow-cost
dataacquisitionboardthissystemprovidesacompletesolutionforhands-onlessons,therefore
improving the effectiveness in teaching basic neurosciences or biophysics.
1 Introduction
The traditional lecture is still the standard pedagogical method for teaching science at the under-
graduatelevel,althoughithasbeenshownthatmoreactiveapproachesaremoreefficientespecially
in large-enrollment courses [6, 5]. In addition, it is now challenged by the development of massive
open online course, or MOOC. This evolution should reinforce the interest in extensive hands-on
learningsessionsastheyprovideawaytoimprovelearningwhichcannotbeobtainedbytheonline
methods[3]. Hands-onlearningsessionsarealsorelevantinthe”flippedclassroom”approachwhich
is an inverted teaching structure where instructional content is delivered outside class, and engage-
ment with the content is done in class, under teacher guidance and in collaboration with peers.
Insteadofgivingthesameexplanationsoverandover,theteachercancapturehisexplanationonce
on video or audio, and spend energy and time individualizing instruction [15]. This provides a way
to cope with large class sizes and reach students who are at varying levels of understanding and
skill.
In undergraduate basic science courses, the hands-on learning sessions can take the form of
laboratory sessions where of a series of challenging questions and tasks require students, divided
in small groups, to practice reasoning and problem solving while provided with frequent feedback
from fellow students and from the instructors. To implement this approach there is crucial need of
engagingteachingmaterials. Entry-levelneurophysiologyequipmentusedforteachingneuroscience
are in the range of thousands of euros and experiments may require the use of living animals.
Here we propose an open-source lipid bilayer amplifier which is appropriate for use in introductory
courses in biophysics or neuroscience. We also describe a simple experimental protocol which is
currently performed by undergraduate medical students during their training in basic neuroscience
]hp-de.scisyhp[
4v9347.3041:viXra
ETIMIL ETRAC
100K IC1 IC2
Rin IC1 1G
M1 P10K K3,3 K01
VIS DE 3mm mm3 ED
- TA 3 N ,3 T µ A F LE
+TANTALE 3,3µF ST/TI 10K IT
OUT1 OUTSIG INSIG
Figure 1: The OpenPicoAmp amplifier. The chosen electronic design uses a minimal number of
commonlyfoundcomponents, liketheTexasInstrumentsTL061andTL071operationalamplifiers.
Itisthereforeinexpensiveandeasytobuild. (A)PrintedcircuitboardlayoutfortheOpenPicoAmp.
(B) Implantation of the circuit and two 6 V batteries in the main box. An additional box is
necessarytobuildtheremotecontrolallowingtoswitchgainandadjusttheoffsetwithoutproducing
vibrations that may compromise the stability of the lipid bilayer (not shown).
at our institution. The related costs to build the amplifier and the bilayer chamber are below 200
euros and the experiments do not involve the use of animals.
Onewaytoshowthatyouunderstandhowsomethingworksistobuildit. Asweareablerecon-
stitute a neuronal cell membrane at the molecular level using the so-called black lipid membrane
technique (BLM) [13], we can say that we understand how neurons produce electrical signals. The
planar lipid bilayer method allows to build an artificial cell membrane and examine pore forming
molecule functionally at the single-molecule level. The laboratory session we propose in this paper
allowsthestudentstoobservedirectlytheseelementarycurrentsproducedbytheactivityofasingle
pore forming molecule, such ionic channels being the key players in the generation of the neuronal
electrical activity.
2 Materials and Methods
2.1 Participants
The laboratory session is typically lasting four hours and starts with a brief 15-20 minutes lecture
focusingontheelectricalpropertiesofthecellmembraneandthevoltageclamptechnique. Students
are reminded that an element of passive cell membrane (i.e. not producing action potentials) is
electricallyequivalenttoaRC circuit. Inaddition,theoperationofthevoltageclampcircuit,which
Figure2: Bilayerchamber. (A)Thebilayerchamberissittinginanmetallicboxthat,whenclosed,
acts as a Faraday cage minimizing electric noise. The chamber is composed of two compartments
milled in two blocks of polyoxymethylene which are pressed together by a pair of screws. Each
compartment is connected to the amplifier though an Ag-AgCl electrode and a salt bridge. (B) the
Teflon film is sealed with silicon grease between the two blocks. Before insertion of the film in the
chamber, a circular 200 µm aperture is first etched in the film (visible at the centre of the cross
superimposed on the image).
is an op-amp current to voltage converter circuit, is explained. The latter allows us to introduce
the general concept of negative feedback which is relevant in many biological processes.
Sessions are coordinated by adjuncts instructors and older students which have been previously
trained. Usually one group of two students is assigned per bilayer setup. To allow the session to
run smoothly and maximize the interactions with the students, one instructor for two groups of
studentsisanoptimalconfiguration. Labsessionsatourinstitutionarerunwithtenbilayersetups
working simultaneously.
2.2 Equipment
2.2.1 Amplifier
Wehavedevelopedalowcostopen-sourcebilayeramplifier(fig. 1). Theamplifierisdesignedusing
the lithographic printed circuit board fabrication process and off-the-shelf electronic components,
like the TL071 and TL061 operational amplifiers (Texas Instruments, USA). The amplifier head
stage is a current to voltage converter equipped with a 1 GΩ feedback resistor. The two-stage
amplifier has two built-in gains of 1 mV/pA and 100 mV/pA, low-passed from 3400 to 16 Hz
respectively. The amplifier at its highest gain has a sensitivity in the pA range which makes
it suitable for the recording of the unitary current produced by the opening of a single channel
molecule. The design choices for this amplifier were driven by the following conditions : it should
be easy to build and inexpensive. Therefore we have chosen to use commonly found electronic
components and kept their number to a minimum. As a consequence this amplifier may not be
film Rm Cm
Figure 3: The planar lipid bilayer technique. (A) Experimental setup for the electrical recording.
The two compartments of the experimental chamber are filled with a 1 M NaCl solution. A small
volumeofthelipidsolutionisinjectedovertheapertureintheteflonfilmandthebilayerisformed
by spontaneous thinning. The voltage signal is applied on the cis side while the trans side is
held at 0 V by the current to voltage converter, acting as a virtual ground. (B) A lipid bilayer is
electrically equivalent to leaky capacitor. With the proposed design for the experimental chamber,
typical values for the resistance (R ) of a channel-free lipid bilayer are in the 100 GΩ range with
a capacitance (C ) in the range of hundreds of pF.
suitable for research purpose due to bandwidth limitations, but is well adapted to perform the
experiment proposed here. The electronics design can be found in the supporting information
section of this paper. These design files are licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution Share-
Alikelicense,whichallowsforbothpersonalandcommercialderivativeworks,aslongasthispaper
is credited and the derivative designs are released under the same license.
2.2.2 Bilayer chamber and electrical recording
The bilayer chamber is composed of two compartments milled in two blocks of polyoxymethy-
lene (Delrin(cid:114)) allowing the insertion of a commercially available polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE
or Teflon(cid:114)) film (Norton T-100 Premium Grade skived PTFE film, Saint-Gobain, Germany). The
films used for this experiment have a thickness of 50 µm. Before insertion of the film in the cham-
ber, a circular 200 µm aperture is first etched in the PTFE film using a modified syringe needle
(for more details, see supplemental information). The experimental chamber consists of the Teflon
film sealed with silicon grease between the two Delrin blocks which are pressed together by a pair
of screws (fig. 2). This design choice allows an easy replacement of the Teflon film which is some-
timestearedduringthemanipulationsbythestudents. Thetwocompartmentsoftheexperimental
chamber are called cis and trans. The trans side is always defined as zero voltage, corresponding
to the usual convention in electrophysiology where the reference potential is on the extracellular
side (fig. 3.A). A lipid bilayer, formed in the aperture of the Teflon film is electrically equivalent
to a leaky capacitor (fig. 3.B).The experimental chamber and the amplifier circuit are enclosed in
an aluminium box that acts as a Faraday cage minimizing electric noise. Mechanical vibrations are
damped by placing the experimental chamber on a heavy granite slab resting on four tennis balls.
Each compartment is connected to the amplifier though an Ag-AgCl electrode and a salt bridge (1
M KCl,2%Agar). Thecompletesetupconsistsoftheamplifier,awaveformgenerator,aswitchable
DC source and an oscilloscope. Alternatively, low cost USB interfaces, like the NI USB6008 or the
NI MyDAQ (National Instruments, USA), can be used to provide a solution for data acquisition
and signal generation using the lab computers (fig. 4).
oscilloscope
(cid:74)(cid:89)(cid:82)(cid:71)(cid:88)(cid:77)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:75)(cid:73)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:86)(cid:69)(cid:88)(cid:83)(cid:86)
OUT CH1 CH2
GND NI USB 6008
OUT IN OUT IN
DC sou(cid:86)ce
(cid:69)(cid:81)(cid:84)(cid:80)(cid:77)(cid:189)(cid:73)(cid:86)
Figure 4: The complete planar bilayer setup as implemented at our institution. (A) The different
parts of the setup can be seen : the amplifier and its remote control, a waveform generator, a
switchable DC source and an oscilloscope. In addition, we use a NI USB6008 for data acquisition
with the lab computers. The recording chamber, connected to the main box of the amplifier, is
placed on a heavy granite slab resting on four tennis balls. A model circuit composed of a 1 GΩ
resistance with a 220 pF capacitor in parallel is used for calibration. (B) The corresponding block
diagram of the setup.
2.2.3 Chemicals and solutions
Commercially available phospholipids can be used to form planar lipid bilayers. We selected 3-sn-
phosphatidylcholine(Sigma-Aldrich,ref. 61758FLUKA)assoylipidextractsarethelessexpensive.
The lipids were dissolved in n-octane (Sigma-Aldrich, ref. O2001 SIGMA) to a final concentration
of 20 mg/ml. This lipid solution has to be prepared shortly before performing the experiments.
The salt or electrolyte solutions used in most planar lipid bilayer experiments are often KCl or
NaCl. Inourcasetherecordingsweremadeinionicsymmetricalconditionswith1M NaClinboth
compartments or in asymmetrical ionic condition with 1 M NaCl in the cis compartment and 0.1
M NaCl in the trans compartment.
Gramicidin A is a small peptide that forms ionic channels in lipid bilayers [12, 7, 4]. It is
active against gram-positive bacteria and used for clinical application as an antibiotic. When
two gramicidin A molecules link transiently, they form an open ionic channel which is selective for
monovalentcationsallowingthepassageofmillionsofionspersecondthroughthelipidbilayer. The
corresponding unitary current is therefore in the pA range and can be detected with the proposed
amplifier. The duration of this elementary step of current is determined by the life time of the
gramicidin dimer extending through the membrane. For the sake of simplicity, we are going to
refertotheseeventsaschannelopenings. Theseopeningstypicallylastseveralhundredsofmsand
are thus also easy to resolve temporally. Gramicidin A is available commercially and inexpensive
(Sigma-Aldrich, ref. 50845SIGMA). A 1nM stock solutionis preparedby successive dilutionwith
ethanol. The stability of gramicidin A in this solution appears very high (more than 4 years).
2.3 Experiments
The laboratory session is divided in three successive steps corresponding to a progressive approach
of the different aspects of the topic. The corresponding student hand-out can be found in the
supporting information section of this paper.
2.3.1 Step 1
The cell membrane is considered to be electrically equivalent to leaky capacitor. Guiding question
: How does such a RC circuit reacts when submitted to a variable or continuous voltage signal ?
Learning goals : Students will understand that (1) the total current is essentially produced by the
capacitive current when the circuit is submitted to a high frequency voltage signal and (2) that
the total current is purely resistive when the circuit is submitted to a constant voltage. Therefore
these two conditions can be used to actually measure the capacitance and resistance of the circuit
elements. Activity : Students have to compute and measure the capacitive and resistive currents
foracircuitcomposedofaresistancewithacapacitorinparallelwhenitissubmitted(1)toahigh
frequency triangular signal and (2) to a constant voltage.
2.3.2 Step 2
Guidingquestion: Howdoesalipidbilayerreactswhensubmittedtosimilarvariableorcontinuous
voltages ? Learning goals : Students will understand that a planar lipid bilayer is electrically
equivalent to a RC circuit. Activity : Students have to obtain a lipid bilayer and measure the
current first when it is submitted (1) to a high frequency triangular signal and (2) to a constant
voltage. This allow them to measure the bilayer capacitance and resistance.
2.3.3 Step 3
Guiding question : What is an ionic channel ? Learning goals : Students will observe that certain
molecules can form pores in the lipid bilayer allowing transiently the selective passage of ions and
therefore act as electrical switches at the molecular level. Activity : Students have to obtain a
lipid bilayer in presence of an gramicidin A and measure the unitary currents when the bilayer is
submitted to a range of constant voltages.
2.4 Survey methodology
At the beginning of the laboratory session, students were given ten minutes to fill out a short
answer survey. An additional survey was then administered at the end of session. The pre- and
post-surveys consisted of True/False questions about membrane biophysics. The answers were
scored as ‘0 = incorrect’and ‘1 = correct’). A “knowledge score” was determined as the sum of
correct answers . A paired samples t-test was conducted to compare knowledge scores before and
after the demonstration.
3.1 Experiments
In a typical four hours session, all students were able to obtain the lipid bilayer formation and
study its electrical properties. In addition, we found that routinely a majority of attendees could
actually succeed to observe the single channel currents. We consider this as a good performance,
as it is a rather delicate experiment and for many students this was their first experience in such a
laboratory environment.
3.1.1 Calibration
Students have to compute the capacitive and resistive currents for a circuit composed of a 1 GΩ
resistance with a 220 pF capacitor in parallel when it is submitted (1) to a 500 Hz 10 mV peak to
peak triangular signal and (2) to a constant 120 mV voltage. When the circuit is submitted to the
triangular signal, which has a slope of ± 10 V/s, the capacitive current is a square signal with an
amplitudeof2200pA. Theresistivecurrentisatriangularsignalof10pApeaktopeakamplitude,
which is therefore negligible. The total current measured by the amplifier with the 1 mV/pA gain
appears therefore a square signal of 2.2 V of amplitude on the oscilloscope which is essentially the
steady state capacitive current. When submitted to the constant 120 mV voltage, the capacitive
current is zero and there is only a constant resistive current of 120 pA appearing as a 120 mV on
the oscilloscope.
Subsequently, they connect the corresponding model RC circuit to the amplifier and do the
actual measurements using the oscilloscope. This step also provides a calibration of the amplifier
allowingtoevaluatethebilayercapacitanceduringitsformationbymeasuringthecapacitivecurrent
when the bilayer is submitted to the triangular signal (each pF of capacitance will contribute 10
mV totheamplitudeofthesignalreadontheoscilloscopewithamplifiersetatthe1mV/pAgain).
3.1.2 Bilayer formation
The two compartments of the experimental chamber are first filled with electrolyte solution (1
M NaCl). Subsequently 2 µl of a 20 mg/ml solution of 3-sn-phosphatidylcholine dissolved in
n-octane are injected over the aperture using a 10 µl pipette (see movie in the supplementary
information). The bilayer is formed by spontaneous thinning. If the lipid bilayer does not form
within a few minutes after adding the lipids, the electrolyte solution is agitated to speed up the
thinning process. The agitation can be achieved by producing small air bubbles near the aperture
witha10µlpipette. Thebilayerformationismonitoredbymeasuringthecapacitivecurrentduring
the application of a triangular voltage signal (500 Hz, 10 mV peak to peak). As a the planar lipid
bilayer is forming in the central part of the aperture, the capacitive current will increase and then
stabilize (fig. 5.A). A stable lipid bilayer formed inside the 200 µm aperture in the teflon film will
typically produce a capacitance in the range of hundreds of pF. The capacitance of the bilayer is
the first criteria for proceeding with an experiment. Low capacitance reflects a bilayer that has not
completely formed or that is overly thick. In that case further agitation is needed to speed up the
thinning process. The final bilayer stability measurement is the amount of current flowing across
a channel-free bilayer in response to test potentials in the voltage range that is to be used in the
experiment. If test potentials generate substantial currents across the membrane in the absence of
Figure 5: Experimental recordings obtained with the OpenPicoAmp. (A). The lipid bilayer forma-
tion is monitored by measuring the increase in the capacitive current during the application of a
triangularvoltagesignal(500Hz,10mV peaktopeak). Inthisparticularexample,thelipidbilayer
forms and stabilizes in less than 10 s with a final capacitance around 70 pF. (B) After addition
of gramicidin A, the students are able to record unitary currents when the bilayer is submitted to
constant voltage. In the presented recording, obtained at -120 mV, a maximum of four gramicidin
A pores are open at the same time. All currents traces appears as voltage deflections as the ampli-
fier acts as a current to voltage converter, with a gain of 1 mV/pA (panel A) or 100 mV/pA (panel
B). All the presented data has been acquired by students using a National Instruments USB6008
A/D converter using a sampling frequency of 10 kHz and a low-pass filter cutoff at 3.4 kHz (panel
A) or a 100 Hz sampling frequency with a low-pass filter cutoff at 16 Hz (panel B).
ionic channels, the bilayer is deemed unstable and should be broken and reformed before beginning
anexperiment. Inourcase, thetotalcurrentataconstant120mV voltageismeasuredandshould
be below 2 pA.
Knowing the specific capacitance of a solvent-containing lipid bilayer (0.5 µF/cm2) and the
intensityofthecapacitivecurrent,thestudentsarealsoabletoestimatethebilayerdiameterwhich
should be slightly lower than the aperture diameter due to the presence of the annulus at the
periphery of the bilayer [17]. In addition, by measuring the membrane current while applying a
constantholdingpotentialandknowingthatthetypicalthicknessofaplanarlipidbilayerisaround
10 nm, they can provide an estimate of the bilayer resistivity and demonstrate that lipids act
as insulators as the typical value is around 103 GΩ.cm. This experiment allows the students to
understandthattheelectricalresponseofapassivecellmembraneiswelldescribedbyanequivalent
RC circuit. Thereisnodifferenceintheelectricalresponsebetweenthemodelcircuitandthelipid
bilayer.
3.1.3 Unitary currents
Afterbreakingthepreviouslyobtainedchannel-freebilayer,studentsareaskedtoreformeditinthe
presence of 1 pM of the ionophore gramicidin A in each compartment. This low concentration is
chosen to obtain less than ten simultaneous individual channel openings, allowing the resolution of
theelementarycurrentproducedbythetransientdimerizationoftwogramicidinAmolecules. After
addition of gramicidin A to the aqueous phase it may require up to 15 minutes for the molecules
to diffuse to the bilayer and insert. The students are able to record unitary currents when the
bilayer is submitted to constant voltage (fig. 5.B). This further allows the study of the biophysical
propertiesofthegramicidinporesinsymmetricioniccondition(1MNaClcis/0.1MNaCltrans)
by measuring the unitary currents, i, at different values of the holding potential (fig. 6.A). The
current mediated by each channel is proportional to the applied voltage, demonstrating the ohmic
behavior of the gramicidin channels :
hold Nernst
whereγ istheconductanceofasinglegramicidinchannel, V theappliedtransmembranepoten-
tial and V the reversal potential for Na+ ions, which is given by the Nernst equation:
V = ln trans (2)
Nernst F [Na+]
whereRisuniversalgasconstant,T theabsolutetemperature,F theFaradayconstant,[Na+]
and [Na+] the Na+ concentrations in the trans and cis compartments respectively. Therefore
when these measures are repeated in asymmetric ionic conditions (1M NaCl cis / 0.1 M NaCl
trans), thereversalpotentialoftheunitarycurrentisshiftedbyapproximatively60mV compared
to the symmetric ionic condition (fig. 6.B and 6.C).
3.2 Survey results
Weassessedtheimprovementinthestudentknowledgeofbasicbiophysicsbycomparingtheknowl-
edgescores(totalpoints)thatwerecollectedbothbeforeandafterthedemonstration. Therewasa
significant difference (p = 0.0015, n=121) in the pre-test (M = 7.12, SD = 1.79) and the post-test
knowledge(M=7.85,SD=1.77),suggestingthattheproposedmaterialimprovedtheirknowledge
of core concepts of membrane biophysics.
4 Discussion
Understanding the human brain is one of the greatest challenges facing contemporary science.
Throughtheprogressofneuroscience,wecangainprofoundinsightsintoourinnerworkings,develop
newtreatmentsforbraindiseasesandbuildrevolutionarynewcomputingtechnologies. Besidesthe
Obamaadministration’sBrainInitiativeandtheEuropeanUnion’sHumanBrainProject,thereare
numerous private and public research efforts in Europe and abroad, focusing on the human brain.
This will undoubtedly provide a surge of activity in brain research as scientists try to build the
toolsandknowledgetheyneedtoaccomplishtheirgoals. Thereforeitisofparticularimportanceto
promote neuroscience education to fuel this initiatives by providing inspiration to future scientists.
In this paper, we provide a basic experimental protocol allowing university undergraduate stu-
dentstobuildartificialcellmembranesandexamineionicchannelspropertiesatthesingle-molecule
level. In this framework, we have developed an open-source lipid bilayer amplifier, the Open-
PicoAmp, whichisappropriateforuseinintroductorycoursesinbiophysicsorneurosciences. Such
alowcost, opensourceandwelldocumentedsolutiontobuildacompleteplanarlipidbilayersetup
was not available so far, although similar projects exist for extracellular recordings of neural elec-
trical activity [11, 10]. This type of open-source hardware projects will without doubt encourage
collaborativetinkering,promotescienceeducationandmayevenprovetobeusefulasresearchtools
[14, 1].
symmetric ionic condition asymmetric ionic condition
3 symmetric
+ 120 mV iunitary (pA) asymmetric
Vhold (mV)
-150 -100 -50 0 50 100 150
Figure 6: Effect of ionic gradients on gramicidin A unitary currents, recorded with the Open-
PicoAmp. (A) Gramicidin A unitary currents in symmetric ionic conditions (1M NaCl cis / 1 M
NaCl trans) at different holding potentials. The dotted line on each individual recording corre-
spondsto0pA. (B)GramicidinAunitarycurrentsinasymmetricionicconditions(1MNaCl cis/
0.1 M NaCl trans) at different holding potentials. (C) Gramicidin channels are ohmic conductors.
The unitary conductance observed in these recordings is around 13 pS. The reversal potential of
the unitary currents is shifted from 0 mV, in symmetric ionic condition, to approximatively -60
mV, in asymmetric ionic condition. All data was acquired using a NI USB 6008 A/D converter
with a 100 Hz sampling frequency with the amplifier gain at 100 mV/pA (low-pass filter cutoff at
16 Hz).
The proposed experimental protocol provides a simple example and can be further refined if
the students attend more laboratory sessions. For example, the single channel recordings with
gramicidin can be repeated in the presence of pharmacological agents affecting the gating of the
channels, e.g. 50 mM fluoxetine [8]. In addition, other ionic channels could be studied but, in this
case,theelectronicsoftheamplifiermayneedtobeadaptedtoallowtherecordingsoffasterevents.
Moreadvancedsubjectscanalsobeintroduced,likethedeterminationofsinglechannelcurrentand
meanchannelopeningtimesusingautocorrelationfunctionanalysisofcurrentnoise[9]. Thedesign
of the bilayer chamber could also be adapted to allow the simultaneous optical monitoring of the
bilayer formation. It is possible to view the phospholipid film using a lens with 10 x magnification
and a light source. The thin film interference of the reflected light at the water/membrane and
membrane/water interfaces produces colorful fringes when the membrane thickness is on the order
of the wavelength of light in the membrane. Once the film reaches nanometer-scale thickness, the
membrane turns black because light reflected off the two interfaces interferes destructively for all
wavelengths; hence the name black lipid membrane (BLM) [16]. Finally, at this stage, we do not
provide any open source software for data acquisition and visualization. But such software exists
[2] and we are currently developing a solution that will be tailored to the experimental protocol
proposed here.
The reactions of the students to the lab sessions are positive and their learning outcomes are
clearly improved by this hands-on approach. We hope that the proposed experiment will be used
as a teaching tool in other institutions, allowing fruitful exposure of undergraduate students to
biophysics or neurosciences.
5 Supporting information
5.1 Electronics
• File S1 : CadSoft Eagle .brd file giving the board layout for printing amplifier circuit.
cadsoftusa.com/.
• File S2 : CadSoft Eagle .sch file including the circuit diagram for the amplifier circuit and
the linked .brd file.
• File S3: APDFdocumentdetailingthepracticalimplementationoftheamplifier, theparts
and costs of components with associated part numbers from an electronics supplier. A ready
to print layout for the printed-circuit board of the OpenPicoAmp is also given (scale 1:1).
5.2 Bilayer chamber
• File S4: AnPDFdocumentdetailingthedesignofourbilayerchamber(alldimensionsgiven
in mm).
• File S5: APDFdocumentdescribingthepreparationoftheTeflonfilm,theassemblyofthe
bilayer chamber and the making of the electrodes.
5.3 Video and hand-outs
homepages.ulb.ac.be/~dgall/S6_BLM.avi)
• File S7 : The student hand-out for the experiments (PDF).
• File S8 : The student survey questions (PDF).
Acknowledgments
We thank Prof. Fabrice Hombl´e for careful reading of the manuscript, Prof. Francis Grenez for
supporting the project, Tiziano D’Angelo and Emmanuel Hortmanns for their technical help. This
project has received support from the Fonds d’Encouragement `a l’Enseignement of the Universit´e
Libre de Bruxelles.