The historical development of
X-ray Absorption Fine Spectroscopy
and of its applications to Materials Science
Annibale Mottana
Department of Geosciences, University of Roma Tre, Italy
e–mail: annibale.mottana@uniroma3.it
Augusto Marcelli
Istituto Nazionale di Fisica Nucleare, Laboratori Nazionali di Frascati, Italy
e–mail: augusto.marcelli@infn.lnf.it
Abstract. This essay sketches the development of X-ray Absorption Fine
Spectroscopy (XAFS) ever since the second half of 20th century. At that time,
synchrotrons started competing with X-ray discharge tubes as the sources of the
excitation able to show the pre- and near-edge structures (XANES) and extended
oscillations (EXAFS) that characterize the X-ray absorption edge of solid matter.
Actually, modern XAFS began after 1975, when the hard-X-ray synchrotron
radiation derived from storage rings took over. Ever since, XAFS greatly
contributed to both technical refinement and to theoretical development of
Materials Science. Although a unified theory of X-ray fine absorption has not
been reached yet, many XAFS advancements benefited of theoretical models and
complex calculations made possible by the continuous growth of the computing
power, while contributing to developing new or previously never used materials.
Key words: X-rays – absorption edge – synchrotron radiation – interatomic
distance – valence – coordination – polarization – EXAFS – XANES – XAFS –
multiple scattering – single scattering – history of science
1 Introduction
Wilhelm Conrad Röntgen (March 28, 1845 – February 10, 1923) detected
absorption of X-rays by matter on the very evening he discovered X-rays
(November 8, 1895). Some days later, he also realized that different
materials display different degrees of transparency, as he took
2 The Title and pages of the Book up to the Editors. Pls, do nothing here
an image of his wife's hand which showed the shadows thrown by the
bones of her hand and that of a ring she was wearing, surrounded by the
penumbra of the flesh, which was more permeable to the rays and therefore
threw a fainter shadow.1
His first, simple observations were crucial not only for the discovery of X-
rays but also for their quick expansion throughout the world. It is well
known, unfortunately, that Science is considered by most people to be of
little use (“pure”) if does not produce practical results at once. The
transparency noticed by Röntgen found a practical application almost
immediately in clinical Medicine: numberless clinical transparency images
were taken, making Radiology the most productive diagnostic method to
Soon X-rays were also tested in detail for scientific reasons. However,
reviewing all branches of Science that benefited from X-rays is not the aim
of this contribution. Rather, we will describe the development of a field of
X-ray-based research on solid matter that started over half a century after
Röntgen’s discovery: X-ray Absorption Fine Spectroscopy (XAFS).
XAFS is the modern development of X-ray Absorption Spectroscopy
(XAS), a branch of X-ray-based Physics that began over ten years later
than Röntgen’s X-ray discovery, and a couple of years later than X-ray
Diffraction (XRD), the first widespread form of application of X-rays for
scientific purposes. For a long time XAS was poorly considered or even
under-esteemed, overshadowed as it was by XRD extraordinary success.
Indeed, XRD had made solid-state research take off because it could
determine the lattice structure of ordered matter, but it could nothing when
such an order was not present, as in amorphous materials, highly
disordered systems and liquid solutions. This was indeed XAS’ deed, but
this took long time to attain be understood and even more to attain
1 This sentence is in the autobiography Röntgen wrote at the time of the Nobel
award, later translated into English and published in the Nobel Lectures (1967).
2 As early as on February 3, 1896, at Dartmouth Medical School and Hospital,
Hanover, NH, USA, the first photographic image of the fractured wrist of a boy
was taken (Spiegel 1995 p 242) and the injured bone could be appropriately
compounded: first clinical application of X-rays in the whole world.
Name Surname Author – Title … 3
successful results. Only during the second half of last century XAS took
off too, and in the new form of XAFS. In order to reach the front-line of
Science, it had to wait for the availability of powerful and brilliant X-ray
sources such as the electron synchrotrons first, and then the much more
stable and brilliant storage rings. In addition, the availability of powerful
computers and advanced computational methods pushed to better insight
into theory (an essential part of Science), by allowing simulations that
would both validate and crosscheck the results of experiments.
Now over 50% of the requests for time reaching synchrotron laboratories
from industrial customers involve one or another X-ray absorption method,
making XAFS the choice field for any study on innovative materials.
XAFS is also the best tool to evaluate their technological applications,
particularly for Chemistry, which is the science that creates new materials;
for Biology to characterize biomolecules, both natural and synthetic;
finally, yet just as importantly, for the Earth’s scientists, to characterize
amorphous or even glassy materials, where XRD is of little help, if any.
The historical development of XAFS has been reviewed several times, but
only by bit and pieces. Actually, there is one authoritative general review
(Stumm von Bordwehr 1989), which however stops in the year 1975, when
synchrotrons started replacing discharge tubes as the X-ray sources. In
addition, there are short review papers published in the proceedings of the
many international conferences taking place ever since 1982 (e.g., the
series “EXAFS and Near Edge Structure”, or “Advances in X-ray
Spectroscopy”, etc.), and there are also accounts by or about people who
contributed to work in progress (e.g., Citrin 1986; Doniach et al. 1997;
Lytle 1999; Stern 2001; Mottana 2003; etc.). Nevertheless, there is no
appraisal yet of the pros and cons, which Materials Science has derived
from XAFS during fifty odd years of life and development. This is indeed
the purpose of our still limited (in terms of space) review.
1.1. How XAS came into being
1913 was a most extraordinary year for Physics. It saw the birth of some
aspects of this science that are basic for its modern state-of-art, such as the
first formulation of the atomic theory (Niels Bohr); the first crystal
structure solution by XRD (W. Henry Bragg and W. Lawrence Bragg); the
essentials of X-ray fluorescence (XRF) analysis (Henry G.J. Moseley). It
was the year too when [August] Julius Hedwig (October 17, 1879 –
January 26, 1936) in Germany and [Louis-César-Victor-] Maurice de
Broglie (April 27, 1875 – July 14, 1960) in France, working independently
4 The Title and pages of the Book up to the Editors. Pls, do nothing here
but both using a modified type of spectrometer in a reverse way to impinge
a metal sheet with monochromatic X-rays, detected on photographic plates
some sharp or diffuse lines and bands that appeared next to the strong,
enhanced edge of the investigated metal atom (platinum or tungsten) in the
region of shorter wavelengths: a spectrum, then. On this rather weak basis,
M. de Broglie (1913) dared proposing a structure for X-rays that was
similar to that - long since known - of light spectra. Neither Herweg nor de
Broglie were completely confident in their observations3. The former
scientist (whom priority should be assigned, as he submitted his paper on
June 30) gave up with this kind of research. The latter one (who presented
his first note on November 17) was heavily criticized and even had to
admit he had misinterpreted his first photos. Nevertheless, he kept on
experimenting and communicating new results for some years, thus amply
justifying the reputation of him as the man who “invented X-ray
spectroscopy” (Lytle 1991 p 123). The existence of modulations at the X-
ray absorption edge of metals was first established without doubts between
1918 and 1920 by [Karl] Wilhelm Stenström (January 28, 1891 –
November 7, 1973) and Hugo Fricke (August 15, 1892 – November 10,
1972), both working at Lund University under the supervision of [Karl]
Manne [Georg] Siegbahn (December 3, 1886 – September 26, 1978), who
earned the 1924 Nobel Prize because of it.
Actually, XAS experienced a great upgrade at the beginning of the second
decade of 20th century, when it was instrumental in probing the electronic
structure of the atoms and in the successful development of quantum
theory. Many people contributed to this early phase of basic research, and
by the final years 1920s, the fundamentals of XAS were firmly set. Then,
limitations inherent in the X-ray sources and detectors restricted its further
development for many years especially on what the method was most in
the need for: the interpretation of the fine structures detectable around the
absorption threshold (known, at that time, as the “Kossel structure”). They
3 Eine Aneinanderreihung von Flecken, die verschiedenen Wellenlängen
entsprechen (Herweg 1913 p 556); un véritable spectre de raies, ayant tout à fait
l’aspect des photographies de spectre lumineux, avec des raies fines or diffuses,
des bandes, etc. (de Broglie 1913 p 925).
Name Surname Author – Title … 5
had been understood in their generality, but not really worked out in detail.
Moreover, other features at higher energy (known as the “Kronig
structure”) had been detected, studied and explained, however without
reaching real consensus on their meaning among scientists, mainly because
experimental results and calculated data rarely matched.
For almost 30 years, it was clear that in order to really reach the front-line
if Science XAS needed more intense X-ray sources, much better detection
methods, and - last but not least - a better theoretical background than the
theories formulated by Walther Kossel (1920) and Ralph deLaer Kronig
(1931, 1932a,b).
2 XAFS moves to synchrotron sources
2.1 Improvements in the apparatus
A first upgrade in the experimental part of XAS studies that would
eventually lead to XAFS occurred only after the Second World War
(WWII), when Norelco designed a novel type of diffractometer for powder
XRD use. Indeed, a Norelco vertical powder diffractometer was the
instrument modified by Robert Van Nostrand (November 28, 1918 –
January 20, 2012) to measure the absorption coefficient of the catalysts
produced by the company he was employed in. As monochromator he used
a single crystal of Si or quartz set at the centre of the Rowland circle, i.e.,
where the sample to be analysed by XRD is, and he recorded the reflected
beam intensity using a counter that could be rotated stepwise. He first was
doing it for the beam passing free (I ), than for the beam filtered by a
finely powdered sample (I ). The absorbance, ln(I /I ), was plotted as a
function of θ, the rotation angle of the diffractometer, the intensity at each
θ angle being a fraction of the maximum occurring at the absorption jump,
which he normalized to one irrespectively of the operation conditions, thus
introducing a normalized absorption coefficient (Van Nostrand 1960). In
this way, which mimics most of the powder-XRD practice, he introduced
into XAS the manner of presenting data that has now become standard4 not
4 For the study of the chemistry of catalysts and other non-crystalline systems this
technique may have a role comparable to that of X-ray and electron diffraction in
crystalline systems (Van Nostrand 1960 p 184). Indeed, he was wrong only in that
6 The Title and pages of the Book up to the Editors. Pls, do nothing here
only in the industry but also among scientists. Indeed, he could use the
absorption data not only for internal comparison, but also to exchange with
outside laboratories, thus creating the first XAS data bank. Despite this
substantial improvement, which prompted not only other experimental
studies but also reconsideration of the entire theory (see later), nothing
highly significant would have really happened with XAS had a new
intense and brilliant source of radiation not entered physical sciences: the
synchrotron.
Particle accelerators had been studied theoretically during WWII and were
built for research in the early years 1950s. Using these early accelerators
the first K-edge absorption spectrum ever-recorded was that of Be metal
(Johnston and Tomboulian 1954: Fig. 1) using the soft X-rays emitted by
the Cornell synchrotron. In Europe, the first ones were the Al and Cu K-
edges recorded in May 1963 at the Frascati electron synchrotron (Cauchois
et al. 1963; Mottana and Marcelli 2013).
Fig. 1. The first absorption spectrum recorded using synchrotron radiation: the B K-edge
using the 300 MeV electron synchrotron (after Johnston & Tomboulian, Phys. Rev. 94, 1954 -
p. 1589 Fig. 5, strongly reduced).
The electron synchrotrons, despite their limited energy (~1 GeV) and large
instabilities, made detailed studies in the soft X-ray energy range possible.
Actually, such studies were few (e.g., Sagawa et al. 1966; Jaeglé and
Missoni 1966; Balzarotti et al. 1970), and were limited to the edges of
gases and of certain metal atoms. Yet, they promoted not only the use of
he did not foresee that the technique could be applied just as successfully to
natural samples that are significant for the oil and mining industries, and more
recently to such environmental problems such as pollution by dust and aerosols.
Name Surname Author – Title … 7
synchrotron radiation (SR), but also the reactivation of studying XAS basic
theory. Unfortunately, it is a historical fact that, in spite of all advantages
offered by orbit-derived radiation (Parrat 1959), SR as the X-ray source
did not become really popular among the XAS community until storage
rings were introduced i.e., 10-15 years after installing the first electron
synchrotrons. Such a long time delay had several good reasons: the
conventional source was much cheaper, and had the advantage of being
stable and reliable, besides being at home.
The approach to Science changed only in the middle of the years ‘70s, and
compelled people to move from their laboratories to large facilities
operating stable storage rings i.e., to radiation sources much more suitable
for high-quality research. Their highly increased brilliance, combined with
the production of hard X-rays, made it possible to measure the K-edges of
heavy metal atoms, and these in turn widened the use of XAFS to branches
of Science well outside Physics, such as Chemistry, Geochemistry,
Biophysics, Metallurgy, etc.
Fig. 2. The first XAS spectrum recorded using the synchrotron radiation extracted from the
SPEAR I storage ring (Eisenberg et al., 1974 - p 806 Fig 1).
The first experimental spectrum that used SR extracted from a storage ring
by a bending magnet was recorded on metallic copper at the Stanford
Synchrotron Radiation Facility (SSRF, now SSRL; cf. Doniach et al.
8 The Title and pages of the Book up to the Editors. Pls, do nothing here
1997), the orbiting storage ring being SPEAR I (Fig. 2).5 Irrespectively on
whether those experiments were done at room or liquid nitrogen
temperature, the improvement in intensity over a conventional source was
beyond any expectation. It was calculated to be 5×104, together with a 104
enhancement in the signal-to-noise ratio, so that the recording time of a
complete EXAFS spectrum could be reduced to 30 min (Kincaid and
Eisenberger 1975 p 1361). The following statement by one of the founding
fathers of modern XAFS is worth quoting, as it marks the change of
paradigm: In one trip to the synchrotron we collected more and better data
in three days than in the previous ten years. I shut down all three X-ray
spectrometers in the Boeing laboratory. A new era had arrived (Lytle
1999 p 132).
Over a short period of time substantial improvements were conceived and
put into operation aiming to record even better spectra, not only by new
techniques such as fluorescence detection based on solid-state detectors
and optimized for diluted systems (Jaklevic et al. 1977), but also by an
increase of the SR flux that bending magnets extracted from the source.
Wiggler magnets were developed jointly in the early years ‘80s, and first
used at SSRL (Winick et al. 1981), then at Frascati National Laboratories
(LNF), where the ADONE storage ring had started operation in 1978.
They proved to be immensely useful because they produced a SR spectrum
with a much higher critical energy, thus providing a high-enough intensity
for all absorption experiments requiring high-energy photons (> 20 keV).
Consequently, many beam lines optimized for spectroscopy moved from
bending magnets to wigglers devices. Further energy gains were obtained
by developing undulators, which increase power and brilliance of several
orders of magnitude.
Because of all this upgrade, modern XAFS blossomed, and a great number
of data became available to renew and test the theory, which was largely
lying still on Kronig’s one (1931). Nevertheless, there were other technical
limitations in the apparatus and particularly in the computing power. They
made so that two specialized techniques developed independently, in both
5 The same paper (Eisenberg et al., 1974) shows in addition the Cu XANES
spectrum recorded on a Cu-porphyrin: this is the first spectrum of an organic
molecule ever recorded.
Name Surname Author – Title … 9
experiment and calculation: (a) EXAFS, which provides a wealth of
quantitative bond distance information based on single scattering
processes, and (b) XANES, which implements the quantitative structural
information deduced from EXAFS with information on the electronic
properties, and also recognizes the local coordination and gives bond
angles information. The time-maps show that the developments of these
two techniques were not the same despite both used the same experimental
apparatus. EXAFS progressed rapidly; XANES lagged behind hampered
by its own complexity. The use of new acronyms underlines a new
theoretical and practical approach. In fact, XAFS main purpose shifted
towards developing a structure-determination technique that would stand
side-by-side or even compete with the XRD-dependent science of
Crystallography, by then mature and able to determine the average crystal
structure with accuracies in bond lengths ±0.001 Å and angles ±0.1°.
During the years ‘80s, it was clearly understood that determining the
atomic structure with all its local defects is the reason behind any study on
solid-state matter, as number and distribution of defects determine and/or
modify physical properties. Such a result can be best attained by XAFS,
which is a local probe, and is reached even better when its results are
combined with information on the average crystal structure. The change of
paradigm of Materials Science was complete, and XAFS was finally in the
front line of Science.
For a rather long period of time scientists working with XAFS could make
use of SR from storage rings only parasitically, but the evident rapid
progress they made and the usefulness of the technique for fundamental
research and industrial applications suggested first creating dedicated
beam lines, then entirely dedicated laboratories. Intensity and tunability
were the properties most required and best made use of. First generation
storage rings had been designed for researches on particle physics, but
were implemented with partly dedicated or parasitic beam time and with
beam lines especially designed for XAFS already in the early ’70s. Second
generation storage rings designed to run as fully dedicated sources started
operation around 1975 (the first one being SOR in Tokyo, Japan, a 380
MeV ring). There is now plenty of second- and third-generation storage
rings in operation, where all types of XAFS experiments can be performed.
The largest, most efficient and best-equipped facilities are ESRF at
10 The Title and pages of the Book up to the Editors. Pls, do nothing here
Grenoble in Europe (6 GeV), APS II at Argonne in USA (7 GeV) and
SPRING-8 in Japan (8 GeV).6
The continuous upgrade of the synchrotron radiation facilities, such as the
increased current and stability and, more recently, the availability of
topping up modes, may explain the continuous increase in number and
quality of XAFS studies, which now involve all possible kinds of materials
and phenomena, and operate even under extreme P,T conditions and high
magnetic fields. To achieve these results, and in particular to perform
experiments on extremely diluted systems, the availability of new solid-
state multi-element detectors was absolutely needed. Computer Science
also contributed with new methods that make the old cumbersome ones
simply legendary. The extensive use of computers is also responsible of
the software packages now available for EXAFS and XANES analyses.
2.2 Development of theory
R. Stumm von Bordwehr (1989) closed his review by reaffirming (p 444)
why he decided to finish his work with the state-of-art of XAS in 1975: at
this date the theory of XAFS was established … and [the year 1975] marks
the beginning of an explosive growth in the field (p 379). In fact, the
change from XAS to XAFS and all related growth were propelled not only
by the introduction of synchrotron as the radiation source of choice, but
because the obsolete Kronig’s theory was profoundly revised and
implemented. The poor calculations resulting from this theory forced
researchers to develop new methods and strategies, and a virtuous loop
started of experimental data requiring theoretical refining.
For clarity, we anticipate that modern XAFS theory describes the entire
absorption spectrum as resulting from the scattering of a photoelectron,
which progressively damps out in energy moving from a multiple-
scattering (MS) regime, which entails many scattering contributions
generated by the photoelectron with neighbouring atoms around the
photoabsorber, containing plenty of information on the local geometrical
structure, i.e. bond distances and bond angles, to a single-scattering (SS)
6 To date, there are 67 synchrotron radiation facilities (www.lightsources.org/) in
operation across the world, with around 152 beam lines optimized for XAFS
measurements: 61 in the Americas, 54 in Europe and 37 in Asia (H. Oyanagi,
personal communication).
Name Surname Author – Title … 11
regime, which involves only couples of neighbouring atoms and contains
information on bond distances (Fig. 3).
Fig. 3. Pictorial view of the photoelectron scattering processes: (left) single scattering by a
single neighbour atom = EXAFS; (right) simple multiple scattering pathways associated to
processes generated by interactions with neighbouring atoms set at different distances and
angles = XANES (centre). All events generate waves and contribute to the absorption cross
section, before the photoabsorber atom returns to its fundamental state in ca. 10-15 s.
3.2.a. EXAFS Spectroscopy. In his recollection of the EXAFS first steps
(1999), Farrel W. Lytle (November 10,1934) makes a strong point at
stating that, before going to SSRL, all the data had been obtained with the
conventional X-ray sources in our laboratory (p. 132). Moreover, he
stresses that the new theory of EXAFS7 was conceived by him and first
presented as nothing more than a preliminary hypothesis (Lytle 1965)
because it was totally different (a break: p 129) with respect to Kronig’s
theory, which at that time was still the reference one, although it was 35
years old. Lytle gradually improved his theory by working in close
cooperation with Dale E. Sayers (1940-2004) and Edward A. Stern (1930)
(Sayers et al. 1970, 1971, 1972). Actually, it is clear that he had felt the
need of developing a new theory because he had a wealth of experimental
data gathered using a Siemens automatic diffractometer with conventional
X-ray source that he had to justify to his company heads. He had modified
his instrument, which operated in a horizontal arrangement, essentially
mimicking the vertical spectrometer set up by Van Nostrand. To Lytle’s
luck, ten years later his horizontal orientation turned out to fit perfectly the
7 This acronym is credited explicitly by him to J.A. Prins (Lytle 1999 p 130).
12 The Title and pages of the Book up to the Editors. Pls, do nothing here
requirements of storage rings, so that the entire EXAFS technique his
group had developed for home studies was quickly transferred to the newly
available, powerful and time-sparing SR sources.8 Additional work
(especially for the correct use of the Fourier transform) was required to
perfect the quantitative interpretation technique and this work too the three
scientists performed jointly. The final EXAFS package covered all three
major points: theory (Stern 1974), experiment (Lytle et al. 1975), and
determination of structural parameters (Stern et al. 1975). The complete
EXAFS formula was:
kR2 λ j j j
It may appear strange that EXAFS (formerly known as a weak “secondary
absorption” and noticed several years later than the “fine structures” near
the absorption edge; cf. Mottana, in preparation) was clarified earlier and
€ quantitatively solved more deeply than the “fine-structures” near the
absorption edge, known from 1918-20. This historical fact can be easily
explained. EXAFS structures had been disregarded by early researchers
essentially because of the limitations inherent in their photographic
detectors, but they could be recorded well by the counters of modified
diffractometer, which also span over much wider angles. Moreover, both
Van Nostrand and Lytle started working on this region of the XAS
spectrum because they looked for few diagnostic features that could be
usable for practical purposes, and simple enough as to require only a
simple mathematical analysis.
The theoretical innovation that Lytle’s group proposed for EXAFS is
based, in fact, on phenomenological rather than abstract theoretical
grounds. It considers the structures in the EXAFS region as due to
interference of electrons: when an X-ray photon impinges an atom, it
excites a core electron, which moves away through the atomic lattice as a
photoelectron having energy equal to that of the incoming photon minus
8 Synchrotron radiation revolutioned the experimental side of EXAFS, making it
accessible to non-experts and attracting the largest number of users at
synchrotron sources (Stern 2001 p 51). Unfortunately, over-interpretation, in
particular over-estimation of the spatial resolution, is the negative outcome of
EXAFS enormous growth among such inexperienced people (ivi).
Name Surname Author – Title … 13
the core binding energy. Alternatively, the photoelectron may be seen to
propagate through the lattice as a spherical wave, its wavelength
decreasing with increasing the energy of the impinging photon. This
spherical wave interacts with waves arising from the atoms neighbouring
the absorber within a certain distance, and each atoms reacts behaving as a
point-scatterer, so that the propagating total wave is the sum of all
scattered waves. The total absorption (and absorption coefficient) is
determined by the dipole transition matrix element between the initial core
state and the photoelectron final state, which in turn is determined by the
superimposition of the outgoing and incoming spherical waves. Inter-
atomic distance and phase relationships between these two waves
determine final state amplitude and modulation of the effects; the
frequency of the damped oscillations in the spectrum depends on the
distance between absorber and back-scatterer atoms; the amplitude is
proportional to the number of the back-scatterer atoms, i.e. to the
coordination around the absorber. EXAFS is indeed a local probe i.e., it is
insensitive to the Long Range Order (LRO), as the photoelectron has a
mean-free-path typically less than 10 Å (Müller et al. 1982). Nevertheless,
EXAFS is a powerful method to study the Short Range Order (SRO) and is
chemically selective. In fact, the large energy separation between different
inner shells makes it possible to tune the incident X-ray photon energy of a
particular core level corresponding to the chosen atom edge; the spectrum
is then scanned up to c. 1000÷2000 eV above edge, provided there are no
interfering contributions by any edges of other atoms present in the
sample.
Modern EXAFS, now conceived as, and actually being, an almost unique
local structural probe (e.g., Stern 1978; Lee et al. 1981), contributes
significantly to understanding the physical behaviours of non-ordered
systems such as defective and semi-amorphous materials that have
important applications in modern life e.g., catalysts, semiconductors,
biomolecules, etc. Perhaps the EXAFS equation may appear to many
researchers to be formidable (Lytle, 1999 p 131), and yet an ordered
sequence of mathematical steps performed by ad hoc computer programs
allows extracting easily (albeit still by trial and error, occasionally) from
the experimentally recorded signal all the intrinsic structural information:
a) interatomic distance R (down to a 0.01÷0.02 Å); b) coordination number
N (with a ~10% approximation); c) Debye-Waller factor; d) asymmetry
due to thermal expansion. The major drawbacks in the EXAFS state-of-art
concern the main approximations non-accounted for by the theory, and
14 The Title and pages of the Book up to the Editors. Pls, do nothing here
consequently neglected (or even ignored) by most users: it is not sensitive
to bond angles, and is complex to interpret when the system is too ordered
(cf. Gunnella et al. 1990). Moreover, because of the large error inherent in
the determination of coordination atoms, the EXAFS analysis fails when
the absorber coordination is high: typically for N>8.
Nevertheless, the continuous improvement of EXAFS methods allowed
also identifying shake-up and shake-off channels that are associated with
multi-electron transition processes (Bernieri and Burattini 1987), and which
for a long time had been considered invalid speculations. Much
experimental and theoretical effort has been dedicated to determine
amplitudes and positions of those excitations and to calculate their relative
cross sections (cf. Chaboy et al. 1994, 1995). Although the intensities of
such multi-electron excitations are very low, and the unambiguous
identification of their energy position and shape is difficult in the presence
of the large EXAFS oscillations, their presence affects the EXAFS data,
leading to errors in the determination of interatomic distances, coordination
numbers and even first-shell anharmonicity (D’Angelo et al. 2004).
3.2.b. XANES spectroscopy. The “fine structure” across the absorption
edge, although discovered first and interpreted properly on its general
lines, has proved to be a rather difficult subject to study in detail. It still
has many obscure points, which often make it unfit to be made use of even
when powerful computers and modern methods are available. Despite the
overall picture is unclear for several reasons, XANES spectra are
frequently used in the “fingerprinting” mode e.g., to recognize in the most
straightforward way a tetrahedral coordination from an octahedral one
(e.g., Mottana et al. 1997), etc. It is physically senseless, although
customary, to distinguish between XANES9 and NEXAFS (cf. Stöhr
1992), as they are the same spectroscopy method. They differ only in that
hard and, respectively, soft X-rays are used to scan the sample. In other
words, some researchers prefer to use the acronym NEXAFS (Near Edge
X-Ray Absorption Fine Structure) to present and discuss X-ray absorption
9 This acronym was used first by Antonio Bianconi (April 1, 1944-) in 1980 while
working at SSRL, Menlo Park, USA. It was published by him two years later
(Bianconi et al. 1982).
Name Surname Author – Title … 15
data recorded while doing surface experiments (see later) or the K-edges of
low Z atoms such as C, N or O.
When the absorption effects of atoms impinged by SR started being
recorded accurately in their whole extent and complexity, two different
approaches to near-edge data presentation, i.e. to XANES, developed: a) a
phenomenological - “fingerprinting-like” - description with the simple
interpretation of the main features occurring across the main absorption
edge, given as E (thus from -10 eV to +30 eV with respect to E ); b) an
analytical, theoretical study of the MS contributions generated by the
photoelectron in relationships to the local geometry of the material probed
and to the disorder and defects shown by its atom arrangement around the
absorber. The last approach may open up as far as to include the atoms
located in high-order coordination shells, in this trying to reach a unified
picture of the entire absorption (cf. Stern, 1978; Natoli and Benfatto,
1986). In fact, the two approaches are interconnected; while the first one is
typically followed by EXAFS users because it complements their
quantitative information on the relative distance among atoms with
qualitative data on the coordination and electronic state of the absorber, the
second one is followed only by small, theoretically-gifted groups that try
deciphering by appropriate calculations the overall physical reactions
undergone by the photoelectron displaced from the absorber in the studied
material impinged by an electromagnetic radiation of suitable energy. The
MS approach, therefore, is essentially a method to calculate the structure
of polyatomic matter from first principles, working in the real space (Lee
and Pendry 1975; Kutzler et al. 1980; Natoli et al. 1980; Durham et al.
1982; Natoli 1983; Bunker and Stern 1985; Ankudinov et al. 1998; etc.)
and searching for an accurate description of the wave function.
Thus, the MS approach proposes and tests algorithms having both
theoretical and computational insight. Underneath its application to
XANES, there is the assumption that, in the proximity of an edge, the X-
ray absorption coefficient depends upon the photoelectron transitions to
low-lying unoccupied states in the conduction band of the absorber atom.
In the MS framework, both the initial state, which is characterized by a
well-defined core level with a localized wave function having precise
angular momentum symmetry, and the continuum part, which is
represented by modulations of the density of non-occupied electronic
states, are calculated. These structures, in fact, are the features near the
edge generated by the dipole selection rule, which samples the density of
16 The Title and pages of the Book up to the Editors. Pls, do nothing here
the final states projected onto the angular momentum and convoluted with
the core-hole energy width.
In the MS framework, a XANES calculation starts with an approximate
molecular potential obtained by partitioning the cluster of atoms
considered to be representative of the studied material into distinct atomic
and interatomic regions, with each atom enclosed in a sphere of specific
radius (“muffin-tin”) and an outer sphere enveloping the entire atomic
cluster whose size depends by the mean-free-path (typically <10 Å) and
the lifetime (~10-15 s) of the X-ray excitation. The Coulomb and exchange
part of the potential are approximated via the total charge density of the
cluster and may or may not consider the existence of dynamical effects.
The photoelectron path is made of the several segments that connect the
atoms involved in the collision. Calculations are iteratively performed by
increasing the size of the cluster and different potentials are considered
until reaching calculated spectra that closely resemble the experimental
spectrum.
The EXAFS theory had taken about ten years to reach completeness (see
above) and from that moment on the EXAFS technique gained wide
appreciation among both the scientists and the industrial world. By
contrast, although there is general convergence on the MS formalism to
explain XANES spectra, a comprehensive, easy to use and universally
accepted practical approach to XANES is still lacking, mainly because of
the relevant, but still incomplete and somewhat unclear electronic
information present in the edge region. At present, there are several
formulations, each one based on different algorithms. They underline a
gigantic effort at understanding (cf. Natoli et al. 1990, 2003; Rehr and
Albers 2000; Ravel and Newville 2005; etc.) and, in addition, reflect the
increased computer power that makes these calculations possible in large
atomic clusters consisting of up to ~200 atoms or more.
A slow, but steadily increasing theoretical development has taken place
ever since the first application of the MS method, which was proposed in
the analogy of the Fano’s (1935) concept of “shape resonances”, which he
had conceived for nuclear physics. Indeed, the MS interpretation is its
extension to condensed systems. Such “shape resonances” are localized
states in the continuum observed in the spectra of diatomic molecules like
N , which could be easily interpreted by the MS theory (Dill and Dehmer
1974; Dehmer and Dill 1975). Only later, it was recognized that there is no
true physical reason to make use of different algorithms for XANES and
Name Surname Author – Title … 17
EXAFS, as the MS calculation method may reproduce the entire spectrum,
if properly applied (Benfatto et al. 1986).
The first major step ahead in this direction was taken by Calogero Rino
Natoli (May 3, 1941-), who first showed that through MS calculations one
can determine the absorber to scatterer distance (Natoli 1983). Then,
Benfatto et al. (1986) showed how the MS theory applied to liquid
solutions connects the lower-energy XANES region to the EXAFS region
at high energy via an intermediate energy region where only a few MS
contributions contribute to the XAFS spectrum (see also Natoli and
Benfatto 1986). Nowadays, it is well recognized that, neglecting the small
structures before the edge (i.e., the “pre-edge”), a XAFS spectrum consists
of three regions undergoing different scattering modes: a) a full multiple
scattering (FMS) region close to the main edge E i.e., with -10/20 ≤ E
≤+20/25 eV, which is nothing else but the former XAS “fine structure” or
“Kossel structure”, now called XANES; b) an intermediate multiple
scattering (IMS) region (+20/25 ≤ E ≤+100/150 eV); and a single
scattering (SS) region, which extends to +500 eV or +1000 eV or even
more above the edge value E and is nothing else but the former
“secondary absorption” or “Kronig structure”, now called EXAFS (Fig. 4).
Within this theoretical framework, the transitional IMS region plays a
critical role for the quantitative evaluation of XAFS spectra (Pendry 1983),
although it has rarely been investigated in detail so far (e.g., Bugaev et al.
2001; Brigatti et al. 2008). It is now acknowledged that a full XAFS
spectrum is the sum of all these regions (Stern 2001), and yet separate
mathematical treatments of the XANES and EXAFS regions are still
normally done, since the latter one, particularly, is quite simple to apply
and is straightforward for most applications, whereas the former requires
the cumbersome application of complex computer codes.
18 The Title and pages of the Book up to the Editors. Pls, do nothing here
Fig. 4. A modern schematic picture of the XAFS spectrum of the K-edge of a transition metal
atom showing the MS or XANES region (with in the left inset the FMS sub-region with the
pre-edge and the edge rise, and in the right inset the transitional IMS sub-region) and the
region of SS or EXAFS (after Mottana, EMU Notes in Mineralogy 6, 2004 - p. 478, Fig. 4,
largely modified).
As a matter of fact, no unified theory nor computer program have been
proposed so far that are able to account for the entire spectrum by a single
algorithm, although the scenario is wide and in continuous evolution
(EXCURVE: Binstead et al. 1991; CONTINUUM: Natoli et al. 1990,
2003; GNXAS: Di Cicco 1995, Filipponi and Di Cicco 2000; FEFF:
Newville 2001; Ravel and Newville 2005); MXAN (Benfatto et al. 2001,
2003; WIEN2k: Blaha et al. 2001; SPRKKR: Ebert 2000; and several
others optimized for special cases).
The contribution of the upgrade of computing methods (both hardware and
software) to XANES development through calculations performed by the
MS method cannot be overestimated. Calculations are now possible within
both the “muffin-tin” and “non-muffin-tin” approximations (Joly 2001,
Hatada et al. 2010), although a major, unfortunately still incompletely
worked out problems, first evidenced by Natoli et al. (1986) and studied by
Gunnella et al. (1990), lies in the use of potentials (Joly et al. 1999).
3.3 Advances in experimental work
3.3.a. EXAFS. The algorithms developed in 1974/1975 by Lytle’s group
(see above) proved their worth in a variety of applications that were
previously believed to be possible only by XRD, and are now to be
considered classical. They allow data retrieval from experimental
recordings performed practically under any condition: at low- as well as
Name Surname Author – Title … 19
high-temperature and pressure (e.g., Itié 1992; Itié et al. 1997; Comez et al.
2002), down to near 0 K and up to 1 Mbar, especially when using the
diamond-anvil cell (DAC) in the energy dispersive setting (Bassett et al.
2000). Quick- and Turbo-EXAFS (Dartyge et al. 1986; Pascarelli et al.
1999) provide data in milliseconds that allow live recording reactions
while they are in progress, although extracting their structural information
then requires some additional time. The polarization of the SR beam has
been carefully analysed (Benfatto et al. 1989; Brouder 1990; Pettifer et al.
1990) and made advantage of to measure the atom distribution in materials
displaying layered structures (e.g., Manceau et al. 1988; Cibin et al. 2010),
and also the distribution and orientation of dopants epitactically growing
over certain chemical compounds (e.g., Asakura and Ijima 2001).
Another major step ahead in XAFS due to the power of third-generation
synchrotrons is the development of the XAFS-microprobe (SmX: Sutton et
al. 1995, 2003; µ-XAS: Mosbah et al. 1999). This apparatus allows
recording spectra at micron- and even pixel-size, thus also permitting
imaging and quantitative mapping of the atom distribution in the studied
materials, and consequently also exposing their zoning and all their
intrinsic and extrinsic defects. SmX may take advantage either of the
fingerprinting method or, more carefully, of quantitative algorithms. It is
particularly interesting for metamorphic petrologists, as it sorts out
compositionally different generations of the same mineral, thus allowing a
well-planned use of geo-thermobarometers (Dyar et al. 2002; cf. Sutton et
al. 2002). A combination of XANES and XRF makes it possible to draw
pixel-size single images as well as large maps showing composition and
speciation for selected elements (Muñoz et al. 2006).
A field where EXAFS has shown all its worth is in the study of metamict
materials (e.g., Greegor et al. 1984; Nakai et al 1987), which are
particularly important in the modern world because they are a common by-
product of nuclear power plants. Moreover, EXAFS showed its worth also
on quasicrystals (Sadoc 1986) i.e., a new category of synthetic materials
having non-crystallographic properties that only recently has reached high
evidence up to attain the Nobel Prize in Chemistry (2010). Nevertheless,
the most exciting results of EXAFS research concern geological materials,
particularly those related to the oil and coal industries, and environmental
problems produced both by the mining industry and the metallurgical and
chemical industrial use of various geological materials. Such studies as
determining the size contamination of sediments and mine tailings by As,
Pb, U, etc. are to be considered extremely valuable contribution to the
20 The Title and pages of the Book up to the Editors. Pls, do nothing here
integrated study of Man Living Space (cf. Fenter et al. 2002). Indeed,
EXAFS is at its best when it studies semi-amorphous ores and ore
derivatives, where XRD cannot give information. Moreover, the exact
location and ordering of selected trace elements in crystalline hosts (e.g.,
diamond) and even the measurement of nanometric metal inclusions (e.g.,
Clausena et al. 1994) are possible by EXAFS, while XRD often cannot
even detect their presence. Finally, it is interesting to note that the
Continuous Cauchy Wavelet Transform (CCWT) analysis (Munoz et al.
2003), which some time ago seemed to supersede the classical EXAFS
treatment because it gives a much wider description of the radial
distribution functions and in three dimension, in contrast with the classical
method which is limited to a one-dimensional representation, has declined
in the general appreciation: the classical method is too well rooted among
users to be easily replaced.
From the very first stages of SR extraction from storage rings, EXAFS was
optimized also for surface experiments. This special technique, called
SEXAFS (Surface Extended X-ray Absorption Fine Structure), concerns
the study of electronic transitions from core levels of atoms located at the
surface of solids. The peculiar local character of core level excitations in
the X-ray absorption processes makes it attractive to study the atoms at the
surface of solids and to investigate both their local structure and localized
electronic states. The knowledge of the atomic arrangement of neighbour
atoms around a selected atom on a surface is important in many industrial
studies such as chemisorption, oxidation processes and catalysis. SEXAFS
has gained wide appreciation because the local structure of chemisorption
sites and the local structure of surface amorphous oxides are basic
information that are not directly given by any other technique based on
diffraction methods e.g., Low Energy Electron Diffraction (LEED).
SEXAFS was born in the middle of seventies as soon as the tunable and
intense SR X-rays of storage rings become available. Indeed, in order to
efficiently start, it had high flux requirements, owing to the very low
concentration of surface atoms: the main experimental problem of all
surface X-ray spectroscopies was and still is how to enhance the sensitivity
at surface. First Lukirskii and Brytov (1964), using the continuum
bremsstrahlung of a standard X-ray tube, and later Gudat and Kunz (1972),
using SR, demonstrated that the total electron yield (TY) by the sample
surface is proportional to the bulk absorption coefficient, while having a
sampling depth of the order of magnitude of few tens of Å. Therefore, TY
is fit for surface investigations, but it could not be proficiently used till a
Name Surname Author – Title … 21
strong enough SR would come in. The first SEXAFS experiment having
high surface sensitivity was carried out at the Stanford Synchrotron
Radiation Facility (SSRF, now SSRL) by detecting the Auger electron
yield (Bianconi et al. 1977). The absorption spectrum of the surface Al
atoms in the top monolayer of an aluminium crystal could be distinguished
from the aluminium bulk spectrum: contrast was increased by selecting an
Auger line originating from the Al atoms at the surface, which interacted
with chemisorbed oxygen producing an inter-atomic, Al-O Auger
transition. Both the total electron yield (Citrin et al. 1978) and the Auger
electron yield (Stöhr et al. 1978) techniques were then made use of to
measure the signal of different atomic species chemisorbed on solid
materials. These experiments brought with them, as an immediate
consequence, that the relaxation undergone by the atoms in the exposed
substrate started being studied too (Bianconi and Bachrach 1979; Bianconi
et al. 1979).
As shown above, SEXAFS concerns the study of the absorption coefficient
modulations over a range of photoelectron wave-vectors above ~3 Å-1. In
this range, the experimental data can be analyzed in the framework of the
well-established EXAFS theory (Stöhr 1986; Norman 1986), and
contribute to policy-making particularly on matters related to
environmental remediation (e.g., Brown et al. 1999; Sherman and Randall
2003). By contrast, the XAFS structures present in the low-energy range
(few tens of eV), which contain information on the local geometry i.e., on
bond distances and bond angles, should be evaluated and discussed in the
framework of the XANES theory (Bianconi and Marcelli 1992).
3.3.b. XANES. In the near-edge fine structures of XANES, the higher-
order terms of the correlation function of the atomic distribution become
much more important than the pair correlation function of the atomic
distribution probed in the EXAFS range. They too have been intensively
studied using SR ever since the first application of this as the X-ray source.
However, due to the lack of a reliable theoretical method of analysis, early
XANES studies on local geometry determination have been limited to a
fingerprint approach using model compounds. This compelled scientists to
perform a preliminary step that was considered useful, i.e., to re-record,
using SR as the source and updated instrumental detection setups, most if
not all the near-edge XAS features of the many materials that had been
collected during the previous fifty years. As pointed out before, many of
them were actually very accurate, and yet they all underwent confirmation.
22 The Title and pages of the Book up to the Editors. Pls, do nothing here
Among the best results on this line of work, those on Mn (Belli et al.
1980), Fe (Waychunas et al. 1983), and Ti (Waychunas 1987; Paris et al.
1993; Farges et al. 1996) are worth mentioning: they all concern transition-
metal atoms of high significance for industry. These studies also updated
certain already well-known XANES properties such as, e.g., the chemical
shift, or angular dependence, or coordination dependence (cf. Mottana, in
preparation). Moreover, a completely new emphasis was given to the role
of the pre-edge features, since instrumental upgrade made it possible to
record them with resolution and intensity much higher than ever done
before. (Wu et al., 2004) Important advances towards a quantitative
theoretical analysis of the surface XANES data have also been carried out
(Bianconi and Marcelli 1992). In particular, priority has been given to
biomolecules (e.g., Shulman et al. 1976; Bianconi 1983), to soft semi-
amorphous compositionally inhomogeneous compounds (e.g., bitumen and
coal: Wong et al. 1983; catalysts), and to glassy materials (e.g., Greaves et
al. 1984; Greaves 1985), because their very low crystallinity hinders
studies using XRD, while allowing XAFS, which does not requires LRO
for detection and study.
Practically, two different lines of approach to XANES have developed,
which both persist up to now. The first and easiest one makes use of the
fingerprinting method and extracts from the XANES region the electronic
information required to best interpreting EXAFS quantitative results, e.g.,
the oxidation state of the absorber. Typical examples of this trend are the
many studies concerning iron and other transition atoms, starting with the
first realization that energy and shape of the pre-edges of transition-atom-
bearing minerals could bear quantitative information of the relative
amounts of e.g., coexisting Fe2+ and Fe3+ (Bajt et al. 1994). Furthermore, it
was shown that the intensity of the pre-edge brings information on the
relative coordination e.g., of Ti[4] and Ti[6] (Paris et al. 1993). This trend
has been pursued particularly by geochemists and is in general universally
acknowledged for transition metals and metalloids, its best example of
application being on the iron-bearing natural materials and on the
oxidation state of arsenic in waters and soils. Indeed, studies on pre-edge
energy and shape have shown that these two features account for both
coordination and oxidation state of Fe in known minerals (e.g., Wilke et al.
2001; Berry et al. 2008) and may foresee conditions that are not yet
realized on Earth, but which might occur on the Moon and in meteorites.
Similarly, Sherman and Randall (2003), although using a somewhat crude
fingerprinting approach, could demonstrate how reacting As5+-bearing
Name Surname Author – Title … 23
solutions with a Fe3+-bearing oxide- and hydroxide-rich substrate can
contribute to reclaiming heavily polluted environments, essentially by
reducing poisonous As5+ to almost harmless As3+. Environmental studies
benefit the most of XANES because this kind of spectroscopy is utterly
independent on the state of the absorber, while being able to reveal very
low contents of it (ppb)(Brigatti et al., 2000). Thus, recently, several
manuscripts appeared that deal with aerosols and nanoparticles suspended
as fine dust in the low layers of the atmosphere, or even permanently
trapped in continental ice, such as in Antarctica (Lama et al. 2012;
Marcelli et al. 2012; Schlaf et al. 2012; etc.).
Chemical reactions also occur at the interface between two solid layers of
different composition and/or structure, which often are packed together to
form multilayers. These have lately become a kind of artificial material
highly interesting for advanced industry and in many scientific applica-
tions. As a matter of fact, for multilayers, the use of XAFS in the total re-
flection mode (ReflEXAFS: Davoli et al. 2003) gives results that are far
more useful than SEXAFS, especially for samples that are grown by mo-
lecular beam epitaxy, the added layers of which have nanometric thickness
(López-Flores et al. 2009).
Another major step ahead in XAFS due to third-generation synchrotrons is
the further upgrade of XAFS-microprobes, which allow recording spectra
at micron- and smaller scales limited only by the pixel size of the available
detectors. They permit imaging and quantitative mapping of a sample
showing intrinsic and extrinsic defects and compositional variations. In-
deed, for all applications from biology to environmental science it is al-
ways more important to fully understand the concentration profile and the
chemical state of the major number of elements present in a given material.
In the last decade, several two-dimensional (2D) X-ray imaging methods
have been developed for in situ analysis of large sample areas. These data
show the distribution of particles in a sample, while XAFS reveals the kind
of elements present and their chemical state. Moreover, X-ray microscopy
and tomography can be also combined with XAFS resulting in a much
more effective analytical technique. A three-dimensional (3D) computed
tomographic XANES approach has been recently demonstrated (Meirer et
al. 2011). It uses a CCD detector having a space resolution of a few µm.
The ability to simultaneously probe morphology and phase distribution in
complex systems at multiple length scales may unravel the interplay of
nano- and micrometre-scale factors that are at the origin of a material
macroscopic behaviour. The newest X-ray layouts combine full-field
24 The Title and pages of the Book up to the Editors. Pls, do nothing here
transmission X-ray microscopy (TXM) with XANES spectroscopy, to
follow 2D and 3D morphological and chemical changes with a resolution
of tens of nanometres in thick samples, allowing the analysis of large areas
over a time from few min to few hours.
This mass of new information prompted the in-depth theoretical studies on
XANES outlined previously and the formulation of the new software
based on the MS theory extensively described there. It is now customary,
even among industrial users, to accompany their experimental results with
structural (or pseudo-structural) interpretations based on theoretical
simulations performed using anyone of the software packages listed above,
most of which are freely available. Therefore, XAFS in all its various
techniques of application is now one of the most specialized techniques of
largest industrial interest. Modern industry – particularly chip technology,
which is essential for both computers and communication tools – needs to
know as precisely as possible the state of the surface of the material and of
interfaces rather than its bulk. In fact, most reactions involved in
technological operations (e.g., lithography of circuits; epitaxial growth of
either required dopants and of unwanted impurities, these ones to be
removed) occur at the surface or in the first few layers of the material, and
are further complicated by the relaxation effect any well-ordered bulk
structure undergoes when it is suddenly interrupted. Consequently, both
fingerprinting and MS techniques typical of SEXAFS and ReflEXAFS
have been used to cope with these assignments on a variety of materials,
starting from ores up to proteins, in a practically continuous, numberless
sequence.
3 Conclusion
XAFS i.e., X-ray absorption fine spectroscopy (now intended to be
XANES+EXAFS, performed together at high resolution), is certainly one
of the most advanced techniques of material investigation particularly
among industrial and applied scientists. Indeed, SR facilities are flooded
by requests of users willing to apply XAFS methods to different materials
and phenomena. (Fukui et al., 2001) XAFS-related methods such as
SEXAFS (Surface EXAFS) and ReflEXAFS (Reflectivity EXAFS), or
others too recent or too poorly pushed to be mentioned here such as e.g.,
XES (X-Ray Emission Spectroscopy), RIXS (Resonant Inelastic X-Ray
Scattering), TXRF (Total Reflection X-ray Fluorescence), XMCD (X-ray
Name Surname Author – Title … 25
Magnetic Circular Dichroism), and DAFS (Diffraction Anomalous Fine
Structure), are successfully applied to complex systems, the deep
knowledge of which is requested by modern research aiming to industrial
applications. New instruments are available, which allow performing
polarized experiments on single crystals and, recently, even µ-XAFS, i.e.,
XAFS performed on micrometre-size spots or microparticles, is
increasingly developed, thus preparing the further evolution towards
nanoparticle studies, which still mostly rely on high-resolution
transmission X-ray microscopy (TXRM) with a spatial resolution in the
range ~30-50 nm. Nowadays, time-resolved experiments using either
dispersive or QUICK-XAFS layouts permit following the advance of
physical phenomena or of chemical reactions with a time resolution from
seconds down to few tens of microseconds.
The continuous growth of XAFS documented here pays a particular
attention to new ideas and their theoretical extension. Early XAS
contributed to the understanding of the atomic theory of matter and to the
establishing of Materials Science (cf. Mottana, in preparation). Since 1975,
XAFS contributed to its advanced understanding; starting from the
characterization of complex or extremely diluted materials up to the
interpretation of order-disorder phenomena under the peculiar aspect of
electronic interactions among neighbouring atoms in a complex chemical
environment. The explosion of modern XAFS opened new fields and
generated unexpected results. All this historical sequence of projects, tests,
and events brings support to the opinion, widespread among the scientific
community, that much greater results are to be expected, such as those
offered in the near future by the incoming availability of fourth-generation
SR coherent X-ray sources.
However, now, the front line of XAFS research is at trying to make the
best out of FEL (Free-Electron Laser). This novel, extremely sophisticated
energy source, allows studies on the near-edge fine structure of solids by
means of femtosecond soft X-ray pulses. So far, only pioneering attempts
on model materials have been successfully carried out (Bernstein et al.
2009). Such preliminary experiments could be carried out only under many
strong constraints on experimental conditions such as sample geometry,
spectrographic energy dispersion, single shot position-sensitive detection.
In addition, they used a data normalization procedure that eliminates the
severe fluctuations of the incident intensity in space and in photon energy
present in FEL, which resemble those occurring in the very first synchro-
trons. Nevertheless, all these pioneering works gave convincing results,
26 The Title and pages of the Book up to the Editors. Pls, do nothing here
thus opening new potential applications to XAFS that will meet with the
increasing demands of Materials Science as the relevant branch of Physics
and, without any doubt, of the most advanced, high-tech industry, which is
definitively oriented to make the best out of its nanometre-size products.
Acknowledgments. Our attempt at sketching the development of XAS and
at clarifying more extensively its transition to XAFS up to the present time is
based on more than two decades of readings and discussions with many people,
whom we thank greatly for contributing to our effort. Among them, we sort out
Antonio Bianconi, Maurizio Benfatto, Jesús Chaboy Nalda, Giannantonio Cibin,
Ivan Davoli, Rino Natoli, Hiroyuki Oyanagi, Eleonora Paris, Piero Pianetta, Tre-
vor Anthony Tyson, and Ziyu Wu. Nevertheless, the responsibility of this histori-
cal account, which necessarily involves selection and evaluation of persons and
works, lies entirely upon us. We certainly forgot relating about some important re-
search papers, but both the capacity of our memory and the length allowed to this
contribution have limitations. We sincerely apologize to all colleagues whose wor-
thy papers we neglected to quote.