The Highest Dimensional Stochastic Blockmodel
with a Regularized Estimator
Karl Rohe, Tai Qin and Haoyang Fan
Department of Statistics, University of Wisconsin Madison
Abstract: In the high dimensional Stochastic Blockmodel for a random network, the number of clusters
(or blocks) K grows with the number of nodes N. Two previous studies have examined the statistical
estimation performance of spectral clustering and the maximum likelihood estimator under the high
dimensionalmodel;neitheroftheseresultsallowK togrowfasterthanN1/2. Westudyamodelwhere,
ignoringlog terms, K cangrowproportionallytoN. Sincethenumberofclustersmustbesmallerthan
the number of nodes, no reasonable model allows K to grow faster; thus, our asymptotic results are the
“highest”dimensional. Topushtheasymptoticsettingtothisextreme,wemakeadditionalassumptions
that are motivated by empirical observations in physical anthropology (Dunbar, 1992), and an in depth
study of massive empirical networks (Leskovec, Lang, Dasgupta, and Mahoney, 2008). Furthermore, we
develop a regularized maximum likelihood estimator that leverages these insights and we prove that,
under certain conditions, the proportion of nodes that the regularized estimator misclusters converges
to zero. This is the first paper to explicitly introduce and demonstrate the advantages of statistical
regularization in a parametric form for network analysis.
Keywordsandphrases: StochasticBlockModel,regularization,clustering,consistency,highdimensional
1 Introduction
Recent advances in information technology have produced a deluge of data on complex systems
withmyriadinteractingelements,easilyrepresentedbynetworks. Communitiesorclustersofhighly
connected actors arean essential feature in amultitude of empirical networks, and identifying these
clustershelpsanswervitalquestionsinvariousfields. Dependingontheareaofinterest, interacting
elements may be metabolites, people, or computers. Their interactions can be represented in
chemical reactions, friendships, or some type of communication. For example, a terrorist cell is
a cluster in the communication network of terrorists; web pages that provide hyperlinks to each
other form a community that may host discussions of a similar topic; a cluster in the network of
biochemical reactions might contain metabolites with similar functions and activities. Networks
(or graphs) appropriately describe these relationships. Therefore, the substantive questions in
these various disciplines are, in essence, questions regarding the structure of networks. Given the
Acknowledgements: Thankyoutotheanonymousrefereesandtheassociateeditorfortheirthoughtfulcommentsthat
haveaddedtothequalityofthisresearch. ResearchsupportedinpartbyNIHGrantEY09946,NSFGrantDMS-0906818,and
grantsfromWARF.
2v0832.6021:viXra
demonstrated interest in making statistical inference from an observed network, it is essential to
evaluate the ability of clustering algorithms to estimate the “true clusters” in a network model.
Understanding when and why a clustering algorithm correctly estimates the “true communities”
provides a rigorous understanding of the behavior of these algorithms and potentially leads to
improved algorithms.
The Stochastic Blockmodel is a model for a random network. The “blocks” in the model corre-
spond to the concept of “true communities” that we want to study. In the Stochastic Blockmodel,
N actors (or nodes) each belong to one of K blocks and the probability of a connection between
two nodes depends only on the memberships of the two nodes (Holland and Leinhardt, 1983). This
paper adds to the rigorous understanding of the maximum likelihood estimator (MLE) under the
Stochastic Blockmodel.
There has been significant interest in how various clustering algorithms perform under the
Stochastic Blockmodel (for example, Bickel and Chen (2009); Rohe, Chatterjee, and Yu (2011);
Choi, Wolfe, and Airoldi (2012); Bickel, Chen, and Levina (2011); Zhao, Levina, and Zhu (2011);
Celisse, Daudin, and Pierre (2011); Channarond, Daudin, and Robin (2011); Flynn and Perry
(2012); Bickel, Choi, Chang, and Zhang (2012); Sussman, Tang, Fishkind, and Priebe (2012)).
In a parallel line of research, several authors have studied clustering algorithms on the Planted
Partition Model, a model nearly identical to the Stochastic Blockmodel. For example, McSherry
(2001) studies a spectral algorithm to recover the planted partition and analyzes the estimation
performanceofthisalgorithm. Chaudhuri,Chung,andTsiatas(2012)improvesuponthisalgorithm
by introducing a type of regularization and proving consistency results under the planted partition
model.
Inthepreviousliterature,twopapershavestudiedthehighdimensionalStochasticBlockmodel,
where the number of blocks K grows with the number of nodes N (Rohe, Chatterjee, and Yu,
2011; Choi, Wolfe, and Airoldi, 2012). The impetus for a high dimensional model comes from two
empiricalobservations. First, Leskovec, Lang, Dasgupta, andMahoney(2008)foundthatinalarge
corpus of empirical networks, the tightest clusters (as judged by several popular clustering criteria)
were no larger than 100 nodes, even though some of the networks had several million nodes. This
result echoes similar findings in Physical Anthropology. Dunbar (1992) took various measurements
of brain size in 38 different primates and found that the size of the neocortex divided by the size of
therestofthebrainhadalog-linearrelationshipwiththesizeoftheprimate’snaturalcommunities.
In humans, the neocortex is roughly four times larger than the rest of the brain. Extrapolating the
log-linear relationship estimated from the 38 other primates, Dunbar (1992) suggests that humans
do not have the social intellect to maintain stable communities larger than roughly 150 people
(colloquially referred to as Dunbar’s number). Leskovec et al. (2008) found a similar result in
several other networks that were not composed of humans. The research of Leskovec et al. (2008)
and Dunbar (1992) suggests that the block sizes in the Stochastic Blockmodel should not grow
asymptotically. Rather, block sizes should remain fixed (or grow very slowly).
In the previous research of Rohe, Chatterjee, and Yu (2011) and Choi, Wolfe, and Airoldi
(2012), the average block size grows at least as fast as N3/4 and N1/2 respectively. Even though
these asymptotic results allow for K to grow with N, K does not grow fast enough. The average
block size quickly surpasses Dunbar’s number. In this paper, we introduce the highest dimensional
asymptotic setting that allows K = N log−5N and N/K = log5N. Thus, under this asymptoti
setting, the size of the clusters grows much more slowly. We call it the “highest” dimensional
because, ignoring the log term, K cannot grow any faster. If it did, then eventually K > N and
there would necessarily be blocks containing zero nodes. To create a sparse graph, the out-of-
block probabilities decay roughly as logγN/N in the highest dimensional setting, where γ > 0
is some constant. To ensure that a block’s induced subgraph remains connected, the in-block
probabilities are only allowed to decay slowly like log−1N. We show that under this asymptotic
setting, a regularized maximum likelihood estimator (RMLE) can estimate the block partition for
most nodes.
This paper departs from the previous high dimensional estimators of Rohe, Chatterjee, and
Yu (2011) and Choi, Wolfe, and Airoldi (2012) by introducing a restricted parameter space for the
StochasticBlockmodel. Inseveralhighdimensionalsettings, regularizationrestrictsthefullparam-
eter space providing a path to consistent estimators (Negahban, Ravikumar, Wainwright, and Yu,
2010). If the true parameter setting is close to the restricted parameter space, then regularization
trades a small amount of bias for a potentially large reduction in variance. For example, in the high
dimensional regression literature, sparse regression techniques such as the LASSO restrict the pa-
rameterspacetoproducesparseregressionestimators(Tibshirani,1996). Severalauthorshavealso
suggested parameter space restrictions for high dimensional covariance estimation, e.g. Fan, Fan,
andLv(2008);Friedman,Hastie,andTibshirani(2008);Ravikumar,Wainwright,Raskutti,andYu
(2011). Parameter space restrictions have also been applied in Linear Discriminant Analysis (Tib-
shirani, Hastie, Narasimhan, and Chu, 2002). In graph inference, previous authors have explored
various ways of incorporating statistical regularization into eigenvector computations (Chaudhuri,
Chung, and Tsiatas, 2012; Amini, Chen, Bickel, and Levina, 2012; Mahoney and Orecchia, 2010;
Perry and Mahoney, 2011; Mahoney, 2012).
Inthispaper, weproposerestrictingtheparameterspacefortheStochasticBlockmodel. These
restrictions are supported by empirical observations (Dunbar, 1992; Leskovec, Lang, Dasgupta, and
Mahoney, 2008), and they result in a statistically regularized estimator. We will show that the
RMLEissuitableinthehighestdimensionalasymptoticsetting. Thisworkisdistinctfromprevious
approaches to regularization in graph inference because we study a parametric method, the MLE.
2 Preliminaries
2.1 Highest Dimensional Asymptotic Setting
IntheStochasticBlockmodel(SBM),eachnodebelongstooneofK blocks. Eachedgecorresponds
to an independent Bernoulli random variable where the probability of an edge between any two
nodes depends only on the two nodes’ block memberships (Holland and Leinhardt, 1983). The
formal definition is as follows.
Definition 2.1. For a node set {1,2,...,N}, let P denote the probability of including an edge
linking node i and j. Let z˜ : {1,2,...,N} → {1,2,...,K} partition the N nodes into K blocks. So,
z˜ equals the block membership for node i. z˜ specifies all true clusters in the model. Let θ be a
K×K matrix where θ ∈ [0,1] for all a,b. Then P = θ for any i,j = 1,2,...,n. So under the
ab ij z˜iz˜j
SBM, the the probability of observing adjacency matrix A is
The distribution factors over i < j because we only consider undirected graphs without self-loops.
The highest dimensional asymptotic setting, defined in Definition 2.2, restricts the parameters
of the SBM in two ways. First, because empirical evidence suggests that community sizes do not
grow with the size of the network, this setting allows s, defined to be the population of the smallest
block, to grow very slowly. The second restriction ensures that the sampled networks will have
sparse edges. At a high level, there are two types of edges, “in-block edges” that connect nodes in
the same block and “out-of-block edges” that connect nodes in different blocks. In order to ensure
sparse edges in the high dimensional setting, it is necessary that both the number of out-of-block
edges and the number of in-block edges do not grow too fast. To control the number of out-of-
block edges, the off-diagonal elements of θ must be (roughly) on the order of 1/N, otherwise the
graph will be dense. The definition allows a set Q to prevent this restriction from becoming too
stringent; if (a,b) ∈ Q, then θ is not required to shrink as the network grows, allowing blocks
a and b to have a tight connection. As for the in-block edges, the slowly growing communities
prevent these from creating a dense network; the number of in-block edges connected to each node
isboundedbythesizeoftheblockpopulation. Assuch, thehighestdimensionalasymptoticsetting
allows the probability of an in-block connection to remain fixed or decay slowly. It is necessary
to prevent these probabilities from converging to zero too quickly because in such small blocks, it
would quickly erase any community structure.
Definition 2.2. The highest dimensional asymptotic setting is an SBM with the following asymp-
totic restrictions.
(R1) For s equal to the population of the smallest block and x = ω(y ) ⇔ y /x = o(1),
(R2) Let (c,d) be the interval between c and d and let Q contain a subset of the indices for θ. For
constants C and f(N) = o(s/logN),
(log−1N,1−log−1N) a = b
 (log−1N,1−log−1N) a < b,{a,b} ∈ Q.
Assumption (R1) requires that the population of the smallest block s = ω(logβN),β > 4. This
includes the scenario where each block size is very small (e.g. o(log5N)). In this case, the expected
degree for each node is o(log5N). In the next sections we will introduce the RMLE and then show
that it can identify the blocks under the highest dimensional asymptotic setting.
2.2 Regularized Maximum Likelihood Estimator
Under the highest dimensional asymptotic setting, the number of parameters in θ is quadratic in
K and the sample size available for estimating each parameter in θ is as small as s2. For tractable
estimation in the “large K small s” setting, we propose an RMLE.
Recall that z˜ denotes the true partition. Let z denote any arbitrary partition. The log-
likelihood for an observed adjacency matrix A under the SBM w.r.t node partition z is
ij zizj ij zizj
For fixed class assignment z, let N denote the number of nodes assigned to class a, and let n
denote the maximum number of possible edges between class a and b; i.e., n = N N if a (cid:54)= b and
(cid:0)Na (cid:1)
. For an arbitrary partition z, the MLE of θ is
θ∈[0,1]K×K
This is a symmetric matrix in the parameter space Θ = [0,1]K×K. It is straightforward to show
1 (cid:88)
A 1{z = a,z = b}, ∀a,b = 1,2,...,K
ab n ij i j
By substituting θˆ(z) into L(A;z,θ), we get the profiled log-likelihood (Bickel and Chen (2009)).
Define zˆ= argmax L(A;z) as the MLE of z˜. To define the RMLE, define the restricted parameter
space, ΘR ⊂ Θ, by the following regularization:
(cid:110) (cid:111)
ΘR = θ ∈ [0,1]K×K : θ = c, ∀ a (cid:54)= b and for c ∈ [0,1] .
If θ ∈ ΘR, then all off-diagonal elements of θ are equal. We call the new estimator “regularized”
because, where Θ has K(K +1)/2 free parameters, ΘR has only K +1 free parameters.
Given class assignment z, The RMLE θR,(z) is the maximizer of L(A;z,θ) within ΘR.
θR,(z) = arg max L(A;z,θ).
The optimization problem within ΘR can be treated as an unconstrained optimization problem
within [0,1]K+1 since we force the off-diagonal elements of θ to be equal to some number r. It has
a closed form solution:
(cid:40) θˆ(z) = 1 (cid:80) A 1{z = a,z = b} a = b,
θˆR,(z) = aa naa i<j ij i j
ab rˆ(z) = 1 (cid:80) A 1{z (cid:54)= z } a (cid:54)= b.
nout i<j ij i j
Here n = n is the maximum number of possible edges between all different blocks. The
out a<b ab
Regularized MLE for θ is exactly the same as ordinary MLE, while the Regularized MLE for
θ ,a (cid:54)= b is set to be equal to the total off-diagonal average. Finally, by substituting
L(A;z,θ), define the regularized profile log-likelihood to be
and denote the RMLE of the true partition z˜ to be
zˆR = argmaxLR(A;z). (1)
3 Performance of the RMLE in the highest dimensional asymp-
totic setting
Our main result shows that most nodes are correctly clustered by the RMLE under the highest
dimensional asymptotic setting. This result requires the definition of “correctly clustered” from
Choi, Wolfe, and Airoldi (2012).
Definition 3.1. For any estimated class assignment z, define N (z) as the number of incorrect
class assignments under z, counted for every node whose true class under z˜ is not in the majority
within its estimated class under z.
The main result, Theorem 3.2, uses the KL divergence between two Bernoulli distributions.
This is defined as
D(p(cid:107)q) = plog +(1−p)log .
Recall that under the highest dimensional asymptotic setting, Q denotes the off diagonal indices of
θ that do not asymptotically decay. Additionally, n denotes the total number of possible edges
between nodes in block a and nodes in block b. Define |Q| as the number of possible tight edges
across different blocks,
The following theorem is our main result. It shows that under the highest dimensional asymp-
totic setting, the proportion of nodes that the RMLE misclusters converges to zero.
Theorem 3.2. Under the highest dimensional asymptotic setting in Definition 2.2, N is the total
number of nodes, and s is the population of the smallest block. Assume that the set of friendly block
pairs Q (defined in R2 of Definition 2.2) is small enough that |Q| = o(Ns), where |Q| is defined in
Equation 2. Furthermore, for the matrix of probabilities θ, assume that for any distinct class pairs
(a,b), there exists a class c such that the following condition holds:
(cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18) (cid:19)
ac bc ac bc
D θ (cid:107) +D θ (cid:107) ≥ C (3)
ac 2 bc 2 N2
Under these assumptions, RMLE zˆR defined in Equation 1 satisfies
where N (z) is the number of misclustered nodes defined in Definition 3.1.
This theorem requires two main assumptions. The first main assumption is |Q| = o(Ns).
Define the number of expected edges M = EA . Under the highest dimensional asymptotic
setting, this first assumption implies that M grows slowly, specifically M = ω(N(logN)3+δ), where
δ > 0. The second main assumption says that every distinct class pair (a,b) has at least one class
c that satisfies Equation 3. This assumption relates to the identifiability of z˜ under the highest
dimensional asymptotic setting. For example, if (a,b) (cid:54)∈ Q, then choosing c = a satisfies the
assumption in Equation 3, because θ is large and θ is small. However, if (a,b) ∈ Q, then there
should exist at least one class c to make θ ,θ identifiable. Otherwise, blocks a and b should be
merged into the same block. Interestingly, this assumption is not strong enough to ensure that z˜
maximizesE(LR(A,·)),butthisisnotrelevantforourasymptoticresults. Ifoneisconcernedabout
this abnormality, it would be enough to assume in R2 (in the definition of the highest dimensional
asymptotic setting) that if {a,b} ∈ Q, then θ < ∆. This ensures that the probabilities in the set
Q are smaller than the in-block probabilities. Such an assumption does not change the asymptotic
result.
While theorem 3.2 does not make an explicit assumption about the size of the largest block,
Equation 3 makes an implicit assumption because the size of the largest blocks affects the number
of edges M. Equation 3 is satisfied when MK/N2 → 0 and the set Q does not interfere. For
example, if |Q| = 0 and the largest block is O(N1/2−(cid:15)) for some (cid:15) > 0, then Equation 3 is satisfied.
4 Simulations
This section compares the RMLE’s and the MLE’s ability to estimate the block memberships in
the Stochastic Blockmodel. In our simulations, the RMLE outperforms the MLE in a wide range
of scenarios, particularly when there are several blocks and when the out-of-block probabilities are
not too heterogeneous.
4.1 Implementation
Computing the exact RMLE and MLE is potentially computationally intractable owing to the
combinatorial nature of the parameter space. In this simulation, we fit the MLE with the pseudo-
likelihood algorithm proposed in Amini, Chen, Bickel, and Levina (2012). A slight change to the
pseudo-likelihood algorithm can fit the RMLE as well; immediately after the pseudo-likelihood
algorithm updates θ(z), we replace the off-diagonal elements with the average of the off-diagonal
elements.
In our simulations, we observed that without any further modification, fitting the RMLE with
the adjusted pseudo-likelihood removes blocks from the estimate. Specifically if data is generated
from a model with 30 blocks and the algorithm is given K = 30, then the algorithm often returns
a partition with only 25 (or so) non-empty sets. Meanwhile, in the hundreds of simulations that
we performed, only two times did the MLE remove a block. On both of these instances, we re-ran
the k-means step in the spectral initialization and gave the MLE this new initialization. It then
returned a partition with K non-empty sets. The RMLE was much more persistent in returning a
reduced partition.
Interestingly,eventhoughtheresultingRMLEestimateshouldbebeatadisadvantagebecause
it has fewer blocks, it has nearly identical misclustering performance compared to the MLE. This
suggests that the pseudo-likelihood RMLE discards meaningless blocks from the current iterate,
a type of dimension reduction. This provides the opportunity to escape local optima near the
initialization.
To illustrate the benefit of discarding meaningless blocks, the simulations below make a further
adjustment to the pseudo-likelihood RMLE. When the algorithm discards a block, it “re-seeds” a
new block. This re-seeding is done by the following algorithm that was motivated by follow-up
work to the current paper (see Rohe and Qin (2013)):
1. Findtheblock(asdefinedbythecurrentiterationofthepartition)withthesmallestempirical
in-block probability.
2. For each node in this block, take its neighborhood and remove any nodes that do not connect
to any other nodes in the neighborhood. Call this the transitive neighborhood.
3. Combine both (1) the node with the largest transitive neighborhood and (2) this node’s
transitive neighborhood into a new block.
SimilarlytothesuggestioninAmini, Chen, Bickel, andLevina(2012), weinitializethepseudo-
likelihood algorithm with spectral clustering using the regularized graph Laplacian (Chaudhuri,
Chung, and Tsiatas, 2012). Specifically, it runs k-means on the top K eigenvectors of the matrix
D AD , where D is a diagonal matrix whose i,ith element is 1/ D +τ. D = A
τ τ τ ii ii j ij
is the degree of node i and tuning parameter τ is set to be the average degree of all nodes.
4.2 Numerical results
This section contains two sets of simulations. In the first set of simulations, K is growing while
everything else remains fixed. The second set of simulations investigate the sensitivity of the
algorithms to heterogeneous values in the off-diagonal elements of θ.
Expected out−of−block degree is 5
20 40 60 80 100
retsulcsim
Expected out−of−block degree is 10
l l l 0.10 l
0.05 l l l l l
l l lll l 0.00
20 40 60 80 100
retsulcsim
Initialization
RMLE l l l l l l
l l l l l l
lll l ll l l l
Figure1: Inthissimulation, acrossawiderangeofK, theRMLEmisclustersfewernodesthantheMLE.In
each simulation, every block contains 20 nodes and K grows from 10 to 100 along the horizontal axis. The
vertical axis displays the proportion of nodes misclustered. Both algorithms are initialized with regularized
spectral clustering and the results for this initialization are displayed by the dashed line. The MLE makes
minor improvements to the initialization, while the RMLE makes more significant improvements. Each
point in this figure represents the average of 300 simulations. All methods were run on the same simulated
adjacency matrices.
The results in Figure 1 compare the RMLE and MLE under an asymptotic regime that keeps
the population of each block fixed at twenty nodes and simply adds blocks. The horizontal axes
corresponds to K growing from ten to one hundred. In both the left and the right panel, the
probability of a connection between two nodes in the same block is 8/20. In the left panel, the
probability of a connection between two nodes in separate blocks is 5/N. In the right panel, it
is 10/N. Under these two asymptotics, the expected number of “signal” edges connected to each
node is eight, while the expected number of “noisy” edges is either five or ten. The vertical axis in
both figures is N (zˆ)/N, the proportion of misclustered nodes.
The results in Figure 2 examine the sensitivity of the algorithms to deviations from the model
in Figure 1 that makes the off-diagonal elements of θ equal to one another. In all simulations, the
expected number of “signal edges” per node is eight, the expected number of “noisy edges” per
nodeis5,s = 20,andK = 40. OntheleftsideofFigure2, theoff-diagonalelementsofθ comefrom
the Gamma distribution. In the top left figure, the shape parameter in the Gamma distribution
(α) varies along the horizontal axis. While the shape parameter varies, the rate parameter changes
to ensure that each node has an expected out-of-block degree equal to five. Under our scaling of
the rate parameter, the variance of the Gamma distribution is proportional to 1/α. As such, the
small values of α make the out-of-block probabilities more heterogeneous, deviating further from
the implicit model. For a point of reference, recall that α = 1 gives the exponential distribution.
Our simulations present α ∈ (.1,.55), more variable than the exponential distribution. For values
of α greater than .18, the RMLE outperforms the MLE. The bottom left plot shows the top left
400 × 400 submatrix of the adjacency matrix for a simulated example when α = .18; the block
pattern is clearly recognizable at this level of α, suggesting that the RMLE is surprisingly robust
to deviations from the implicit model.
The plots on the right side of Figure 2 are similar, except the off-diagonal elements of θ are
scaled Bernoulli(p) random variables. Note that when p = 1, this simulation would be identical
to a setting in Figure 1. The scaling ensures that the expected out-of-block degree is always
five. Here, the break-even point is around p = .14 and the bottom right figure shows the top left
400×400 submatrix of the adjacency matrix for a sample when p = .14; the block pattern is clearly
recognizable for this level of p. In both of these cases, the RMLE appears robust to deviations from
the implied model. At the same time, for small levels of p and α, the MLE misclusters fewer nodes
than the RMLE.
5 Discussion
This paper examines the theoretical properties of the regularized maximum likelihood estimator
(RMLE)underthehighestdimensionalasymptoticsetting,showingthatunderanovelandrelevant
Sinceθ isnowrandom,thisexpectationistakenoverbothAandθ.
Off−diagonal block probabilities are
Gamma(alpha, alpha/r)
0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5
retsulcsim
Off−diagonal block probabilities are
l Initialization
l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l
l l l l l l
0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5
retsulcsim l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l
l l l l l l l l
Gamma block probabilities Bernoulli block probabilities
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
Figure2: ThesefiguresinvestigatethesensitivityofthealgorithmstodeviationsfromtheRMLE’s“implied
model” that has homogeneous off-diagonal elements in θ. The top left figure displays results when these
elementsofθcomefromtheGammadistributionwithvaryingshapeparameter. Thetoprightfiguredisplays
results when these elements of θ come from the Bernoulli distribution with varying probability p. In both
cases, adjustments are made so that each node has five expected out-of-block neighbors. The bottom plots
illustrate the how these heterogenous probabilities manifest in the adjacency matrix; in both cases, A is
sampled with the parameterization that corresponds to the break-even point between the MLE and the
RMLE. Each point represents an average over 200 simulations
asymptoticregime,regularizationallowsforweaklyconsistentestimationoftheblockmemberships.
Under the highest dimensional asymptotic setting, the size of the communities grows at a poly-
logarithmic rate, not at a polynomial rate, aligning with several empirical observations (Dunbar,
1992; Leskovec, Lang, Dasgupta, and Mahoney, 2008). There are two natural implications of the
block populations growing this slowly. Under any Stochastic Blockmodel, to ensure the sampled
graph has sparse edges, the probability of an out-of-block connection must decay. In previous “low-
dimensional” analyses, it was also necessary for the probability of an in-block connection to decay.
The first clear implication of small blocks is that the probability of an in-block connection must
stay bounded away from zero. Otherwise, a block’s induced sub-graph will become disconnected.
The second implication of small block sizes is that the number of off diagonal elements in Θ grows
nearly quadratically with N, while the number of in-block parameters (diagonal elements of Θ)
grows linearly with N.
The proposed estimator, restricts the parameter space of the SBM in a way that leverages both
of these implications. Since the out-of-block edge probabilities decay to zero, we maximize the like-
lihood over a parameter space that estimates the probabilities as equal. Theorem 3.2 shows that
under the highest dimensional asymptotic setting and certain conditions that are similar to identi-
fiability conditions, the RMLE can estimate the correct block for most nodes. Correspondingly, the
simulation section demonstrates the advantages of the RMLE over the MLE. Overall, this paper
represents a first step in applying statistically regularized estimators to high dimensional network
analysis in a parametric setting. Because of the computational issues involved in computing both
the MLE and the RMLE, future work will propose a “local estimator” that (1) incorporates the
insights gained from the current analysis and (2) is computationally straight-forward.
6 Proof of the main result
The proof requires some additional definitions. After giving these definitions, we will outline the
proof.
Define the expectation of
. Define the expectation of
L(A;z,θ) to be
P ij zizj ij zizj
Let L¯ (z) to be the maximizer of L¯ (z,θ) over Θ, and let L¯R(z) to be the maximizer of L¯ (z,θ)
over ΘR. That is,
The proof of the main theorem is divided into five lemmas. The first step is to bound the difference
between L¯ (z˜) and L¯R(zˆR) (Lemma 6.3). Lemma 6.1 and Lemma 6.2 are two building blocks
of Lemma 6.3 . Lemma 6.1 establishes a union bound of |LR(A;z)−L¯R(z)| for any partition z.
Lemma 2 shows that under the true partition z˜, the expectation of regularized likelihood is close
to the expectation of the ordinary likelihood. Lemma 6.3 divides L¯ (z˜)−L¯R(zˆR) into three parts
and controls them respectively. We can see this as a bias-variance tradeoff; we sacrifice some bias
L¯ (z˜)−L¯R(z˜)todecreasethevariancemax |LR(A;z)−L¯R(z)|. AfterLemma6.3,itisnecessaryto
develop the concept of regularized refinement, an extension of the refinement idea proposed in Choi
et al. (2012). Using the concept of regularized refinement, we can bound the error rate N (zˆR)/N
with a function of L¯ (z˜)−L¯R(zˆR). Lemma 6.5 and Lemma 6.6 use a new concept of regularized
refinement to connect the bounds on the log-likelihood with the error rate N (zˆR)/N. From here
on, we write θˆand θ¯instead of θˆ(z) and θ¯(z) when the choice of z is understood.
Lemma 6.1. Let M to be the total expected degree of A. That is, M = EA .
This proof follows a similar argument made in Choi, Wolfe, and Airoldi (2012).
Proof. Let H(p) = −plogp−(1−p)log(1−p), which is the entropy of a Bernoulli random variable
withparameterp. DefineX = (cid:80) A log{θ¯ /(1−θ¯ )}. Letn denotethemaximumnumber
i<j ij zizj zizj ab
of possible edges between all different blocks.
P aa aa aa out
aa aa aa out
For the first part (cid:80)K n D(θˆ (cid:107)θ¯ ) + n D(rˆ(cid:107)r¯), by similar argument as in Choi et al.
a=1 aa aa aa out
(2012), we have that for every regularized estimator θˆR:
(cid:26) K (cid:27)
aa aa aa out
Let Θˆ denote the range of θˆR for fixed z. Then the total number of sets of values θˆR can take is
out a=1 aa a=1 aa out 2
K (cid:27) N2
aa aa aa out
(cid:26) (cid:27)
For the second part X −E(X), each X = A log{θ¯ /(1−θ¯ )} is bounded in magnitude
ij ij zizj zizj
by C = 2logN. By the following concentration inequality:
(cid:26) (cid:15)2 (cid:27)
Here (cid:80) E(X2) ≤ 4M log2N. Finally, by a union bound inequality over all partition z, we have:
(cid:26) (cid:15)2M (cid:27)
+2exp N logK − .
8log2N +(4/3)(cid:15)logN
Notice that in this asymptotic setting , the total expected degree M = ω(N(logN)3+δ). Then,
Lemma 6.2. Under the true partition z˜, L¯ (z˜)−L¯R(z˜) = o(M).
Proof. When N is sufficiently large,
(cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88)
P P ab ab ab ab ab ab
(cid:88) Cf(N)
Here C > 0 is some constant. The last equality is due to the fact that M = Ω(Ns), which is
directly implied by Definition 2.2.
Lemma 6.3. Under the true partition z˜ and the RMLE zˆR, L¯ (z˜)−L¯R(zˆR) = o (M).
Proof. First notice that the left hand side is a nonnegative value since z˜ maximizes L¯ (·) and
By adding another positive term, and using Lemma 6.1 and Lemma 6.2:
= o (M).
To make N (z) mathematically tractable, Choi, Wolfe, and Airoldi (2012) introduced the con-
cept of block refinements. The next paragraphs first reintroduce the definition. We then extend
this definition to the regularized block refinement.
6.1 Partitions and refinements
TherefinementisthekeyconcepttoconnectL¯ (z˜)−L¯R(zˆR)withtheerrorrateN (zˆR)/N. Forthis
subsection, we first review the concept of partition and refinement. Then, we give its regularized
version. Second, we state the fact that a refinement’s log-likelihood is no less than the original
partition’s log-likelihood. Then, the distance between log-likehood of its (regularized) refinement
and log-likelihood of true z˜ can be bounded by the distance between (regularized) log-likelihood
of arbitrary z partitions and log-likelihood true z˜. Finally, the connection between (regularized)
refinement log-likelihood and the error rate is established (Lemma 6.6.)
For positive integer N, define [N] as the set {1,...,N}. The partition log-likelihood L¯∗ is
defined for any partition Π of the indices of a lower triangular matrix,
S = {(i,j) : Π(i,j) = (cid:96) and i < j} and θ¯ = |S |−1 P .
(cid:96) (cid:96) (cid:96) ij
The partition log-likelihood is defined as
P ij Π(i,j) ij Π(i,j)
Notice that any class assignment z induces a corresponding partition Πz,
Πz(i,j) = (cid:96), where (cid:96) = z +(z −1)·K.
It is straightforward to show that L¯∗(Πz) = L¯ (z).
A refinement Π(cid:48) of partition Π further divides the partitions in Π into subgroups. Formally,
Definition 6.4. A refinement Π(cid:48) of partition Π satisfies the following condition.
Π(cid:48)(i ,j ) = Π(cid:48)(i ,j ) =⇒ Π(i ,j ) = Π(i ,j ), for any i < j and i < j .
1 1 2 2 1 1 2 2 1 1 2 2
From Lemma A2 in Choi et al. (2012),
This will be essential for for Lemma 6.6.
To define Π∗, a specific refinement of partition Πz, we first need to define a set of triples T.
The following construction comes directly from Choi et al. (2012):
“For a given membership class under z, partition the corresponding set of nodes into
subclasses according to the true class assignment z˜of each node. Then remove one node
from each of the two largest subclasses so obtained, and group them together as a pair;
continue this pairing process until no more than one nonempty subclass remains. Then,
terminate. If pair (i,j) is chosen from the above procedure, then z = z and z˜ (cid:54)= z˜ .”
Define C as the number of (i,j) pairs selected by the above routine. Notice that at least one of i
or j is misclustered. In fact, N (z)/2 ≤ C ≤ N (z). This will be important for Lemma 6.5 which
connects the error rate N (z)/N with the refinement.
Define the set T to contain the triple (i,j,k) if the pair (i,j) was tallied in C , and k ∈ [N]
(cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18) (cid:19)
P +P P +P MK
ik jk ik jk
D P (cid:107) +D P (cid:107) ≥ C .
ik 2 jk 2 N2
From assuming Equation 3 , if (i,j) is tallied in C , then there exists at least one such k. Further,
if z = z , then (i,j,(cid:96)) is also in T. The set T is essential to defining the refinement partition Π∗
k (cid:96)
and later the refined regularized partition Π∗R.
For each (i,j,k) ∈ T, remove (i,k) and (j,k) from their previous subset under Πz, and place
them into their own, distinct two-element set. Define the resulting partition as Π∗. Notice that it
is a refinement of Πz.
6.2 Regularized partition and regularized refinement
ToextendtheanalysistotheRMLE,wewilldefinetheregularizedpartitionΠzR andtheassociated
refinementpartitionΠ∗R. ΠzR partitionsthenodesintoK+1groups; ifz = z , thenΠzR(i,j) = z
and if z (cid:54)= z , then ΠzR(i,j) = K +1. It follows from the definition of L¯∗ that L¯R(z) = L¯∗(ΠzR).
Construct Π∗R in the following way: For each (i,j,k) ∈ T, remove (i,k) and (j,k) from their
previous subset under ΠzR, and place them into their own, distinct two-element set. Define the
resulting partition as Π∗R. Notice that Π∗R is constructed from ΠzR in the same way that Π∗ is
constructed from Πz. Define R as the set of elements in the off-diagonal block partition that where
not removed by the set T,
(cid:8) (cid:9)
R = (q,k) ∈ [N]×[N] : z (cid:54)= z , (q,x,k) (cid:54)∈ T, (x,q,k) (cid:54)∈ T, for any x ∈ [N] .
Notice that R is one group in Π∗R. Make a refinement Π(cid:48) by subdividing R into (cid:0)K(cid:1) new groups:
For u < v,u ∈ [K],v ∈ [K], define G = {(i,j) ∈ R : z = u,z = v or z = v,z = u}.
uv i j i j
It follows that Π(cid:48) = Π∗. So, Π∗ is a refinement of Π∗R and Π∗R is a refinement for ΠzR.
Lemma 6.5. (Theorem 3 in Choi, Wolfe, and Airoldi (2012)) For any partition z and Π∗ being
its refinement, if the size of the smallest block s = Ω(MK), and for any distinct class pairs (a, b),
there exists a class c such that Equation 3 holds, then
Proof.
(cid:18) (cid:19)
p p ij Π(i,j) 1 N2 N
Lemma 6.6. Let ΠzˆR be the partition corresponding to zˆR (the regularized block estimator). Let
Π(cid:48) be the refinement of ΠzˆR, and let Π(cid:48)R be the regularized refinement of ΠzˆR.
P P P P P P
Proof. Recall that taking a refinement increases the partition log-likelihood. The first inequality is
due to the fact that Π(cid:48)R is a refinement of the partition ΠzˆR. The second inequality follows from
the fact that Π(cid:48) is a refinement of Π(cid:48)R.
Proof of main theorem: The conditions in Lemma 6.5 are satisfied by the highest dimensional
asymptotic setting assumption. By Lemma 6.3, 6.5, 6.6, we have:
p P P P P N N p
Acknowledgments
Thanks to Sara Fernandes-Taylor for helpful comments. Research of KR is supported by a grant
from the University of Wisconsin. Research of TQ is supported by NSF Grant DMS-0906818 and
NIH Grant EY09946.