]nyd-ulf.scisyhp[
1v7970.0131:viXra
The sedimentation of flexible filaments: Trajectories,
particle clouds and a buckling instability
Harishankar Manikantan1, Lei Li2, David Saintillan1,
and Saverio E. Spagnolie2
Department of Mechanical Science and Engineering, University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign, 1206 W. Green Street, Urbana, IL 61801,USA
Department of Mathematics, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 480 Lincoln Drive,
Madison, WI 53706,USA
In this fluid dynamics video we explore an arrayof different possible dynamics for a flexible
filament sedimenting in a viscous fluid. The time-dependent shapes and trajectories of the fila-
mentaredeterminedanalyticallyandnumericallybybalancingviscous,elasticandgravitational
forcesinaslender-bodytheoryforzero-Reynoldsnumberflows. Thedynamicsarecharacterized
by a single dimensionless elasto-gravitation number. The video shows the process of filament
relaxationand reorientation,the formationof particle clouds, and finally a buckling instability.
Introduction
Theshapesanddynamicsofelasticfilamentsinviscousfluidsareofcriticalimportanceinawide
rangeofbiologicalandtechnological processes. However, eventhestudyofrelatively simplesystems
can be difficult, due to the complex interactions between elasticity and nonlocal fluid-structure
interactions. In a recent paper, the present authors investigated such a fundamental problem, the
sedimentationofasingleelasticfilamentinaviscousfluid[1]. Amathematicalmodelwasdeveloped
by balancing viscous, elastic, and gravitational forces in a slender-body theory for zero-Reynolds
number flows. The dynamics of the filament are characterized by a single dimensionless elasto-
gravitation number that compares the elastic forces acting on the filament to the gravitational
force:
where E is the elastic modulus of the filament, a is an average cross-sectional radius, L is the fila-
ment length, and FG is the total gravitational force acting on the body. Numerical and analytical
approaches are used to study the filament behavior in a number of situations, with excellent agree-
ment between the two [1]. This video illustrates three prominent features of the filament dynamics,
which we now describe.
1. Particle trajectories and reorientation
In the first part of the video, numerical simulations are used to show that sedimentation causes
weakly flexible filaments to reorient and eventually reach a terminal settling shape. Two non-
interacting filaments (with β = 0.02) are initially placed at the origin at angles π/4 and π/64 with
respect to gravity, and are allowed to sediment freely. The instantaneous shape and orientation are
tracked along with the position of the center of the filaments, and the time-dependent trajectories
and filament shapes are illustrated. Analytical expressions for these quantities have been deter-
mined using a multiple-scale asymptotic expansion in the large β regime [1]. We proceed to show
theterminal sedimentingshapesover arange of theelasto-gravitation number,β. Theseshapes are
found(andcan beshownanalytically) to beself-similar over abroad rangeof theelasto-gravitation
number. When β is sufficiently small, large filament deformations lead to a horseshoe-like terminal
shape.
2. Particle clouds
The complicated sedimentation trajectories shown in the first part of the video are a conse-
quence of the coupling between the filament shape and its translational and rotational velocities.
The individual filament trajectories suggest an interesting possibility for the spreading dynamics
for a collection of flexible filaments, which we model as non-interacting in the dilute limit. The
second part of the video shows the sedimentation of a collection of filaments, initially at the same
location but with different orientations with respect to gravity, with β = 0.1. In stark contrast to
the dynamics of rigid rods, flexible filaments are restricted to a cloud with a width that can be
shown to be proportional to the elasto-gravitation number [1].
3. Buckling Instability
Finally, it can beshown that thetension acting on a filament backbone whenit sediments along
itslengthiscompressiveinthefilament’sleadinghalf. Thiscompressionleadstoabucklinginstabil-
ityifthefilamentissufficientlyflexible. Alinearstabilityanalysisrevealsthisbucklingthreshold,as
wellasthemostunstablewavenumbersandtheirgrowthratesasafunctionoftheelasto-gravitation
number. In the final part of the video, we show this buckling instability by numerical simulations
for three different values of the elasto-gravitation number (β = 0.0005,0.0001,0.0000625). Just
as predicted by our analysis, smaller wavelength perturbations are more unstable for smaller β
(increased filament flexibility).