Research and Evaluation in Education
Volume 1, Number 2, December 2015 (pages 175-185)
THE EFFECTIVENESS OF WEB-BASED INTERACTIVE BLENDED
LEARNING MODEL IN ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING COURSES
1)Hansi Effendi; 2)Soenarto; 3)Herminarto Sofyan
1)Padang State University, Indonesia; 2)3)Yogyakarta State University, Indonesia
1)hansieffendi@yahoo.com; 2)narto_elka@yahoo.com; 3)hermin@uny.ac.id
The study was to test the effectiveness of Web-Based Interactive Blended Learning
(WBIBL) model for subjects in the Department of Electrical Engineering, Padang State
University. The design employed was a quasi-experimental design with one group pretest-posttest
administered to a group of 30 students twice. The effectiveness of WBIBL model was tested by
comparing the average pretest scores and the average posttest scores, both in the first trial and
the second trial. The average pretest and posttest scores in the first trial were 14.13 and 33.80
subsequently. The increase in the average score was significant at alpha 0.05. The average pretest
and posttest scores in the second trial were 18.67 and 47.03. The result was also significant at
alpha 0.05. The effectiveness of WBIBL model in the second trial was higher than that in the first
test. The result was not entirely satisfactory and it might be caused by several weaknesses in both
tests, including the limited number of sessions, being only one subject, and the limited number of
students as the subjects. However, it could be concluded that the WBIBL model might be
implemented as an alternative to the face-to-face instruction.
Keywords: instructional model, blended learning, interactive, web-based
Research and Evaluation in Education
e-ISSN: 2460-6995
Research and Evaluation in Education
academic qualifications, competencies,
Introduction
educational certificates, physical and mental
In Law Number 20 Year 2003 regarding health and capability in order to materialize
the National Education System article 3, it is the objectives of national education’ (Article
stated that the function of national education 8). The academic qualifications mentioned in
is to develop the national capability and to Article 8 will be attained by means of higher
shape national characteristics as well as education in bachelor and diploma programs
national civilization in order to brighten (Article 9).
national life. The objective is to develop On the other hand, the requirements
students’ potentials in order to be human regarding the lecturers are formulated in Law
beings who have faith and piety toward the Number 14 Year 2005 Article 45 and the
Lord the Almighty, to have noble lecturers should have the following minimum
characteristics, to master science, to have requirements: (1) Should be the graduates of
capabilities, to be creative and independent, masters programs for the diploma or the
and to become democratic and responsible bachelor degree; and (2) Should be the
citizens. graduates of doctoral programs for the post-
In order to achieve the objective, the graduate degree (Verse 2). In Article 47 Verse
government has designed multiple policies 1, it is added that the educator certificates for
and activities that are formulated into five- the lecturers as mentioned in Article 45 shall
year strategic plannings. One of these be given after the lecturers meet the following
plannings is the 2010-2014 Strategic Planning requirements: (1) having been working as
of Indonesian Government with the educators in higher education for at least two
following missions: (1) to improve the years; (2) having an academic position at least
availability of educational service; (2) to as an expert assistant; (3) having been
expand the accessibility of educational service; graduated from the certification conducted by
(3) to improve the quality and relevance of the universities that run the educational staff
educational service; (4) to bring into reality provision programs and the universities that
the equality in attaining educational service; run the intended program should be appoint-
and (5) to ensure the assurance of attaining ed by the Government.
educational service. Due to those regulations, the teachers
Although the missions are designed assigned in the remote areas are motivated to
well, in the implementation, there are several continue their studies. However, state
constraints found in the reality. The universities have limited capacities in absorb-
weaknesses are as follows: the educational ing these teachers, while there are many
supporting facilities (in this case the physical private universities but these universities are
facilities) are not sufficient; the number of less qualified in comparison to the state ones.
teaching staff is not sufficient; the students’ In addition, the tuition fee in private
achievement is still low; the objective of the universities is expensive. As a result, these
implemented learning activities is not clear; teachers decide to continue their study in state
the curriculum systems are prone to changes; universities. Unfortunately, at the same time,
the educational opportunities are not the number of lecturers who teach in state
distributed evenly; and the educational costs universities is limited because most of these
are relatively expensive (Soekatarwi, 2007, lecturers are also continuing their study,
pp.4-19). attending multiple training program, and
In line with the problems explained, performing tri dharma (teaching, research, and
with the effective implementation of the community service) activities in the university
Teacher and Lecturer Law regarding the level in order to improve their competencies.
Teacher Sertification, the teachers and As a result, the ratio between the students and
lecturers are motivated to continue their the lecturers becomes very high. The high
study. In Law Number 14 Year 2005, it has ratio has been becoming another problem in
been formulated that: ‘Teachers should have the implementation of education.
The effectiveness of web-based interactive blended learning model... - 176
Hansi Effendi, Soenarto, & Herminarto Sofyan
Research and Evaluation in Education
One of the ways for overcoming the technology-based distance learning because of
problem is by utilizing the Information and educational cost effectiveness and efficiency;
Communication Technology (ICT) in the however, the information and technology-
teaching-learning process. The researchers based distance learning should be implement-
expect that by utilizing ICT in teaching, some ed based on the regulations and procedures
of the teaching problems such as infra- that are already formulated.
structure costs, teach-ing staff quantity, The use of Information and
educational access, and educational fees might Communication Technology development in
be overcome. In other words, ICT might be teaching has been brought into reality by
utilized to reduce the infrastructure costs, employing web-based learning/e-learning
increase the quantity of teaching staffs, implementation. Cheng (2005, p.34) states
expand the educational access, and reduce the that there has been a change of paradigm in
educational fees. the learning process, and in the new
The use of Information and paradigm, there has been new characteristics,
Communication Technology in ongoing namely: (1) life long learning, (2) multiple
teaching-learning process is appropriate to be sources of learning and teaching, and (3)
implemented in Indonesia because the globally and locally networked learning and
program is compatible to the Republic of teaching. On the other hand, pedagogic
Indonesia characteristics, namely: (1) the environment has been globally connected by
Republic of Indonesia is an archipelagic some aspects, such as: (1) self-learning
country that has unequal people distribution; program and package; (2) interactive multi-
(2) the ICT-based teaching supporting media material; (3) web-based learning; (4)
infrastructures are quite sufficient (especially outside expert; and (5) local and global
the telephone network); (3) the number of the exchange program. Similarly, the information
internet users and stations is quite plenty; (4) and technology pedagogic environment for
Indonesian people are more aware of the students and the lecturers has been
investment toward the educational domain; connected by the following aspects: (1) web-
and (5) the universities still have low based learning; (2) interactive self-learning; (3)
absorbing capacity (Soekartawi, 2007, pp.9- multimedia facilities and learning material; (4)
10). With the existence of ICT-based teaching interactive self-learning; dan (5) video
program, educational programs are expected conferencing.
to expand to the remote areas, and the The comparison of the new learning
community members will be motivated to paradigm and the old learning paradigm is
continue their study. displayed in Table 1. Table 1 shows that the
In addition, the implementation of ICT- teachers or the lecturers do not become the
based teaching is supported by the govern- single source; instead, they become
ment. Several legal aspects that support the facilitators, motivators, catalysts or mediators
implementation of ICT-based teaching are as for the students. The students are also
follows: National Education System Act demanded to be active, independent, full of
Number 20 Year 2003; Minister of National initiatives and analytical in the learning
Education Decree Number 107/U/2001 process. Therefore, the web-based learning
regarding the Implementation of Distance that will be developed should be based on the
Learning; Circular of the Directorate General students’ demands (student-centered, web-
of Higher Education Number 3040/D/ based learning), should be mastered in-
T/2005 regarding the Explanation of Remote dependently (self-learning), should be focused
Class dated on September 8th, 2005; Minister on the learning manners, should have
of National Education Explanation dated on sufficient sources in supporting the learning
September 1st, 2005; and governing law process (multiple sources), should not be
regulations and policies. Based on the afore- limited to time and space, and should also be
mentioned regulations, the government allows interactive.
universities to implement the infomation and
177 - Volume 1, Number 2, December 2015
Research and Evaluation in Education
Table 1. Changes in the Learning Paradigm
New CMI-Tripilization Paradigm Traditional Site-Bounded Paradigm
Individualized Learning: Reproduced Learning:
 Student is the centre of Education  Student is the Follower of Teacher
 Individualized Programs  Standard Programs
 Self-Learning  Absorbing Knowledge
 Self-Actualizing Process  Receiving Process
 Focus on How to Learn  Focus on How to Gain
 Self Rewarding  External Rewarding
Localized and Globalized Learning: Institution-Bounded Learning:
 Multiple Sources of Learning  Teacher-Based Learning
 Networked Learning  Separated Learning
 Lifelong and Everywhere  Fixed Period and Within Institution
 Unlimited Opportunities  Limited Opportunities
 World-Class Learning  Site-Bounded Learning
 Local and International Outlook  Mainly Institution-based Experiences
(Source: Cheng, 2005, p.29)
Naidu (2006, pp.4-7) also states that interaction between the students and the
there are several superiorities in developing lecturers, the idea exploration should be deep,
the web-based learning programs namely: (1) and all of the discussions should be recorded.
the learning program is very dynamic and In addition, the use of web-based learning
might be displayed in multiple interesting, should make the learning more effective due
attractive and interactive forms; (2) the learn- to the learning concept such as repetition in
ing program might be operated all time so which the students might repeat the learning
that the students and the lecturers might materials as often as possible. The reason is
attain information regarding the necessary that the learning materials are available 24
learning materials; (3) the learning program hours a day and seven days a week.
might be implemented individually, where The Faculty of Engineering, Padang
each student might select the learning form or State University, is elligible to implement the
the learning model that might be more missions of higher education that have been
relevant to his or her background; and (4) the formulated in the higher-education strategic
learning program is comprehensive and planning, which includes improving education
provides multiple learning forms from availability, expanding educational access-
multiple sources that enable the students to ibility, improving education quality and
select the available learning format, learning relevance, realizing education equality, and
method, and/or practice. ensuring the certainty in attaining higher
With all of the available technology, education service. However, in order to
web-based learning provides opportunities for accomplish these missions, there have been
designing the authentic environment such as limitations in the available resources.
contextual learning and problem-based learn- The use of e-learning is viewed as one
ing; as a result, the students will have ‘learning of the alternatives that might be used to
by doing’ experiences. Even Lehmann and overcome the limitations that exist in the
Chamberlin (2009, p.2) believe if the web- available resources. Naidu (2006, p.2) states
based learning is well-managed, it might have that the use of ICT might improve rapidly
better performance than the traditional especially in universities because technology
learning under the following considerations: has been considered as a way of improving
the students should be active, the learning learning access to the information source as
materials should be up-to-date, there should well as a way of decreasing educational cost.
be an interaction between the students and However, the use of e-learning in the learning
the learning contents, there should be an process in universities is not as easy as
The effectiveness of web-based interactive blended learning model... - 178
Hansi Effendi, Soenarto, & Herminarto Sofyan
Research and Evaluation in Education
flipping our hands, because e-learning The package of e-learning materials that
demands multiple prerequisites that might be does not garner the benefits ICT definitely
hard to accomplish. becomes less useful for the students with
Since the publication of the regulations, several differences. For example, the different
both at the level of Educational Minister and learning styles possessed by the students
Directorate General of Higher Education, should also be given attention in developing
which regulate the implementation of remote the learning forms including the e-learning
learning, the Faculty of Engineering, Padang ones.
State University has expanded e-learning. The students and lecturers, for years,
Specifically, it has prepared a sufficient web- have been accustomed to face-to-face learning
based learning system. However, the use of model. In this model, the interaction, in terms
the system has not been optimum. of students’ control toward the learning
There are several problems that have process, is very limited. Some people argue
been identified regarding the reasons why the that the use of ICT for the learning process
already possessed e-learning has not been has caused the occurence of social isolation
optimally benefitted. One of the problems is due to the decrease in the interaction both
that both the students and lecturers have not between the students and the lecturers and
been accustomed to attend and implement the among the students themselves in the class-
e-learning (Effendi, 2005, p.18). Both the room. In order to overcome the problem, the
students and lecturers might need motivations researchers would like to develop a blended
and good examples in relation to the use of e- learning one of whose characteristics is being
learning. interactive. The blended learning is basically
Through the assistance of Islamic able to overcome the problem of interaction
Development Bank, Padang State University within the learning process. Lawhead and
has implemented the training programs for Rosbottom (Anggarwal, 2003, p.399) believe
lecturers. The university serves as the designer that the combination of two learning methods
of the e-learning training program so that the (in this case, face-to-face and online) will
lecturers will have sufficient competencies for make the learning process more effective.
benefitting all of the available information and From the students’ point of view, it has
communication technologies as their teaching been apparent that the students have been
media. However, in reality both at the accustomed to the student-centered learning.
Department of Electrical Engineering and at They have not been fully aware that the
other departments of Padang State University, responsibility of learning process in the new
there has not been much web-based learning paradigm is on their own hand.
developed by the lecturers. One of the blended learning models
On the other hand, there has been a that has been developed is Web-Based
small group of lecturers who develop and use Interactive Blended Learning Model
e-learning. Most of the e-learning forms are (WBIBLM). The model refers to the
turning face-to-face presentation into web appropriate learning theory and learning
presentation in the form of texts and/or method. Then, the term interactive refers to
documents. Certainly, such a use is not in- the fact that the learning will focus on the
correct, but the lecturers might gain more students (student-centered learning) and will
benefits by using all of the strengths possess- be fully controlled by the students (student-
ed by the information and communication controlled learning). The model also has
technology since the technology is able to complete learning components and considers
integrate multiple systems of symbols into the the students’ needs and learning styles
learning process. In addition, the e-learning (Effendi, 2015, pp.16-17).
developed by the lecturers has not fully The model emphasizes the aspect of
implemented the appropriate learning theories interaction between the students and learning
and learning methods in order to create materials, between the students and lecturers,
effective and interesting learning situations. and among the students themselves. The
179 - Volume 1, Number 2, December 2015
Research and Evaluation in Education
interaction between the students and learning who took the Electrical Machines subject at
materials is designed by using the component the Electrical Engineering Department, the
display theory that is proposed by Merrill. Faculty of Engineering, Padang State
Meanwhile, the interaction between the University. They were selected randomly by
students and lecturers is designed by using the implementing purposive random sampling
facility of direct and indirect discussions, technique.
which is provided by the moodle-based online
learning system. As a result, the blended- Research Procedure
learning model is based on the combination
There were two experiments in the
of constructivism paradigm, interactivity
study, namely the first experiment and the
principles, and learning styles, which are the
second experiment. The first experiment was
aspects given attention in the the Web-Based
conducted in eight sessions for the materials
Interactive Blended Learning Model.
of transformator within the learning group.
Based on the background of the study,
Three out of the eight sessions (37.50%),
the problem in the study can be formulated as
namely sessions one, five, and eight, were
follows: What is the effectiveness of the Web-
conducted by means of face-to-face learning
Based Interactive Blended Learning Model
in the classroom, while five out of the eight
(WBIBLM) in improving the like of learning
sessions (62.50%) were conducted by using
achievement? Therefore, the objective of the
the web-based e-learning.
study is to test the effectiveness of WBIBLM
The initial meeting was used for
in improving the learning achievement of the
explaining every single aspect that was related
students.
to WBIBLM and for administering the pre-
test. Session five was used for having a class
Research Method discussion regarding the materials that the
students had not mastered. Session eight was
used for administering post-test.
The study was quasi-experimental with The selection of one group pre-test and
one group pre-test and post-test design. The post-test design was primarily based on the
study might be described as follows: limited learning group; there was only one
learning group that consisted of 30 students.
O X O Several weaknesses of the design were as
follows: (a) there had not been any guarantee
Figure 1. Experimental Design that the model would be the sole factor that
Note: cuased the differences between the results of
O 1 = Pre-test the pre-test and post-test; and (b) the impacts
O 2 = Post-test of history, maturation, testing, instrument,
X = Experiment regression, selection and mortality might not
be avoided (Creswell, 2014, pp.245-246).
Research Setting However, the selection of the design
also had several benefits. The primary benefit
The study was conducted in the even
was that the pre-test provided an opportunity
semester (January-June) of 2014 Academic
for the researchers to compare the achieve-
Year and the odd semester (July-December)
ment of the same subjects before and after
of 2015 Academic Year. The study was held
the administration of the WBIBLM.
at the Department of Electrical Engineering,
the Faculty of Engineering, Padang State
Data, Instrument, and Data Gathering
University.
Subjects/Targets The data which were gathered in the
study were the scores of the pre-test and post-
The subjects in the study were a
test in the Electrical Machines 1 subject for
learning group that consisted of 30 students
the topic of transformator. The data were
The effectiveness of web-based interactive blended learning model... - 180
Hansi Effendi, Soenarto, & Herminarto Sofyan
Research and Evaluation in Education
gathered by means of a learning achievement consistency or the experts agreement regard-
test which had been initialized by designing ing learning achievement test. The aspects of
the test guidelines. The test guidelines the learning achievement test that the
included five topics, namely: (a) working researchers asked for the expert judgment
principles and construction of one-phased were the test substance, form and language.
transformator; (b) vector diagram and circuit The experts agreement was measured by
use of one-phased replacement; (c) transform- means of inter-rate reliability (Mardapi, 2012,
ator loading according to the load type and p.86). After the inter-rater consistency had
voltage regulation according to the loading been calculated, the researchers found that
type; (d) parralel performance and voltage the inter-rater coefficient was 0.73. The
regulation of the one-phased transformator coefficient showed that 73.00% of the raters
load; and (e) working principles and agreed with the judged aspects of learning
construction of three-phased transformator achievement test. Theoretically, the correlat-
and the connections. ion coefficient above 0.70 is very good
Based on those test guidelines, the (Streiner & Norman, 2000; Polgar & Thomas,
learning achievement test items were 2000). Second, the researchers administered
constructed. In order to guarantee that the an internal reliability test in order to ensure
test guidelines and test items had a content that all of the items provided similar results.
validity, two lecturers of subject-matter of The result of the internal reliability test for the
Electrical Machines 1 and two other lecturers first field experiment was 0.744 (KR-20),
validated the test guidelines and test items. while the result of the internal reliability test
The expert validation was performed from for the second field experiment was 0.954
February 8th to February 15th, 2014. (KR-20).
In addition, the quality of the learning As to the data gathering technique, the
achievement test was measured by means of a researchers employed learning achievement
content validity test that was performed in the test results in the form of pre-test and post-
first and second experiments. The content test. The pre-test and post-test were
validity test was performed by employing administered before and after the administra-
point-biserial correlation. The test followed tion of the Web-Based Interactive Blended
the opinion proposed by Mardapi (2004, Learning Model in order to measure the
p.27) who states that if the score is performed learning effectiveness by using the developed
under dichotomous manner (1 for each model.
correct answer and 0 for each incorrect
answer), then the implemented correlation Data Analysis Technique
technique is point-biserial.
In data analysis technique, the following
The results of the first field experiment
techniques were employed: (1) internal
showed that 25 out of 54 test items were
consistency analysis of reliability by means of
totally valid. In addition, five test items (test
KR-20 for the instrument of learning
item number 4, 9, 11, 20 and 30) could not
achievement test items whose item scores
answered and four test items (test item
were dichotomous (1 or 0); and (2) t-test for
number 5, 6, 8 and 24) could be completed
testing the effective-ness of the Web-Based
correctly. The invalid test items, including the
Interactive Blended Learning Model by
easiest ones and hardest ones, were revised
comparing the results of the pre-test and
for the second field experiment. In addition,
post-test.
based on the expert judgement, the number
of the test items should be expanded to 60
Findings and Discussions
items. In the second field experiment, the
overall 60 test items were valid. The first field experiment was conduct-
The reliability estimation of the learning ed to a learning group that consisted of 48
achievement test was conducted in two ways. students. After the second week, five students
First, the researchers measured the experts withdrew from the learning group. There
181 - Volume 1, Number 2, December 2015
Research and Evaluation in Education
were 30 students who fully participated in the The effectiveness test for the Web-
classroom activity. The learning materials of Based Interactive Blended Learning Model
transformator that became the example of was implemented by comparing the scores of
development consisted of eight sessions: three the pre-test and the post-test. The scores of
sessions (37.50%), namely sessions one, five, learning achievement in the first field
and eight, were conducted in the face-to-face experiment are shown in Table 2. In the first
learning manner, while the remaining five field experiment, the researchers found that
sessions (62.50%) were conducted through e- the learning by means of the Web-Based
learning activities. Interactive Blended Learning Model could
The initial meeting was used for attain only 62.59% of the learning achieve-
explaining every single aspect that was related ments. In general, the increase from the pre-
to the e-learning and for administering the test results to the post-test results was
pre-test. In addition, the researchers also 36.42%. However, based on the findings the
motivated the students to implement the differences between the pre-test scores and
Web-Based Interactive Blended Learning the post-test scores are not very high but the
Model (WBIBLM). Session five was used for scores from both tests are significantly
having a class discussion regarding the different.
learning materials that the students had not
mastered and it served as a formative action.
Table 2. The Effectiveness of the WBIBLM in the First Experiment
Test Period Note
Maximum (%) Minimum (%) Mean (%) Standard
Pre-test 5 (9.26) 20 (37.00) 14.13 (26.17) 3.52
Post-test 19 (35.19) 38 (70.37) 33.80 (62.59) 4.49 P < 0.05
Increase 17 (25.93) 18 (33.37) 19.67 (36.42) -
The second field testing also served as Based on the results in Table 3, the
the main field testing. The objective of the effectiveness of the Web-Based Interactive
second field testing was to test and to see how Blended Learning Model is achieved around
far the expectations of the model use had 78.00% of the learning objectives. If the pre-
been met. The design of the second field test results are compared to the post-test
testing was similar to that of the first field results, in general, the increase is 47.28%.
testing, namely the one-group pre-test and Although the increase is not high, it is
post-test. The results of the second field significant.
testing are displayed in Table 3.
Table 3. The Effectiveness of the WBIBLM in the Second Experiment
Test Period Note
Minimum (%) Maximum (%) Mean (%) Standard
Pre-test 10 (16.67) 25 (42.67) 18.67 (31.11) 3.87
Post-test 17 (28.33) 59 (98.33) 47.03 (78.39) 12.87 P < 0.05
Increase 14(23.33) 35 (58.00) 28.37 (47.28) -
Table 3 shows that 60% of the who earned higher scores in the pre-test
participants were able to achieve more than tended to earn higher scores in the post-test.
78% of the learning objectives. The position After these results were analyzed further, it is
of each participant might be viewed from the found that the correlation between the pre-
pre-test and post-test results that are displayed test scores and the post-test scores is 0.86,
in Figure 2, which show that the participants which is significant.
The effectiveness of web-based interactive blended learning model... - 182
Hansi Effendi, Soenarto, & Herminarto Sofyan
Research and Evaluation in Education
Figure 2. The Position of Each Participant based on the Pre-Test and Post-Test Results
The comparison on the effectiveness of experiments is displayed in Figure 3. The
the Web-Based Interactive Blended Learning increase of learning achievement achievement
Model that had been measured by comparing from the first field experiment to the second
the general percentage of learning achieve- field experiment is 15% and even more.
ments between the first and second field
Figure 3. The Comparison on the Effectiveness of the WBIBLM
between the First and Second Field Experiments
The effectiveness of the WBIBLM was in the following composition: 37.50% face-to-
78.39%. The model was not significantly face learning and 62.50% online learning. The
effective but the study on the model had composition showed that the subject might
informed that the WBIBLM might be used as save 62.50% of the educational resources
an alternative for the face-to-face lectures. such as classrooms, lecturers, and subject
Within the study, WBIBLM was implemented assisting tools.
183 - Volume 1, Number 2, December 2015
Research and Evaluation in Education
Despite the effectiveness, other was higher than that of in the first field
limitations of the study on the model might testing.
not also be avoided. The limitations on the The effectiveness of implementing the
research and development toward WBIBLM WBIBLM achieved only 78.39%. Such result
are as follows. First, the researchers lost five is not significant; however, the study on the
respondents from the study and the lost is model at least has concluded that WBIBLM
one of the consequences in implementing a might be used as an alternative for some of
research and development study within a the face-to-face lectures.
certain period of time. The study was
conducted for eight weeks and, as a result, the Suggestions
researchers were not able to avoid the
The development of WBIBLM might
situations in which the students withdrew
be continued by creating a stronger design.
themselves as the research subject or they did
Probably, future researchers might use control
not play their role as the subject completely.
groups, more subjects, longer period and
The withdrawal might be caused by one of
more comparisons between face-to-face learn-
the regulations which state that in the second
ing and e-learning to produce a more effective
week, the students might change their study
and reliable WBIBLM.
activities. In addition, for certain reasons,
there were some students who did not