1v8030.0101:viXra
StatisticalScience
2009,Vol.24,No.3,343–360
(cid:13)c InstituteofMathematicalStatistics,2009
The Impact of Levene’s Test of Equality
of Variances on Statistical Theory and
Joseph L. Gastwirth, Yulia R. Gel and Weiwen Miao
Abstract. Inmanyapplications,theunderlyingscientificquestioncon-
cerns whether the variances of k samples are equal. There are a sub-
stantial number of tests for this problem. Many of them rely on the
assumption of normality and are not robust to its violation. In 1960
Professor Howard Levene proposed a new approach to this problem by
applying the F-test to the absolute deviations of the observations from
their group means. Levene’s approach is powerful and robust to non-
normalityandbecameaverypopulartoolforcheckingthehomogeneity
of variances.
Thispaperreviews theoriginal methodproposedby Leveneand sub-
sequentrobustmodifications.AmodificationofLevene-typeteststoin-
crease their power to detect monotonic trendsin variances is discussed.
This procedure is useful when one is concerned with an alternative of
increasing or decreasing variability, for example, increasing volatility
of stocks prices or “open or closed gramophones” in regression resid-
ual analysis. A major section of the paper is devoted to discussion of
various scientific problems where Levene-type tests have been used, for
example, economic anthropology, accuracy of medical measurements,
volatility of the price of oil, studies of the consistency of jury awards
in legal cases and the effect of hurricanes on ecological systems.
Key words and phrases: ANOVA, equality of variances, Levene’s test,
trend tests, effect of dependence, applied statistics.
INTRODUCTION tistical problems arising in biological science, was
the sole author of three such classic papers. Not
Very few statisticians write an article that is still
only have they been cited hundreds of times; they
cited forty or fifty years after it is published.Profes-
continue to be cited today. Professor Levene passed
sor Howard Levene, whose research focused on sta-
away in July, 2003 and this article is written in
recognition of his important contributions to sta-
Joseph L. Gastwirth is Professor of Statistics and
tistical science.
Economics, George Washington University,
Pennsylvania Ave. 2140, Washington, DC 20052, USA After introducing two earlier well cited articles,
e-mail: jlgast@gwu.edu. Yulia R. Gel is Associate Levene (1949) and Levene (1953), the impact of the
Professor, Department of Mathematics and Statistics, third article, on a robust test for the equality of
University of Waterloo, 200 University Ave. W,
Waterloo, Ontario, Canada N2L 3G1 e-mail:
ygl@math.uwaterloo.ca. Weiwen Miao is Associate This is an electronic reprint of the original article
Professor, Department of Mathematics, Haverford published by the Institute of Mathematical Statistics in
College, Haverford, Pennsylvania 19041, USA e-mail: Statistical Science, 2009, Vol. 24, No. 3, 343–360. This
wmiao@haverford.edu. reprint differs from the original in pagination and
typographic detail.
2 J. L. GASTWIRTH,Y.R. GEL ANDW. MIAO
the variances of k populations, will be emphasized. heterozygotes as homozygotes. Finally, Levene ex-
In particular, both the robustness aspect and the pressed the problem of finding the distribution of h
focus on the “spread” or variability of the data in intermsofcardmatching;similaranalogiesbetween
the Levene (1960) article influenced the work of the exacttestsforHWEandcardshufflingproblemsare
authors, especially J. L. Gastwirth, who took his still used today (Weir, 1996, page 110).
first class in Mathematical Statistics from Professor A few years later, Levene (1953) developed the
Levene. first theoretical model that examined the effects of
The first seminal article of Professor Levene con- spatialvariationonfitness(Hedrick,2000,page161).
cerned checking that the random mating assump- During the 1920’s Fisher and Haldane asked an im-
tion often used in mathematical models in popu- portant question: How is polymorphism maintained
lation genetics holds. This implies that the alleles when selection is operating? When there are two al-
transmitted by each parent are independent, that leles at a locus, natural selection should favor the
is, when there are two possible alleles, A and a allele (A) most related to survival and mating, so
at a locus, with frequencies p(A) = p and p(a) = eventually all the entire population should become
1 p=q in the population, the frequencies of the homozygotes (AA). As described by Pollak (2006),
three genotypes (AA, Aa and aa) in the next gener- they demonstrated that each of the two alleles can
ation equal p2, 2pq and q2. Hardy (1908) and Wein- have a substantial equilibrium frequency when het-
berg (1908) showed that in a large randomly mat- erozygotesaresuperiorinviabilitytoeitherhomozy-
ing population these genotype frequencies remain gote and that a deleterious allele, d, can be main-
the same from one generation to the next. To test tained at a low equilibrium frequency due to re-
whether the Hardy–Weinberg (HWE) equilibrium current mutation of the favored allele to d. Levene
holds at a locus, one estimates the frequencies p (1953) showed that two alleles could be maintained
and q from a sample of n individuals, using p¯= when a population inhabits K ecological niches, mi-
[2n(AA)+n(Aa)]/2n, q¯=1 p¯. Under HWE, the gratesbetweenthem,andselectionvariesamongthe
expected genotype frequencies at a particular locus niches, even if the viabilities of a heterozygote are
areobtainedbysubstitutingtheseestimatesintothe between those of homozygotes in all K niches. In
equilibrium distribution. Then the standard χ2-test particular, a stable polymorphism can occur when
(Gillespie, 1998, pages 11–15) is conducted. When the harmonic mean fitness of both homozygotes is
HWE does not hold, different genetic theories and less than that of the heterozygote. The basic ap-
settings typically predict either a decrease or in- proach taken by Levene (1953) is still used in mod-
crease in the number of homozygotes. erntexts(Hedrick,2000,page161),wherereferences
Ananalogous equilibriumdistributionholdswhen todevelopmentsincorporatinggenotypic-specifichabi-
there are k possible alleles at a locus and the ap- tat selection, that is, individuals preferentially mi-
propriate χ2-test is used. In the highly polymorphic grate to niches in which they have higher fitness
(large k) situation, which is of interest in forensic (viability), are described. Recent developments are
applications (Evett and Weir, 1998), the accuracy surveyed by Hedrick (2006) and Star, Stoffels and
of the χ2-test in moderate sample sizes is question- Spencer (2007) who investigate the levels of poly-
able; while in studies of rare or endangered species, morphism in a model incorporating recurrent muta-
only small samplesizes are available (Hedrick, 2000, tion and selection.
page 74). In the spirit of Fisher’s exact test, Lev- In 1960 Professor Howard Levene proposed a now
ene (1949) obtained an exact test for the number classic test for the equality of the variances of k
(h) of homozygotes that conditioned on the num- populations. The practical importance of Levene’s
ber of alleles of each of k types. The importance of (1960) article is demonstrated by the fact that it
theproblemis reflected by thecurrentliterature de- hasbeencitedover1000timesinthescientificlitera-
veloping more computer intensive exact procedures ture.Thegoalofthispaperistodiscussthescientific
(Huber et al., 2006; Maurer, Melchinger and Frisch, heritage of Professor Levene’s contribution on both
2007); however, Levene’s exact test for HWE was statistical methodology and its use in a wide vari-
the first. The original article also derived the large ety of disciplines. Other procedures for testing the
sample distribution of the statistic and considered equality of variances have been surveyed by Boos
the effect of misclassification of a small fraction of and Brownie (2004).
THE IMPACT OFLEVENE’S TEST OFEQUALITY 3
Levene’s (1960) original article was motivated by and even sex research (Hicks and Leitenberg, 2001;
thek-sampleproblem.Beforecomparingthesample Hays et al., 2001).
means, one should check that the underlying popu- The original tests along with subsequent modifi-
lations have acommon variance.At thetime,proce- cations that improve the robustness of the test to
dures that were easy to calculate were desired. Sec- non-normality of the underlying data, for example,
tion 3 describes the proper use of Levene-type tests Brown and Forsythe (1974), or improve the statisti-
as a first stage test to select either the standard cal performance in certain circumstances, for exam-
or Welch-modified k-sample ANOVA. With modern ple,unequalsamplesizes,aredescribedinSection1.
Section 2 discusses Levene-type tests when the al-
computers and software, nowadays one can use the
ternative is thatthevariances ofthe k-groupsfollow
Welch method in place of ANOVA, as it incurs only
a monotonic trend. A modification of the statistic
a small loss in power when the variances are equal.
along the lines of the Cochran–Armitage trend test,
Levene’s test, however, remains very useful, as
used to analyze dose-response data, is described.
many scientific questions concern the variances of
The results of a small simulation study illustrate
k populations, rather than their means or location
its increased power. Our results are consistent with
parameters(centers). For example,tochoose among
the detailed investigations of Balakrishnan and Ma
several ways of delivering the same average dose of
(1990)andLimandLoh(1996)andcollectively they
a drug, the one with least variability in the mea-
provideextensivesupportfortheuseofrobustLevene-
sured dose is preferred. When reviewing the applied
typetests inpractice. Section 3describestheproper
literature, it became apparent that many alterna-
use of Levene-type tests as a first stage test to de-
tive hypotheses were best described as a monotonic
cide whether to analyze the data by the standard or
trend in the variances of the k populations; hence, a
Welch-modified k-sample ANOVA. While the two-
modification of Levene-type tests for this situation
stagemethod,usinganappropriatesizeforaLevene-
is proposed. The increased power of a trend test,
type preliminary test, remains valid, with modern
which is directed at the alternative of interest, is
day statistical software, in most situations one can
illustrated by reanalyzing data from two published
usetheWelch method,asitisonlyslightly lesspow-
studies.
erful than the standard test when the variances are
Levene-type tests have become very popular and equal. The use of Levene-type tests in the analy-
are used in a wide variety of applications, for exam- sis of data arising in a wide variety of interesting
ple, clinical data (Grissom, 2000), marine pollution applications is described in the penultimate section
(Johnson, Rice and Moles, 1998), species preserva- (Section 4). The paper concludes with a summary
tion (Neave et al., 2006), climate change and geol- of recommended methods and a discussion of topics
ogy (Henriksen, 2003; Khan, Coulibaly and Dibike, needing further research.
2006; Coulson and Joyce, 2006), animal science
(Waldo and Goering, 1979; Schom and Kit, 1980), 1. THE ORIGINAL TEST AND FURTHER
food quality (Francois et al., 2006), spherical distri- ROBUST MODIFICATIONS
butions in astronomy (Fisher, 1986), regional differ-
AbasicprobleminANOVAistodeterminewhether
ences of semen quality (Auger and Jouannet, 1997),
k populations have a common mean µ. One has k
business(Chang,JainandLocke,1995;Christieand
randomsamples,x ,...,x ,ofsize n fromeach of
Koch, 1997; Plourde and Watkins, 1998), auditing
k populations with respective means, µ , and vari-
(Davis, 1996), studies of awards in civil cases (Saks ances σ2, i=1,...,k. The standard F-test assumes
etal.,1997;RobbennoltandStudebaker,1999;Marti that in each of the populations the variable studied
and Wissler, 2000; Greene et al., 2001), the anal- has a common variance σ2 and compares the be-
ysis of data in actual legal cases (Tyler v. Uno- tween group mean square to the within group mean
cal, 304 F.3d 379, 5th Cir. 2002), genetics and evo- square (s2), that is,
lution (Mitchell-Olds and Rutledge, 1986; Giraud
(Flynn and Brockner, 2003; Cattaneo, Postma and X
Vechi, 2006; O’Neil, Penrod and Bornstein, 2003; wheres2 p isthepooledvariance,x¯ i. isthemeanofthe
Tabain, 2001), sports (Cumming and Hall, 2002) ithgroup,x¯·· isthegrandmeanandN = k
4 J. L. GASTWIRTH,Y.R. GEL ANDW. MIAO
has long been known that the actual size of the test Sincethegroupmeans,µ ,aretypically unknown,
based on F may differ noticeably from the nominal Levene naturally used the sample group means, x¯ i·,
size, for example, 0.05, when the groups have dif- in their places. Then x ij x¯ i· or (x ij x¯ i·)2 are
ferent variances (Sheffe, 1959, pages 351–358). This treated as independent, identically distributed, nor-
problem is quite serious when the variances are neg- malvariables,andtheusualANOVAstatistic is uti-
atively correlated withthesamplesizes (Krutchkoff, lized. While neither x ij x¯ i· nor (x ij x¯ i·)2 is nor-
1988; Weerhandi, 1995). Hence, it is important to mally distributed, Levene’s approach takes advan-
develop methods for checking the validity of the tage of the fact that classical ANOVA procedures
equal variance assumption. for comparing means are robust to violations of the
Bartlett (1937) proposed a statistic, M, for test- assumption that the data follow a normal distribu-
ing the equality of k population variances that is tion (Miller, 1968, page 80). Of course, Levene real-
a function of the variances (s2 i ) of the ith group. ized that x ij x¯ i· and (x ij x¯ i·)2 are not indepen-
Subsequently, Box (1953) showed that the sampling | − | −
dent within each group, as they are deviations from
distribution of Bartlett’s M is not robust to vio-
the group mean. However, he showed that the cor-
lations of the assumed normality of the underlying relation is of the order 1/n2 and had the intuition
distributions. Box noted that Bartlett’s procedure
that this small degree of dependencewould not seri-
is more useful as a test of normality than as a test
ously effect the distribution of the F-statistic. After
for equality of k group variances. Box andAnderson
trying different functions of (x
x¯ i·), for example,
(1955) showed that the effect of normality depends −
square,log etc., Levene proposedthefinalversion of
on the kurtosis, γ =µ /µ2, the ratio of the fourth
2 4 2 the test in the form of the classic ANOVA method
centralmomentoftheunderlyingdistributiontothe
applied to the absolute differences between each ob-
square of the variance. Assuming the data from the
servation and the mean of its group d ij = x ij x¯ i· ,
k groups have the same distribution, the natural es- | − |
i=1,...,k, j =1,...,n . Since the d are not nor-
timator of γ is
2 mally distributedevenwhentheoriginal x are,the
.
resulting F-statistic,
2 [ P k i=1 P n j= i 1 (x ij − x¯ i·)2]2 (3) F = N − k k i=1 (d¯ i· − d¯ ··)2 ,
Multiplying BPartlettP’s M by 2/(γˆ
1) yields a k
test statistic, B , which has an approximate χ2-
is not exactly distPributePd as the usual F-statistic
distribution with (k 1) degrees of freedom. Notice
− with k 1 and N k degrees of freedom. Levene
thatfornormaldatatheexpectedvalueofthefactor − −
(1960)showedbysimulationthattheusualF statis-
2/(γˆ 1) equals 1.0 and as the kurtosis increases
− tic provides a good approximation, especially at the
above 3, it becomes smaller. The statistic B is the
cut-off values corresponding to the commonly used
form of the Box–Anderson test discussed by Miller
significance levels, α=0.01 and 0.05.
(1986); see also Shorack (1969).
A natural way to increase the robustness of Lev-
In the small samples often encountered in appli-
ene’s original statistic is to replace the group means
cations of ANOVA, the higher moments are quite
in the definition of d by a more robust estima-
variable, so a test that does not rely on the fourth ij
tor of location, for example, the median (Brown
sample moment is desirable. To appreciate the idea
underlyingtheapproachadoptedbyLevene,assume andForsythe,1974)(BFLtest).StudiesbyConover,
that the group means µ are known. To measure JohnsonandJohnson(1981)andLimandLoh(1996)
variance or spread, he considered various functions confirm that utilizing the absolute deviations of the
ofx µ ,forexample, x µ and(x µ )2.The observations from their group medians, rather than
ij i ij i ij i
expected value of (x µ )2 is σ2, the variance of means, is preferable. Thus, the modern version of
the ith group, while the expected value of | x ij − µ i | Levene’s test uses the z ij = | x ij − µˆ i | in place of d ij
is the mean deviation from the mean, a well-known in (3), where µˆ i are robust estimators of µ i .
measure of spread related to a classical measure of In small samples, for example, when there are
income inequality due to Pietra (Gastwirth, 1972). no more than 10 observations in each group, the
Thus, if one knew the group means, one could ap- level of the Levene test can be quite conservative
ply the standard ANOVA statistic to x µ or when the group centers are estimated by their me-
(x µ )2. dians. The problem arises from the fact that for
THE IMPACT OFLEVENE’S TEST OFEQUALITY 5
odd group sizes, one of the absolute deviations from showed that the weighted F-statistic is a factor, m,
the group median must equal 0; and for even sam- times the OLS F-test. Furthermore, m tends to 1
ple sizes, two of the absolute deviations are equal as n increases. O’Neill and Mathews (2000) also ob-
as the group median is estimated by the average tainedthecorrespondingmultiplierwhendeviations
of the middle two observations. Thus, a bootstrap from the group medians are used. Manly and Fran-
version was proposed by Boos and Brownie (1989) cis (2002) showed that when the significance level of
and shown to have improved power by Lim and Loh the F-test was determined by randomization of the
(1996). An alternative modification was suggested residuals of deviations from the sample medians, it
byHines andHines (2000).Whenthenumberof ob- was very robust to nonnormality and was less af-
servations n i in the ith group is odd, they propose fected by modest differences in the n i .
to remove a structural zero z for m=[n /2]+1
(here [y] is the floor function of y); when n i is even, 2. LEVENE-TYPE TESTS FOR A TREND IN
then the two smallest and necessarily equal devia- THE GROUP VARIANCES
tions z and z are replaced by one single
While reviewing the large number of studies ap-
value √2z . The Hines–Hines (2000) procedure
i[ni/2] plying Levene’s test or the Brown–Forsythe mod-
increases the variability of z , reducing degrees of
ij ification, we noticed that the alternative hypoth-
freedombyoneforeachgrouptocompensateforthe
esis appropriate to the subject matter often indi-
structural zeros as well as decreasing the Error Sum
cated that the variances would follow a decreasing
ofSquaresandMeanSquaresintheLeveneANOVA
or increasing trend; for example, the groups might
table. As a result, this simple modification provides
correspond to dose levels or could be classified by
a test with size closer to the nominal one, especially
status on a monotonic scale. It is well known that
in small samples. In addition, this usually provides
tests directed at a specific alternative typically are
a Levene-type test with increased power.
more powerful in detecting a particular alternative
Several authors, Martin and Games (1977),
(Agresti, 2002; Freidlin and Gastwirth, 2004). Of-
O’Brien (1979), Keyes and Levy (1997) and O’Neil
ten, under the alternative the k groups can be ar-
andMathews (2000, 2002), examined the effect that
ranged so that their variances increase, that is, H
unequal sample sizes create when the data follows a a
is σ <σ < <σ .Anumberof procedureswhich
normal distribution and proposed appropriate cor- 1 2 ··· k
employ the idea of regressing the sample variances
rection factors. In the one-way ANOVA, under H ,
the variances of the observations σ2 differ, implying of each group vs. some preselected scores or consid-
ering a particular contrast have been developed for
that the expected values of the d are given by
this problem (Vincent, 1961; Chacko, 1963; Fujino,
2 1 1979; and Hines and Hines, 2000). Here we follow
ij i thesimplelinearregressionapproachinwhichscores
i(cid:19) w <w < <w are assigned to each observation
Notice that equation (4) implies that even under in the ith · g · r · oup (i=1,...,k). The expected value
H 0 , that is, when all groups have a common vari- of the slope βˆ (5) of the regression line relating the
ance σ2, the expected group averages differ. Thus,
z to the w is zero under the null hypothesis, but
large differences in the sample sizes, n , may cause
i willbepositive(negative) underthealternativethat
the original Levene test to reject the null hypothesis
there is an increasing (decreasing) trend in the vari-
when it is true.
ances. The estimator βˆ of β is given by
O’Brien (1979) and Keyes and Levy (1997) re-
move this design effect by replacing d ij by u ij = (5) βˆ= k i=1 n i (w i − w¯)(z¯ i· − z¯··) ,
d ij / 1 1/n i , which have the same expected value k n (w w¯)2
and are − proportional to the absolute values of the P i=1 i i −
stan p dardized residuals from the original ANOVA. k P
w¯= n w /N,
Then one applies OLS ANOVA to the u . O’Neill i i
and Mathews (2000) obtained the covariance ma- X i=1
and created the appropriate weighted where z¯ i·,i = 1,...,k, are the group means of z
least squares estimates of the within group and be- and z¯·· is thegrand mean over z¯ i·,i=1,...,k.When
tween groupvariances of u andobtained thecorre- the observations in each group come from a nor-
sponding F-test. When the n are equal, to n, they mal distribution, the null hypothesis that the group
6 J. L. GASTWIRTH,Y.R. GEL ANDW. MIAO
variancesareequalimpliesthatthemeandeviations Asmallsimulationstudyconsideringsamplesfrom
from the group means (or medians) also are equal. normalandheavy-tailedsymmetricdistributionswas
When the variances or other measure of spread are conductedwherearobusttrimmedmean(Crowand
equal, βˆ should be centered around zero, while un- Siddiqui,1967;GastwirthandRubin,1969;Andrews
derthealternative thatthegroupvariances increase et al., 1972), the average of the middle 50% of the
βˆ should be positive. data, was also used to estimate the group centers.
The expression for the slope βˆ in (5) is analo- Our simulation study1 indicates that for small and
gous to the classic one degree of freedom test for
moderate sample sizes, the 25% trimmed versions
the strength of linearity (Johnson and Leone, 1964,
of Levene’s (L ) trend tests yield the most accu-
page 78) or the Cochran–Armitage trend test for
rate size for a test at the nominal 5% level for all
binary data (Piegorsch and Bailar, 2005) and its
the distributions (normal, exponential, t- and χ2-
numerator is like a covariance between the group
distributions with 3 degrees of freedom) studied. In
centers z¯ and scores w . Hines and Hines (2000)
i. i contrast, the corresponding test statistics using the
show that using contrasts that reflect the alterna-
samplemeanshavelevelsexceedingthenominal5%,
tive or suspected trend have higher power than the
especially for the heavy tailed and skewed distribu-
usual F-statistic (1) for homogeneity applied to the
tions.Usingmedians,asintheBrown–Forsythever-
z . Abelson and Tukey (1963) showed the linear
sion,substantiallyunderestimatesthesizeofthetest
scores are efficiency robust over a wide range of in-
for small samples, especially for normal data. Over-
creasing trends, so they are commonly used. If the
all, allthethreeversions of Levene’s trend test, that
alternative hypothesis implies a specific nonlinear
is,themean,medianand25%trimmedmeanbased,
trend, one should use the corresponding values for
w , for example, w = i2 or w =√i. Roth (1983) were more powerful against monotonic trend alter-
andNeuhauserandHothorn(2000)developed trend natives than the corresponding homogeneity tests,
tests using order-restricted inference. These meth- especially for small sample sizes. This is true even
ods may be more powerful when the trend is mono- whenthescoresdiffersomewhatfromthetruetrend,
tonicbutfarfromlinear,theyarenotexploredhere. for example, the linear scores 1, 2, 3 are used when
The increased power of Levene-type trend tests will the ratios of the standard deviations are 1:3:5. As
be seen in Section 4 where we reanalyze data sets expected, in larger samples the difference in perfor-
from two scientific studies. mance between Levene-type homogeneity and trend
tests is minor.
Remark. If the true group centers are known,
then the standardized Levene-type trend statistic
3. USING LEVENE’S TEST AS THE FIRST
asymptotically follows a standard normal distribu-
STAGE IN ADAPTIVE ANOVA TESTS
tion, as do results from Proposition 2.2 of Huber
(1973),Theorem1of Arnold(1980)andCarrolland
Inmanyapplicationsadaptiveproceduresthatuti-
Schneider (1985). In practice, however, the “true”
lize a preliminary test to choose the estimator or
group centers are typically unknown and estimated
test for the final analysis improve the accuracy of
from a sample of observations. In the one-sample
the final inference (Hall and Padmanabhan, 1997;
setting Miller (1968) showed that Levene’s original
O’Gorman, 1997). For example, Hogg (1974) and
statistic, using absolute deviations from the group
Hogg, Randles and Fisher (1975) use a measure of
means,isasymptotically distribution-freeonlywhen
tail-weight to select the estimator of the location
theunderlyingdistributionissymmetric;ifthesam-
parameter; Freidlin, Miao and Gastwirth (2003) use
ple group median are employed, then the statistic is
thep-valueoftheShapiro–Wilktesttoselectapow-
asymptotically distribution-free. The corresponding
erful nonparametric test for the analysis of paired
large sample result for k groups was proved by Car-
differences.Miao andGastwirth(2009)usetheratio
roll and Schneider (1985). Using the results of Car-
of two measures of spread to choose the nonpara-
roll and Schneider (1985), Bickel (1975) and Carroll
and Ruppert (1982), it can be shown that if the metric test to analyze paired data for the second
“true” group centers are unknown, then the size of stage. These methods have been successful in the
Levene’s trend statistic determined from its asymp- one-sampleproblembecauseheavy-tailscanseverely
totic distribution is correct only when the group lo-
cation parameters are estimated by the group medi- 1All calculations are performed using the R package Law-
THE IMPACT OFLEVENE’S TEST OFEQUALITY 7
affect the behavior of the sample mean and an ap- When k is 2, the procedure reduces to the Welch
propriate preliminary test enables one to choose a 1938 two-sample t-test. Because the test using (6)
robustestimatorortestthathashighefficiencyacross allows for unequal variances, one needs to examine
a class of distributions with tail weight close to that whetheritincursanoticeablelossofpowerwhenthe
of the sample. Recently, Schucany and Ng (2006) group variances are equal. This section reports the
notedthatpreliminarytestsmustbeusedwithcare, results of a small simulation study that compares
as at the second stage, the analysis is conditional on three tests: the usual ANOVA F-test, the Welch
theresultsofthefirst-stagetest.Theydemonstrated modification(6)andanadaptiveANOVA.Theadap-
that graphical diagnostics for normality are prefer- tive procedure is the following: first use a Levene-
able to a formal test of normality at the first stage type test to see whether the variances are equal
when the objective is to make inferences about the or not. If the test concludes that the variances are
population mean. equal, use the ordinary ANOVA F-test, otherwise,
For testing the equality of k sample means, when usetheWelchmodification.Theresultsindicatethat
the variances may not be equal, Welch (1951) pro- justusingtheWelch method(6),whichisnowavail-
videdthefollowingmodificationoftheusualANOVA able on statistical packages, is easier to usethan the
F-test: adaptive ANOVA and only incurs a small loss in
power when the variances are equal.
F W = w i (x¯ i· xˆ)2/(k 1) The study focused on testing whether the means
(cid:18) i (cid:19) fromthreenormal distributionsareequal.Following
2(k 2) the recommendations of Bancroft (1964) and Huber
k2 1 (1972) that the level of a preliminary test should be
(cid:30)(cid:20) −
greater than 5%, a level of 15% is used here.
1 i , Table 1 shows the observed level of the three tests
i i − (cid:18) j j(cid:19) (cid:21) for different sample sizes and different variance ra-
tios.Thenominallevel is 5%.Clearly, theWelch ad-
where w =n /s2 and xˆ= w x / Pw .
i i i i i i justedANOVAtestandtheadaptiveprocedurepre-
This Welch modification rejects the null hypothe-
P P servethenominallevels verywellforallsamplesizes
sisofequalmeansiftheF statistic (6)islargerthan
and variance ratios studied. These results are con-
thecritical value determinedfrom an F distribution
sistent with previous studies of the two-sample situ-
with degrees of freedom f and f , where
1 2 ation (Moser, Stevens and Matts, 1989, 1992; Weer-
f =k 1, handi, 1995; Zimmerman, 2004 and Vangel, 2005).
(7) 1 − Incontrast, theactual level of theordinaryANOVA
∗ i F test is affected when the variances are not equal.
f = 1 .
2 (cid:20) k2 − 1 i f i(cid:18) − j w j(cid:19) (cid:21) In some situations, the actual size of the test can be
The actual sizes of a nominal 0.05 level test for the three procedures. The
results are based on 10,000 simulations
10, 10, 10 10, 10, 20
σ :σ :σ 1:1:1 1:2:3 1:3:5 1:1:1 1:2:3 1:3:5
ANOVA 0.0481 0.0665 0.0665 0.0512 0.0264 0.023
Welch ANOVA 0.0485 0.0518 0.053 0.0514 0.0524 0.0529
AdaptiveANOVA 0.0496 0.0572 0.0539 0.0546 0.0514 0.0529
10, 20, 10 20, 10, 10
σ :σ :σ 1:1:1 1:2:3 1:3:5 1:1:1 1:2:3 1:3:5
ANOVA 0.0491 0.0714 0.0867 0.0542 0.1212 0.1399
Welch ANOVA 0.0494 0.0495 0.0524 0.0557 0.0506 0.0515
AdaptiveANOVA 0.0523 0.0554 0.0528 0.0572 0.0564 0.052
8 J. L. GASTWIRTH,Y.R. GEL ANDW. MIAO
as large as 0.1399, for example, when (n ,n ,n )= chosen from hundreds of valuable scientific contri-
(20,10,10) and (σ :σ :σ )=(1:3:5). butions and illustrate the broad scientific impact of
The powers of the adaptive and Welch ANOVA Professor Levene’s method.
testswerealsoinvestigated bysimulation.Whenthe
4.1 Applications in Archeology and Ethnography
variances are equal, the powers of the adaptive pro-
cedure are about 2–3% higher than the Welch ad- Archaeologists are concerned with the effects in-
justed ANOVA F-test. When the variances are not creasingeconomic activity hasonoldercivilizations.
equal, the Welch adjusted test has higher power, Economic growth encourages specialization in the
about 2–3% more than the adaptive one. Overall, production of goods, which led to the “standard-
the difference in power between the two procedures ization hypothesis,” that is, increased production of
is quite small, rarely more than 0.02. (Detailed re- an item would lead to its becoming more uniform.
sults can beobtained from the authors.) Thus,both Kvamme,StarkandLongacre(1996)testedthisthe-
the Welch method and the adaptive ANOVA are oryonatypeofearthenware,chupa-pots,fromthree
valid procedures. Philippine communities that differ in the way they
The results reported in Table 1 use the group me- organize ceramic production. In Dangtalan, pottery
dians to estimate their centers, in the preliminary is primarily made for household use and restricted
Levene-type test. Simulation studies, using the 25% exchange.Dalupahasanextensivenonmarketbased
trimmed means in place of the medians in the Lev- barter economy, where part-time specialist potters
ene test, yielded similar results. Other simulations trade their output for other goods. The village of
explored the role of the size of the preliminary test. Paradijon is near the Provincial capital; full-time
The findings indicate that the size of the first-stage pottery specialists sell their output to shopkeepers,
test should be in the range 15% to 25% in order located in the village or in the capital, for sale to
for the adaptive procedure to have the nominal size thegeneralpublic.Totestthe“standardization”hy-
(0.05)andhavereasonablepower.Theseresultscon- pothesis, these authors took measurements on three
firm the recommended levels of 25% by Bancroft characteristics (aperture, circumference and height)
(1964) or 20% by Huber (1972, 1973) for the size of of two-chalupa pots from the three areas and used
a preliminary test. the F-test and Brown–Forsythe version of Levene’s
Both the Welch and the adaptive tests are more test to compare the variation among pots produced
robust to departures from the equal variance as-
in each area. The null hypothesis is that the vari-
sumptionthan the usualANOVA F-test. Thesetwo
ance or spread of each characteristic is the same in
tests are nearly as powerful as the standard F test
the three areas, while the alternative is that they
when the group variances are equal. As the Welch
differ.
test is simpler, we recommend it for general use.
After demonstrating that typically the measure-
Researchers in areas where the two-stage method is
ments did not follow a normal distribution and had
commonly accepted, however, can still rely on it.
heaviertails,theauthorsshowed(theirTable5)that
The size of the Levene-type preliminary test should
the usual F-test can yield substantially different p-
be between 15% and 25%.
values than those obtained from Levene’s test. For
example,comparingthecircumferenceofthe55pots
4. THE WIDE APPLICABILITY OF LEVENE’S
from Dangtalan with 170 from Dalupa, the stan-
TEST AND ITS MODIFICATIONS
dard F-test statistic yielded 1.24, leading to accep-
The important role statistical design, methodol- tance of the null hypothesis that variances are the
ogy and inference have in a wide array of intel- same. In contrast, the robust Levene test yields a p-
lectual disciplines is exemplified by the numerous value = 0.001. Several other pair-wise comparisons
applications of Levene-type tests. This section de- showed that the F-test could yield much lower p-
scribeshowLevene-typetestswereusedinanumber values than the robust Levene method. Here we ap-
of interesting studies from a variety of disciplines. ply the three Levene type tests for homogeneity of
In many cases the Levene-type test was used as a variances described in Section 2 to assess whether
preliminary check of the equal variance assumption the variances of the apertures of the two-chalupa
in classical ANOVA; in others, the scientific issue potsfromthethreelocations arethesame.Allthree
concerned the equality of the variances of measure- tests, the original Levene’s test (L), the Brown and
mentsfromkpopulations.Thetopicsdescribedwere Forsythe version (BFL) and the trimmed version
THE IMPACT OFLEVENE’S TEST OFEQUALITY 9
(L ), conclude that the variation in each of the including: what were the residual effects of the dis-
three measured characteristics of the pots made in turbanceontheaveragelevelsofkeyresourcesinthe
theregionsarestatistically significant.Theseresults disturbed sites three years later? Did the simulated
provide support for the standardization hypothesis. hurricaneincreaseresourceheterogeneity amongthe
The standardization hypothesis predicts that as different micro-sites?
economies develop, production intensifies, causing One-way ANOVA was used to test the differences
products to become more uniform or less variable. in the average level of a resource among the five
A test having high power for this particular alter- types of micro-sites. Samples of size five were taken
native hypothesis, that is, the standard deviation of from eight different micro-sites of each type. The
the three characteristics of the pots should decrease authors applied the original version of Levene’s test
with increasing economic development, is preferable to check whether the variances of the measurements
to a general test of homogeneity of the variances. in the five groups were equal. When it indicated un-
equal variances, a single degree of freedom contrasts
Because thealternative hypothesispredicts that the
(SDFC) were used in lieu of ANOVA (Milliken and
variances of the three characteristics in pots from
Johnson,1984). When the homogeneity of variances
Dangtalan should be larger than those produced in
assumption was satisfied and the ANOVA indicated
Dalupa, which in turn should be larger than pots
significantly different effects among the micro-sites,
made in Paradijon, we analyze the data with the
a standard multiple comparison method for con-
trend test (5).
trasts was utilized.
To appreciate the increased power of the directed
Due to nonhomogeneity of variance, Carlton and
trend test, we analyzed the aperture data, kindly
Bazzaz (1998) needed to use an SDFC to establish
provided by Professor Kvamme. Using weights 1, 2
that the top sites were higher in soil organic matter
and 3 and deviations from the group means, mid-
than all other micro-sites, while percent soil water
means and medians, respectively, in (5) yielded p-
by mass was highest on fern, open and control sites.
values 0.0001, 0.0004 and 0.0004 respectively. The
ThestandardANOVAmethodwasapplicabletothe
estimates of the slope βˆ were similar: 1.77, 1.68
− − dataon climate factors. TheCO concentration was
and 1.81. All three p-values are less than one-half 2
− lowest on mounds. A major finding was that pho-
those obtained from the corresponding test of ho-
ton flux density (PFD), a measure of the amount of
mogeneity and provide stronger evidence in favor of
lightlevel,onmounds,opensitesandpitswashigher
the “standardization hypothesis.”
than in the control (undisturbed) area. In contrast,
4.2 Applications in Environmental Sciences thePFDonfernandtopmicro-sites waslessthanin
thecontrol area. Theresults suggestthathurricanes
Even before Katrina, ecologists studied the effect
increaselightlevels immediately,whichmayencour-
ofhurricanesonforests,especiallytheirrejuvenation
agethegrowthof shade-intolerant species,whilethe
after a severe storm. The catastrophic uprooting of
change in the availability of various soil resources is
treescreatesmounds,pitsandothermicro-sitesthat
moregradual.Theauthorscarefullynotedthattheir
provide possible locations for a particular species
simulation cannot replicate all the features, for ex-
to regenerate. Carlton and Bazzaz (1998) simulated
ample,veryhighwinds,ofarealhurricane.Presum-
the effect of a hurricane by pulling down selected
ably, similar studies are underway in the areas most
canopy trees and then measuring several important affected by the recent severe storms to assist in the
environmental resources (soil organic matter con- regeneration of plant species.
centration, nitrogen transformation rates and the
4.3 Applications in Business and Economics
amount of CO ) at five types of micro-sites that are
created after a storm. These are as follows: mounds; Theproblemofcomparingksamplevariancesalso
pits; top sites, which are north facing forest floor arises in business and economics. Here, two appli-
surfaces; open sites, which are level and unshaded cations of Levene’s test in this area are briefly de-
portions of the forest floor; and level portions of the scribed, although there are many other interesting
forest floor that are covered by ferns or similar veg- studies (Davis, 1996; Christie and Koch, 1997;
etation, called fern sites. For comparative purposes, Dhillon, Lasser and Watanbe, 1997; Chang, Pine-
measurements of the various resources were taken gar andSchacter, 1997;Koissi,ShapiroandHognas,
in a control area. Several questions were addressed, 2006) that implemented the procedure.
10 J. L. GASTWIRTH,Y.R. GEL ANDW. MIAO
Prior to the 1970s, the price of oil was less vari- were careful to construct a control group of simi-
able than that of other commodities; first due to lar firms that did not omit a dividend. In a similar
the dominance of the major oil companies and later comparison,theearningsofthesecompanieswasnot
the formation of OPEC by the main countries pro- significantly greater in the later period.Because the
ducing it. To examine whether the behavior of oil increased earnings variability only occurred in the
prices changed in the 1980s and became more simi- firms that omitted a dividend, their findings sup-
lartothatof othercommodities, whichtendtohave port the hypothesis that managers omit dividends
largepricefluctuations,PlourdeandWatkins(1998) when a firm’s earnings become less predictable.
appliedLevene’stesttomonthlypricechanges,mea-
4.4 Applications in Medical Research
suredbythelogarithmoftheratioofthepriceinthe
current month to that of the previous month, in oil Since a cancer patient’s probability of survival is
increased when the disease is detected at an early
andothercommodities(tin,zinc,wheat,etc.). After
stage, screening tests are an essential part of health
noticing that the monthly price changes of the two
care. Women over 50 typically have a mammogram
oil markets (West Texas and Brent) and the seven
every year or two. In many European nations, for
other commodities have high kurtosis, the authors
example, the UK, mammograms tend to be evalu-
realized thattheusualassumptionthattheunderly-
ated at a few central locations, so each radiologist
ing populations all have the same shape or distribu-
reviewsmanyofthem.Incontrast,thesysteminthe
tion and differ only in the scale parameter was im-
US is more decentralized, so there are fewer radiolo-
plausible.Thus,theyusedboththeBrown–Forsythe
gistswhoassessalargenumberofmammograms.To
adaptation of Levene’s test and the nonparametric
study whether the accuracy of the mammogram is
Fligner–Killeen (1976) test in a series of pairwise
related to the volume a radiologist sees, Esserman
comparisons to assess the relative dispersions of the
et al. (2002) obtained a sample of 59 radiologists
price changes. In general, both tests showed that
in the US and 194 high-volume radiologists in the
the monthly oil price changes were statistically sig-
UK The number of US radiologists in each volume
nificantly more dispersed than those of other com-
category was 19 low (<100 per month), 22 medium
modities,exceptforleadandnickel,duringtheyears
(101–300) and 18 high (>300). Each radiologist was
1985–1994. The modified Levene test did detect an
given a test set of 60 two-view films that contained
increaseinthedispersionofthepricechangesofzinc
13 cancers.
that the F–K test did not. This is consistent with
In thedisease screening context (Gastwirth, 1987;
the findings of Algina, Olejnik and Ocanto (1989),
Pepe, 2003) accuracy is measured by both sensi-
indicating that the O’Brien (1979) and BFL tests
tivity (the probability a person with cancer is cor-
have relatively high power and preserve the nomi-
rectly identified) and specificity (the probability a
nal significance for the family of distributions and
healthy person is correctly classified). One can in-
sample sizes they studied.
crease the sensitivity of a screening test by lowering
Stockmarketanalystsandinvestorsareinterested
the threshold level for classifying a subject as dis-
in deciding whether various actions by companies
eased,whichdecreases thecorrespondingspecificity.
assist them in predicting the future earnings and
A radiologist’s accuracy is evaluated by their sensi-
market prospects of those firms. Sant and Cowan
tivity at a specificity level of 0.90. Therefore, the
(1994) studied the impact of an omission of a div- authors fit an ROC curve (Gastwirth, 2001; Pepe,
idend by a company on the variability of both the 2003) to the data for each radiologist using a vari-
forecasts of future earnings and the actual earnings. ant of the binormal model (Dorfman and Berbaum,
They compared the earnings and forecasts of com- 2000). For the US radiologists, average sensitivity
panies that omitted a dividend during the period was 70.3% for those in the low-volume category,
1963–1984 by comparing the variances of the ac- 69.7% for the medium volume group and 77% for
tual or forecasted earnings per share two years after readers of a high-volume of mammograms. High-
the omission and two years before. Since the data volume UK radiologists had an average sensitivity
was not normal, they utilized a robust Levene test of 79.3%. Because the BFL test indicated that the
(BFL). All comparisons showed that the variability variances in the sensitivities of the radiologists in
of actual and forecasted earnings were significantly the groups were not equal, separate pairwise Welch-
larger after the dividend omission. The authors also type t-tests were performed and showed that the
THE IMPACT OFLEVENE’S TEST OFEQUALITY 11
differences among the average sensitivities were sta- to the large, but unequal, sample sizes and/or the
tistically significant. The area underthe ROC curve fact that the LVF measurements appear to be left-
(AROC) was used as a second measure of accu- skewed,asthemeanvaluesofallthreereaders(52.7,
racy. The areas under the ROC curve ranged from 51.5 and 51.6) were less than the corresponding me-
an average of 0.832 for low-volume readers to 0.902 dians. The nonnormality and skewness of both data
(0.891) for high volume UK (US) radiologists. Lev- sets were indicated by Q–Q type plots. In contrast
ene’s testshowed thatthevariances of theAROCin to the LVF data, the LAD measurements appear to
the four groups were statistically significant. Thus, be right skewed, with a fairly heavy right-tail.
Bonferroni adjusted pairwise comparisons were car- A major finding was that the prevalence of mitral
ried out and showed that the high volume radiol- valve prolapse (MVP) differed in the three groups
ogists were noticeably more accurate than the low (5.3%, 3.0% and 4.8%), as did the recognition of
and medium volume readers. Several related com- clots (1.9% for reader 1 versus about 0.5% for read-
parisons were conducted, which confirmed that the
ers 2 and 3). After checking that the individuals
percentage of cancers detected by high volume ra-
in the three groups had similar age and sex com-
diologists significantly exceeded the corresponding
positions, the authors noted that these differences
percentage detected by lower volume radiologists.
would be difficult to detect in a typical small-scale
Their finding that higher volume improves diagnos-
reproducibilitystudy.Thedatausedinthisstudy,as
tic performance suggests that the quality and effi-
in many epidemiologic investigations, were observa-
ciency ofscreeningprogramscanbeimprovedbyre-
tional, and not obtained from a randomized clinical
organizing them into more centralized high-volume
trial. Thus, a sensitivity analysis based on general-
centers.
izationsofCornfield’sinequality(Rosenbaum,2002)
Berger et al. (1999) utilized a database of 6026
can be used to assess whether an omitted variable
echocardiograms thatwerereadbyoneofthreesim-
could explain the observed differences in the preva-
ilarly qualified readers to assess the differences in
lence of heart problems found by the three readers.
frequency of several diagnoses and related measure-
The article noted that some data was missing in a
ments.Thenumbersofechocardiograms readbythe
smallproportionofcasesbut,giventhelargesample
readers (1, 2, 3) were 2702, 2101 and 1223, respec-
size, the authors decided not to impute those data.
tively. Levene’s test was used to assess the variabil-
In this particular case, they are probably correct,
ity in the measurements of several continuous char-
however, from a statistical viewpoint it would be
acteristics, of which we discuss two: left atrial di-
preferable for researchers to report the proportion
mension (LAD) and left ventricle ejection fraction
of missing data. Then readers could assess whether
(LVEF). The median values of LAD for the three
itmightaffecttheresults.Forexample,theKruskal–
readers were as follows: 3.9, 3.9 and 3.8, respec-
Wallis test of equality of the location parameters of
tively. The Kruskal–Wallis test (K–W test), how-
the LVF measurements just reached statistical sig-
ever,showedthatthethreegroupsweresignificantly
nificance at the 0.05 level. If the proportion of miss-
different,buttheMediantestdidnotdetectanydif-
ing measurements varied among the three readers,
ference. Levene’s test indicated statistically signifi-
thenthedata wouldnotbeconsistent with“missing
cant differences in the variability of LAD measure-
at random” and the significance of the data might
mentsmadebythethreedoctors.LiketheWilcoxon
test,thenulldistributionoftheK–Wtestisaffected change with the method of imputation adopted.
bydifferencesinthescaleparametersorvariancesof An interesting study (Rosser, Murdoch and
the underlying distributions. The investigators may Cousens, 2004) demonstrated that a medical prob-
nothavebeenawareofthisissueanddidnotexplore lem, optical defocus, increases the variability of the
whether the differences among the variances of the measurements of visual acuity. When visual acu-
three distributions would be sufficient to change the ity is repeatedly measured on the same person, the
inference obtained from the usual K–W test. recorded scores can vary. This test-retest variabil-
The median values of the LVEF measurements ity (TRV) is measured in units of the logarithm of
made by the three readers were identical, 57.5 and the minimum angle of resolution (logMAR) and is a
Levene’s test foundno difference in their variability. formofmeasurementerror.Previous studiesyielded
A somewhat surprising statistically significant dif- estimates of the 95% range of TRV measurements
ference in location was found by both the Kruskal– between 0.07 to 0.19 logMAR. Following up on
Wallis and the Median tests. This might be due a conjecture that the length of the 95% TRV range
12 J. L. GASTWIRTH,Y.R. GEL ANDW. MIAO
might increase with the amount of defocus, these the injury. For low severity injuries, Levene’s origi-
investigators examined 40 subjects under three con- nal test yielded a highly significant result F =
ditions: no defocus or full refractive correction, full 11.5, (p<0.001). Significant variation also occurred
correction plus 0.50 D and full correction plus 1.00 in the medium and high injury categories. Some-
D. The order of the six measurements given to a what unexpectedly, jurors given a cap had the most
participant was randomized and no eye chart was variable awards for low-level injuries. In the high-
used for consecutive measurements. When the same level category, themostvariable conditions werethe
chart was used the patient was asked to read it for- oneswhennoguidanceorjusttheaverageawardwas
ward one time and backward on the other. Thus, providedtothemockjurors.RobbennoltandStude-
memory or learning as well as the potential effect of baker (1999) explored the effect of varying the cap
fatigue were controlled for in the experimental de- on punitive damage awards. Levene’s test showed
sign. Following a common practice in ophthalmol- that the variability of those awards also increased
with the size of the cap the mock jurors were given,
ogy of ignoring the matching, the authors applied
however, the variability of the awards the control or
the original Levene test of homogeneity of variances
nocap mock juries gave was less than those of mock
and obtained a significant result (p=0.00023). The
juries given the highest cap ($50 million). These
trendtestusingthegroupmeansyieldedamoresig-
nificantresult(p=4.16 10
−5).Similarly,thetrend authors also showed that overall variability of jury
× awards was reduced when the awards for compen-
test using group medians yielded a lower p-value
satory damages and punitive damages were made in
than the test of homogeneity (0.00024 vs. 0.00124).
two separate stages of jury deliberation.
As expected, the p-values obtained using the 25%-
The Tyler v. Union Oil Co. of California (304 F.
trimmed means of each group as their centers were
3d 379, 5th Cir. 2002) case concerned age discrimi-
in between those obtained using the mean and me-
nationinlayoffs.First,plaintiffs’expertshowedthat
dian. The smaller p-value of the trend test, which
recent job evaluations received by employees and
is directed at the alternative of interest, provides
their retention status were not significantly corre-
greater support for the conclusion that the variabil-
lated. Then he compared the age distribution of the
ity of measured visual acuity increases with the de-
employees who were terminated to those who were
gree of optical defocusthan thetest of homogeneity.
retained in various locations of the firm. Levene’s
4.5 Applications in Legal Studies and Law Cases test was used to determine whether the usual t-test,
which assumes the variances of the distributions are
In product liability and other tort cases, there
equal, or the Welch modified t-test is more appro-
is concern that monetary damages are not propor-
priate. In most comparisons both versions of the t-
tionate to the actual harm. Furthermore, individ-
test were significant. In one location, Ponville, the
uals who contract the same illness after exposure
ages of 36 employees whowere placed in a redeploy-
to the same toxic product can receive very differ-
mentpoolandeventuallyterminatedwerecompared
ent monetary compensation from the legal system.
with the ages of 272 retained employees. Levene’s
Sincethedeliberations of actual jurorsare confiden-
test showed that the standard deviations (9.97 and
tial, researchers (Saks et al., 1997;Goodman, Green
6.94) of the age distributionsof the two groups were
andLoftus,1989;RobbennoltandStudebaker,1999;
statistically significant. The usual t-test found the
Marti and Wissler, 2000) have varied the scenario
difference of three years between the average ages
describedortheinstructionsgiven tomockjurorsto of the two groups significant (two-sided p-value is
evaluate whether the variability of awards for simi- 0.024), while the modified t-test did not (two-sided
lar injuries can be reduced. p-value is 0.093). Surprisingly, the transcript of the
For example, Saks et al. (1997) explored the ef- expert testimony does not mention any questions
fect of giving jurors different types of information by the defendant about the potential implication of
to guide their awards. Thus, some jurors were given the result that the age distributions of retained and
no guidance (control), some the average award for laid-off employees were similar. Comparisons show-
the type of injury, some a range or interval of val- ing that the termination rates of employees aged 50
ues, some both an interval and the average, and or more were higher than those of employees under
some were given some examples of awards in sim- 50, however, were quite significant (p<0.001). This
ilar cases while some were given a cap or upper analysis provided very strong evidence supporting
limit. These researchers also varied the severity of the finding of age discrimination.
THE IMPACT OFLEVENE’S TEST OFEQUALITY 13
4.6 Miscellaneous Applications questionnaire, they obtained 317 surveys from stu-
dents (94% response rate) and 273 completed sur-
By the late 1990s researchers had documented ge-
veys (24% response rate) from faculty and staff at a
ographical differences in semen quality, including
mid-sized University. Eliminating a few cases with
sperm concentration, which raised questions about
missing data, six outliers and 188 forms from in-
the possible causal roles of genetic differences and
dividuals not currently in a relationship, they an-
environmental factors. Since the criteria for recruit-
alyzed 349 responses (215 females, 134 males); ap-
ing study subjects, methods of laboratory analysis
parently females had a higher response rate than
and experimental design differed among the earlier males. Levene’s test showed a significant gender dif-
studies, to eliminate those factors as possible expla- ferenceinthevariance ofthenumberof fantasies, so
nations for the basic finding, Auger and Jouannet the Welch modified t-test was used to compare the
(1997) conducted a retrospective study of candidate means. Men had a statistically significantly higher
semendonorstospermbanksatUniversityhospitals numberoffantasiespermonththanwomen(76.7vs.
in eight regions of France during the period 1973– 34.1, t = 4.77). To control for this gender dif-
1993. These hospitals adopted the same guidelines ference in total number of fantasies, the researchers
for recruiting male semen donors and used similar calculated the percentage of each respondent’s fan-
laboratory methods. The authors analyzed data on tasies that were extra-dyadic. Since the variances
seminal volume, sperm concentration, sperm count of these percentages again differed by gender, the
and the percentage of sperm that were motile. As Welch t-test showed that men reported a greater
the data were not normally distributed, they made number of sexual fantasies with an outsider than
appropriate transformations for each variable of in- women (54% vs. 36%, t 311 = 5.1). While only a
terest, for example, the square root transform for modest percentage of extra-dyadic fantasies
sperm concentration and total sperm count. Lev- concerned former partners, on average, women had
ene’s original test indicated that even the trans- significantly more of them than men (34% vs. 22%,
p=0.004).
formed data for all four variables had statistically
A regression analysis, adjusting for length of the
significantly different variances. Hence, the authors
relationship and whether one cheated on their part-
usedtheWelch analog (6)of ANOVAtoanalyze the
ner, showed that the number of prior partners a
data.Theresultsshowed statistically significantdif-
person had was significantly more highly related to
ferences among the eight regions in all four charac-
the percentage of extra-dyadic fantasies of women
teristics of semen quality (all p-values are less than
thanmen.Thepercentagesoffantasiesthatinvolved
0.0001). Whilethesesmall p-values arose inpartbe-
someoneotherthantheircurrentpartnerwasnearly
causethetotal samplesizewas large(4710), varying
identical for men and women who had cheated on
from226inCaento1396inParis,thedifferencesap-
their partner (55% vs. 53%), implying that the ma-
pear to be quite meaningful. For instance, the mean
jor difference between the genders in extra-dyadic
total sperm count varied from 284 per million in
fantasies occurs in faithful partners. Since the per-
Toulouse to 409 per-million in Caen. The authors
centages of male and female respondents who ad-
showed that these regional differences remained sta-
mitted to having cheated on their current partner
tistically significant after controlling for age, year
were nearly identical (28% vs. 29%), the previous
of semen donation and number of days the subject
finding is not likely to have been affected by nonre-
abstained from sex prior to sample collection.
sponse. For both sexes, the percentage of fantasies
Sexual fantasies and their content can provide in-
that were extra-dyadic increased with the length of
sight into the process of sexual arousal as well as
the relationship. As most of the individuals in long-
gender differences in what people find exciting. As termrelationshipswerefacultyandstaffratherthan
previousresearchindicatedthatmenhavemorefan- students, the subjects with a high degree of nonre-
tasiesthanwomen,HicksandLeitenberg(2001)stud- sponse, this last finding might require further con-
iedwhethermenandwomendifferintheirlikelihood firmation. Since the overall regression had an R2
of having sexual fantasies about their current part- of only 0.25, more research is needed to determine
ner as compared to extra-dyadic fantasies (about other explanatory factors as well as improving the
someone else) after controlling for the overall differ- accuracy of the recall data collected in similar stud-
ence in number of fantasies. Using an anonymous ies.
14 J. L. GASTWIRTH,Y.R. GEL ANDW. MIAO
5. DISCUSSION AND OPEN QUESTIONS as powerful as more complicated alternative proce-
dures (Pan, 2002), these methods can now be in-
Levene’s original article and the statistical proce-
cluded in statistics curriculum.
dures that developed and refined his original test
Reviewingtheappliedliteratureshowedthatcom-
enabled researchers in many intellectual disciplines
paring the variability of data from several groups
tocheckthevalidityofanimportantassumptionun-
frequently is the scientific question of interest. In
derlying the analysis of data obtained from studies
particular, analysis of the variability of the mea-
using an ANOVA design. With modern day com-
surements of medical characteristics obtained from
puter programs for calculation of statistical tests
different devices or techniques should lead to more
and estimators, the results in Section 3 show that reliable diagnosis. Quite often the problem of inter-
today there is less need for a Levene-type test as estwaswhethertherewasadecreasingorincreasing
a preliminary step to decide whether a standard or trend in the variability of the characteristic of inter-
Welch-modified ANOVA test statistic should be ap- est that is associated with a covariate. This was the
plied, as the Welch procedure does not lose much focus of articles from a variety of fields: the study
power when the variances are equal. With an ap- relating characteristics of pots to the degree of eco-
propriate choice for the size of the Levene-type pre- nomic development, the investigations of the rela-
liminary test, the two-stage procedure is valid and tionshipbetweentheamountofinformationgivento
can be reliably used in disciplines where it has be- juries and the variability of the monetary damages
come a standard technique. they award, or the variability of eye examination
Levene’sarticleandthesubsequentliteraturehave measurements.
properlyfocusedusersofstatisticsontheneedtoex- Thesimple test described in Section 2, along with
amine whether their data “fit” the assumptions un- related references, should be useful to researchers
derlying the methods they apply. If one observes a concernedwithsimilartrendalternatives.Forexam-
“borderline” result, a Levene-type test may be used ple, Kutner, Nachtsheim and Neter (2004) describe
the use of the BFL two-sample test for checking the
as one of the diagnostic tools to assess the sensi-
equality of variances of residuals from a time se-
tivity of the inference to potential violations of the
ries regression against a time-trend alternative. It
basic assumptions. In particular, an analog of the
is likely that the power of such a test would be in-
Sprott and Farewell (1993) use of a confidence in-
creasedifmorethantwogroupswereformedandthe
terval for the ratio, ρ2, of both sample variances in
trendtestwasapplied.Furtherresearchisneeded,as
the Behrens–Fisher problem to assess the sensitiv-
theappropriatenumberofgroupsislikelytodepend
ity of inferences on the difference of the two means
on the total sample size as well as the magnitude of
should be developed for the k-group setting. Using
the trend.
the ratios of the mean absolute deviations from a
The increased power of the test will also enable
robust estimate of the group centers in place of the
researchers to use smaller samples in those studies.
ratioofthesamplevariancesmayincreasetheappli-
Graubard and Korn (1987) noted that the choice
cability of this technique to data from heavier tailed
of scores used in the Cochran–Armitage (CA) trend
distributions.
test in proportions is an important topic, as they
The Welch-modified t-test now appears in some
can have a noticeable effect on the p-value of the
standard textbooks and statistical packages. Since
test. Their point also applies to the trend test for
that procedurehas been shown to benearly as pow-
variances.Whenthereareseveralscientifically plau-
erful as the standard one used in the equal variance
siblechoicesfortheweights,analogsoftheefficiency
setting and has much superior control of the Type
robust methods (Zheng et al., 2003) developed for
I error when the group variances differ, authors of the CA test can be obtained, as the correlations of
statistical textbooks should consider including it in the test statistics based on each set of weights can
their discussion of ANOVA. The main extra com- be estimated from the data. These correlations are
plications are the calculation of the denominator used in creating a suitable test statistic that has
of the statistic (6) and the degrees of freedom (7), high power over the family of scientifically plausible
which are now readily carried out in statistical soft- models of the trend.
ware. Since Levene-type tests for equal variance or Although there exist several methods based on
a trend in variances are easy to describe and nearly Levene-typestatisticsforstudyingdifferencesinvari-
THE IMPACT OFLEVENE’S TEST OFEQUALITY 15
ability or the scale parameter of two variables mea- studyshouldbeexamined,asinEnglish,Armstrong
suredonpaireddata(Wilcox,1989;Grambsch,1994), and Kricker (1998). In the study by Berger et al.
the visual acuity study (Rosser, Murdoch and (1999), only a small proportion of data was missing,
Cousens, 2004) indicates that appropriate k-sample which was unlikely to affect the conclusions. Never-
versions should bedeveloped. A related problem oc- theless, researchers should be encouraged to report
curs when the same technician assesses the same the pattern of missing data and any methods of im-
sample with several devices. This topic is related putation they adopted in the statistical analysis.
to tests for the equality of variance in randomized In contrast, the probability of nonresponse in the
block designs. The survey of Schaalje and Despain studyofsexualfantasies(HicksandLeitenberg,2001)
(1996) found that when the block effect is mild, was highly correlated with age, a characteristic that
the method of Wilcox (1989) performs well. When is related to two independent variables in the re-
the block effect is strong and the distributions are gressionpredictingpercentage offantasies thatwere
symmetric, a variant of Levene’s test due to Yitno-
extradyadic. Thus, a study population containing a
sumarto and O’Neill (1986) is recommended. Fur-
greater proportion of older respondents might yield
ther research is needed for the situation of asym-
different estimates of the effects of the number of
metric or very heavy-tailed distributions.
prior partners and the length of current relation-
TextbookdiscussionsofANOVAfocusoncompar-
ship, respectively. Since the slope of the regression
ingarelatively smallnumberoftreatments (groups)
relating the proportion of extradyadic fantasies to
andthelargesampletheoryisderivedassumingthat
number of prior partners was stronger for women
the numbers of observations in each group increase
thanformen,whetherthenonresponseratesofolder
at the same rate. In some situations the number of
males and females differed should also be investi-
treatments can also be large (Boos and Brownie,
gated. Given the recent development of imputation
1995). Bathke (2002, 2004) examines the effect of
andother techniquesforhandlingmissingdata(Lit-
unequal variances in the multi-factor situation. In
tle and Rubin, 2002; Molenberghs and Kenward,
thecommonlyoccurringtwo-factordesign,whenthe
2007), it would be useful to explore how they can
numberoflevels of thefirstfactor, A1,increases but
be used in these applications to realistically assess
the number of levels of the second, A2, remains fi-
the affect of missing data on the results of Levene-
nite, as long as the inequality in the error variances
type tests, both for homogeneity and trend.
is not related to the level of factor A1, the F-test
Thenumberofobservational,ratherthandesigned,
for the main effect of the first factor is almost un-
studiesweencountered inthearea ofquality control
affected by differences in the variances at the levels
or accuracy of medical measurements indicates the
of the other factor. The tests for the main effect
importance of developing methods for assessing the
of factor A2 and interaction, however, are affected.
sensitivity of inferences based on tests of the equal-
A thorough analysis of tests of equality of variance
ity of variance to an unobservedvariable. Hopefully,
whentherearemanytreatmentswithamodestsized
this review will stimulate the development of meth-
sample for each one remains to be done.
ods analogous to those used to assess the potential
In most of the applications discussed here the ob-
impact of omitted variables on the comparison of
servations in each group are independent random
the means or proportions from two samples (Rosen-
samples. It is well known (van Belle, 2002) that de-
pendencecanhaveamajoreffectonthedistribution baum, 2002) or in regression analysis (Dempster,
of many standard statistics. Thus, researchers will 1988).
need to design their experiments and studies care- Forcost-effectiveness manygovernmentsponsored
fully to ensure that the observations in each group surveys have a complex design based on stratified
are independent of each other and those in other multistage probability cluster sampling, which pro-
groups. This may not be a routine problem in stud- duces estimates of population means and propor-
ies where the same individuals and devices are used tions with larger standard errors than would be ob-
to make the measurements. More statistical proce- tainedfromapurelyrandomsampleofthesamesize
dures that model the dependence appropriately and (Nygard andSandstrom,1989; Kornand Graubard,
incorporate it in the analysis need to be developed. 1999).AppropriatemodificationsofLevene-typetests
Inseverallargestudieswereviewedtherewassome forvarianceormeasuresofrelativevariabilityshould
nonresponse or missing data. In general, the poten- be useful when the status of several sub-groups of
tial effect of missing data on the conclusions of a the population is studied.
16 J. L. GASTWIRTH,Y.R. GEL ANDW. MIAO
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS Box, G. E. P.(1953).Non-normalityandtestsonvariances.
Biometrika 40 318–335. MR0058937
TheresearchofProfessorGastwirthwassupported Box, G. E. P. and Andersen, S. L. (1955). Permutation
in part by NSF Grant SES-0317956. The research theoryinthederivationofrobustcriteriaandthestudyof
of Professor Gel was in part supported by a Grant departures from assumption. J. Roy. Statist. Soc. Ser. B
17 1–26.
from NSERC of Canada and was made possible by
Brown,M.B.andForsythe,A.B.(1974).Robusttestsfor
the facilities of SHARCNET.
equality of variances. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 69 364–367.
Carlton, G. C. and Bazzaz, F. A. (1998). Resource con-
gruence and forest regeneration following an experimental
REFERENCES hurricaneblowdown. Ecology 79 1305–1319.
Carroll, R.J.andRuppert,D.(1982).Robustestimation
Abelson, R. P. and Tukey, J. W. (1963). Efficient utiliza-
inheteroscedastic linear models. Ann. Statist. 10429–441.
tionofnon-numericalinformation inquantitativeanalysis:
General theory and the case of simple order. Ann. Math.
Carroll, R. J. and Schneider, H. (1985). A note on Lev-
Statist. 34 1347–1369. MR0156411
ene’stestsforequalityofvariances.Statist. Probab. Lett.3
Agresti, A. (2002). Categorical Data Analysis. Wiley, New
191–194.
York.MR1914507
Cattaneo, Z., Postma, A and Vecchi, T. (2006). Gen-
Algina, J., Olejnik, S. and Ocanto, R. (1989). Type I
der differences in memory for object and word. Quarterly
error rates and power estimates for selected two-sample
Journal of Experimental Psychology 59 904–919.
testsofscale.JournalofEducationalStatistics 14373–383.
Chacko, V. J. (1963). Testing homogeneity against ordered
Andrews,D.F.,Bickel,P.J.,Hampel,F.R.,Huber,P.
alternatives. Ann. Math. Statist. 34 945–956. MR0150882
J.,Rodgers,W.H.andTukey,J.W.(1972).RobustEs-
Chang, E. C., Jain, P. C. and Locke, P. R.(1995). Stan-
timatesofLocation:SurveyandAdvances.PrincetonUniv.
dard and Poors 500 index futrues volatility and price
Press, Princeton, NJ. MR0331595
changes around the New York stock exchange close. Jour-
Arnold, S. F.(1980).AsymptoticvalidityofF testsforthe
nal of Business 68 61–84.
ordinary linear model and the multiple correlation model.
Chang, E. C., Pinegar, J. M. and Schacter B. (1997).
J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 75 890–894. MR0600972
Interday variations in volume, variance and participation
Auger, J. and Jouannet, P. (1997). Evidence for regional
of large speculators. Journal of Banking and Finance 21
differencesof semenqualityamongfertile frenchmen.Hu-
797–810.
man Reproduction 12 740–745.
Conover, W. J., Johnson, M. E. and Johnson, M. M.
Balakrishnan N. and Ma, C. W. (1990). A comparative
(1981). A comparative study of tests for homogeneity of
study of various tests for the equality of two population
variances, with applications to the outer continental shelf
variances. J. Stat. Comput. Simul.35 41–89. biddingdata. Technometrics 23 351–361.
Bancroft, T. A. (1964). Analysis and inference for incom- Crow, E. L. and Siddiqui, M. M. (1967). Robust esti-
pletely specified models involving the use of preliminary mation of location. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 62 353–389.
test(s)ofsignificance. Biometrics 20427–442. MR0181066 MR0212953
Bartlett,M.S.(1937).Propertiesofsufficiencyandstatis- Coulson, D. and Joyce, L. (2006). Indexing variability: A
tical tests. Proc. Roy. Soc. Ser. A 160 268–282. case study with climate change impacts on ecosystems.
Bathke, A. (2002). ANOVA for a large number of treat- Ecological Indicators 6 749–769.
ments. Math. Methods Statist. 11 118–132. MR1900976 Christie, D. R. and Koch, T. W. (1997). The impact of
Bathke, A. (2004). The ANOVA F-test can still be used market-specific public information on return variance in
in some balanced designs with unequal variances and anilliquidmarket.JournalofFutures Markets 17887–908.
non-normal data. J. Statist. Plann. Inference 2 413–422. Cumming, J. and Hall, C. (2002). Athlete’s use of imagery
MR2088750 in the off-season. Sport Pshychologist 16 160–172.
Berger, A. K., Gottdiener, J. S., Yohe, M. A. and Davis,J.T.(1996).Experienceandauditors’selectionofrel-
Guerro, J. L. (1999). Epidemiologic approach to qual- evantinformationforpreliminarycontrolriskassessments.
ity assessment in echocardiographic diagnosis. Journal of Auditing 15 16–37.
the American College of Cardiology 34 1831–1836. Dempster, A. P. (1988). Employment discrimination and
Bickel, P. J (1975). One-step Huberestimates in thelinear statistical science. Statist. Sci. 3 149–161. MR0968389
model. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 70 428–434. MR0386168 Dhillon, U. S., Lasser, D. J. and Watanbe, T. (1997).
Boos,D.D.andBrownie,C.(1989).Bootstrapmethodsfor Volatility,informationanddoubleversuswalrasianauction
testinghomogeneityofvariances.Technometrics 3169–82. pricing in US and Japanese futures markets. Journal of
MR0997671 Banking and Finance 21 1045–1061.
Boos, D. D. and Brownie, C. (1995). ANOVA and ranks Dorfman, D. D. and Berbaum, K. S. (2000). A contami-
test when the number of treatments is large. Statist. nated binormal model for ROC data-part III: Initial eval-
Probab. Lett. 23 183–191. uation with detection ROC data. Academic Radiology 7
Boos, D. D. and Brownie C. (2004). Comparing variances 438–447.
and othermeasures of dispersion. Statist. Sci.19 571–578. English, D. R., Armstrong, B. K. and Kricker, A.
MR2185578 (1998). Reproducibility of reported measurements of sun
THE IMPACT OFLEVENE’S TEST OFEQUALITY 17
exposure in a case-control study. Cancer, Epidemiology, Graubard,B. I.andKorn, E. L.(1987).Choiceofcolumn
Biomarkers and Prevention 7 857–863. scores for testing independence in ordered 2×k contin-
Esserman,L.,Cowley, H.,Eberle,C.,Kirkpatrick,A., gency tables. Biometrics 43 471–476. MR0897415
Chang S., Berbaum, K. and Gale, A. (2002). Improv- Greene,E.,Coon, D.andBoornstein, B.(2001).Theef-
ing the accuracy of mammography: Volume and outcome fectsoflimitingpunitivedamageawards. Law and Human
relationships. Journal of the National Cancer Institute 94 Behavior 25 217–234.
369–375. Hall, P. and Padmanabhan, A. R.(1997). Adaptiveinfer-
Evett, I. W. and Weir, B. S. (1998). Interpreting DNA ence for the two-sample scale problem. Technometrics 39
Evidence. Sinauer, Sunderland,MA. 412–422. MR1482518
Fisher, N. I. (1986). Robust-tests for comparing the dis- Hardy,G.H.(1908).Mendelianproportionsinamixedpop-
persions of several Fisher or Watson distributions on the ulation. Science 28 40–50.
sphere.Geophysical Journal ofthe Royal Astronomical So- Hedrick, P. W. (2000). Genetics of Populations, 2nd ed.
ciety 85 563–572. Jones and Bartlett, Sudbury,MA.
Fligner, M. A. and Killeen, T. J. (1976). Distribution- Hedrick, P. W. (2006). Genetic polymorphism in heteroge-
freetwo-sample testsfor scale. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 71 neousenvironments:Theageofgenomics.Ann. Rev. Ecol.
210–213. MR0400532 Systems 37 67–93.
Flynn, F. J. and Brockner, J. (2003). It is different to Henriksen, H. (2003). The role of some regional factors in
give than to receive: Predictors of givers’ and receivers’
the assessment of well yields from hard-rock aquifers of
reactionstofavorexchange.Journal of AppliedPsychology
Fennoscandia. Hydrogeology Journal 11 628–645.
88 1034–1045.
Hays,M.A.,Irsula,B.,McMullen,S.L.andFeldblum,
Francois, N., Guydot-Declerck, C., Hug, B.,
P. J. (2001). A comparison of three daily coital diary de-
Callemien, D., Govaerts, B. and Collin, S. (2006).
signs and a phone-inregimen. Contraception 63 159–166.
Beer astringency assessed by time-intensity and quantita-
Hicks, T. V. and Leitenberg, H. (2001). Sexual fantasies
tive descriptive analysis: Influence of pH and accelerated
aboutone’spartnerversussomeoneelse:Genderdifferences
aging. Food Quality and Preference 17 445–452.
inincidenceandfrequency.TheJournalofSexResearch 38
Freidlin, B. and Gastwirth, J. L. (2004). A note on the
43–50.
use of tests of mutation rates on ordered groups. Genetic
Hines,W.G.S.andHines,R.J.O.(2000).Increasedpower
Testing 8 437–440.
with modified forms of the Levene (med) test for hetero-
Freidlin, B., Miao M. and Gastwirth, J. L. (2003). On
geneity of variance. Biometrics 56 451–454.
theuse of the Shapiro–Wilk test in two-stage adaptive in-
Hogg, R. V. (1974). Adaptive robust procedures: A partial
ferenceforpaireddatafrommoderatetoveryheavytailed
review and some suggestions for future applications and
distributions.BiometricalJournal 45887–900.MR2012347
theory.J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 69 909–923. MR0461779
Fujino,Y.(1979).Testsforthehomogeneityofvariancesfor
Hogg, R. V., Fisher, V. M. and Randles, R. H. (1975).
ordered aternatives. Biometrika 66 133–139. MR0529157
A two-sample adaptive distribution-free test. J. Amer.
Gastwirth, J. L. and Rubin, H. (1969). On robust linear
Statist. Assoc. 70 656–661.
estimators. Ann. Math. Statist. 40 24–39. MR0242329
Huber,P.J.(1972).Robuststatistics:Areview.Ann.Math.
Gastwirth, J. L. (1972). Robust estimation of the Lorenz
Statist. 43 1041–1067. MR0314180
curve and Gini index. Rev. Econom. Statist. 54 306–316.
Huber, P. J. (1973). Robust regression: Asymptotic, con-
jectures and Monte Carlo. Ann. Statist. 1 799–821.
Gastwirth,J.L.(1987),Thestatisticalprecisionofmedical
screening procedures: Application to polygraph and AIDS
antibodies test data. Statist. Sci. 2 213–238. MR0920139 Huber, M, Chen, Y. G., Dinwoodie, I., Dobra, A. and
Gastwirth, J. L. (2001). Screening and selection. In In-
Nicholas, M.(2006).MonteCarloalgorithmsforHardy–
ternational Encyclopedia of Social Sciences (N.J. Smelser Weinbergproportions. Biometrics 62 49–53. MR2226555
andP.B.Bates,eds.).Elsevier,Oxford,U.K.13755–13767. Johnson, S. W., Rice, S. D. and Moles, D. A. (1998).
Gillespie, J. H. (1998). Population Genetics: A Concise Effectsofsubmarineminetailingsdisposalonjuvenileyel-
Guide. Johns HopkinsUniv.Press, Baltimore, MD. lowfin sole (Pleuronectes asper): A laboratory study. Ma-
Giraud, T. and Capy, P. (1996). Somatic activity of the rine Pollution Bulletin 36 278–287.
mariner trasposable element in natural populations of Johnson, N. L. and Leone, F. C. (1964). Statistics and
Drosophila simulans. Proceedings: Biological Sciences 263 ExperimentalDesigninEngineeringandPhysicalSciences,
1481–1486. 2nd ed. Wiley, NewYork. MR0172362
Grambsch,P.M.(1994).Simplerobusttestsforscalediffer- Kahn, M. S., Coulibaly, P. and Dibike, Y. (2006). Un-
ences in paired data. Biometrika 81 359–372. MR1294897 certaintyanalysisofstatistical downscalingmethodsusing
Goodman, J., Green, E. and Loftus, E. F. (1989). Run- canadian global climate predictors. Hydrological Processes
away verdicts or reasonable determination: Mock juror 20 3085–3104.
strategies in awarding damages. Jurimetrics Journal 29 Keyes, T. K. and Levy, M. S. (1997). Analysisof Levene’s
285–309. test under design imbalance. Journal of Educational and
Grissom, R. J. (2000). Heterogeneity of variance in clini- Behavioral Statistics 22 845–858.
caldata.Journal ofConsulting and ClinicalPsychology 68 Korn, E. L. and Graubard, B. I. (1999). The Analysis of
155–165. Health Surveys. Wiley, NewYork.
18 J. L. GASTWIRTH,Y.R. GEL ANDW. MIAO
Koissi, M. C., Shapiro, A. R. and Hognas, G. (2006). Molenberghs, G. and Kenward, M. G. (2007). Missing
Evaluating and extending the Lee–Carter model for mor- Data in Clinical Studies. Wiley, Chichester, UK.
talityforecasting:Bootstrapconfidenceinterval.Insurance Moser, B. K., Stevens, G. R. and Watts, C. L. (1989).
Math. Econom. 38 1–20. MR2197300 The two-sample T-test versus Satterthwaite’s approxi-
Krutchkoff, R. G. (1988). One-way fixed effects analysis mation F-test. Communication in Statistics—Theory and
of variance when the variances may be unequal. J. Stat. Methods 18 3963–3975. MR1058922
Comput. Simul. 30 259–183. Moser, B. K., Stevens, G. R. and Watts, C. L. (1992).
Kutner, M. H.,Nachtsheim, C. J. andNeter, J. (2004). Homogeneity of variances in the two-sample means test.
Applied Regression Analysis. McGraw-Hill/Irwin, Boston. Amer. Statist. 46 19–21.
Kvamme, K. L., Stark, M. T. and Longacre, M. A. Neave, F. B., Mandrak, N. E., Docker, M. F. and
(1996). Alternative procedures for assessing standardiza- Noakes,D.L.(2006).Effectsofpreservationonpigmenta-
tion in ceramic assemblages. American Antiquity 61 116– tion and length measurements in larval lampreys. Journal
126. of Fish Biology 68 991–1001.
Levene, H.(1949). Onamatchingproblemarising ingenet- Neuhauser, M. and Hothorn, L. A. (2000). Paramet-
ics. Ann. Math. Statist. 20 91–94. MR0029149 ric location-scale and scale trend tests based on Levene’s
Levene,H.(1953).Geneticequilibriumwhenmorethanone transformation. Comput. Statist. Data Anal. 33 189–200.
ecological niche is available. American Naturalist 87 331– Nygard, F. and Sandstrom, A. (1989). Income inequality
333. measuresbasedonsamplesurveys.J.Econometrics 4281–
Levene,H.(1960).Robusttestesforequalityofvariances.In 95.
Contributions to Probability and Statistics (I. Olkin, ed.) O’Brien,R.G.(1979).AgeneralANOVAmethodforrobust
278–292.StanfordUniv.Press,PaloAlto,CA.MR0120709 tests of additive models for variances. J. Amer. Statist.
Lim, T. S. and Loh, W. Y. (1996). A comparison of tests Assoc. 74 877–880. MR0556482
of equality of variances. Comput. Statist. Data Anal. 22 O’Gorman, T. (1997). A comparison of an adaptive two-
287–301. MR1410388 sample test tothe t-testand theranksum test. Commun.
Little, R. J. A.andRubin, D. A.(2002). Statistical Anal- Statist. Simulation and Comput. 26 1393–1411.
ysis with Missing Data. Wiley, New York.MR1925014 O’Neil, K. M., Penrod, S. D. and Bornstein, B. H.
Manly, B. F. J. and Francis, R. I. C. C. (2002). Testing (2003). Web-based research: Methodological variables’ ef-
formeanandvariancedifferenceswithsamplesfromdistri- fects on dropout and sample characteristics. Behavior Re-
butions that may be non-normal with unequal variances. search Methods Instruments and Computers 35 217–226.
J. Stat. Comput. Simul.72 633–646. MR1930485 O’Neil, M. E. and Mathews, K. L. (2000). A weighted
Marti, M. W. and Wissler, R. L. (2000). Be careful what least squares approach to Levene’s test of homogeneity of
youask for: Theeffect of anchorson personal injury dam- variance. Aust. N. Z. J. Stat. 42 81–100. MR1747464
ages awards. Journal of Experimental Psychology-Applied O’Neil, M. E and Mathews, K. L. (2002). Levene tests of
6 91–103. homogeneity of variance for general block and treatment
Martin, C. G. and Games, P. A. (1977). Tests for homo- designs. Biometrics 58 216–2224. MR1891382
geneity of variance: Non-normality and unequal samples. Pan, G.(2002).Confidenceintervalsforcomparingtwoscale
Journal of Educational Statistics 2 187–206. parameters based on levene statistics. J. Nonparametr.
Maurer,H.P.,Melchinger,A.E.andFrisch,M.(2007). Stat. 14 459–476. MR1919050
An incomplete enumeration algorithm for an exact test of Piegorsch, W. W. and Bailer, A. J. (2005). Analyzing
Hardy–Weinberg proportions with multiple alleles. Theo- Environmental Data. Wiley, Chichester, UK.
retical and Applied Genetics 115 393–398. Pepe, M.(2003).The Statistical Evaluation of Medical Tests
Mayhew, D. A., Comer, C. P. and Stargel, W. W. for Classification and Prediction. Wiley, Chichester, UK.
(2003). Food consumption and body weight changes with MR2260483
neotame, a new sweetener with intense taste: Differenti- Plourdes, A. and Watkins, G. C. (1998). Crude oil prices
ating effects of palatability from toxicity in dietary safety between 1985 and 1994: How volatile in relation to other
studies. Regulatory Toxicology and Pharmacology 38 124– commodities?ResourceandEnergyEconomics 20245–262.
143. Pollak, E.(2006). TheinfluenceofLevene’spaperonpoly-
Miao, W. and Gastwirth, J. L (2009). A new two stage morphisminsubdividedpopulations.InProceedings ofthe
adaptivenonparametrictestforpaireddifference.Statistics JointStatisticalMeetings,August,2006.Amer.Statist.As-
and Its Interface 2 213–221. MR2516072 soc., Alexandria, VA.
Miller, R. G.,Jr.(1968).Jacknifingvariances.Ann. Math. Robbennolt, J. K. and Studebaker, C. A. (1999). An-
Statist. 39 567–582. MR0223001 choring in the courtroom: The effect of caps on punitive
Miller, R. G., Jr. (1986). Beyond ANOVA: Basics of Ap- damages. Law and Human Behavior 23 353–373.
plied Statistics. Wiley, NewYork. MR0838087 Rosenbaum, P. R. (2002). Observational Studies. Springer,
Milliken, G. A. and Johnson, D. E. (1984). Analysis of New York.MR1899138
Messy Data, Vol.1. VanNostrand Reinhold, NewYork. Rosser, D.A.Murdoch, I.E.andCousens,S. N.(2004).
Mitchell-Olds, T.andRutledge, J. J.(1986).Quantita- Theeffectofopticaldefocusonthetest-retestvariabilityof
tivegeneticsinnaturalpopulations:Areviewofthetheory. visualacuitymeasurements.InvestigativeOphththalmology
The American Naturalist 127 379–402. and Visual Science 45 1076–1079.
THE IMPACT OFLEVENE’S TEST OFEQUALITY 19
Roth, A. J. (1983). Robust trend tests derived and simu- Vangel, M. G. (2005). A numerical approach to the
lated: Analogs of the Welch and Brown–Forsythe tests. J. Behrens–Fisher problem. J. Statist. Plann. Inference 130
Amer. Statist. Assoc. 78 1972–1980. MR0727583 341–350. MR2128012
Saks,M.J.,Hollinger,L. A.,Wissler,R.L.,Evans,D. Vincent, S. E. (1961). A test of homogeneity for or-
L. andHart, A.(1997). Reducingvariability in civil jury dered variances. J. Roy. Statist. Soc. Ser. B 23 195–206.
awards. Law and Human Behavior 21 243–256. MR0141190
Sant, R. and Cowan, A. R. (1994). Do dividends signal Waldo, D. R. and Goering, H. K. (1979). Insolubility of
earnings—thecaseofomitted dividends.Journal of Bank- proteins in ruminant feeds by 4 methods. Journal of Ani-
ing and Finance 18 1113–1133. mal Science 49 1560–1568.
Schaale, G. B. and Despain, D. J. (1996). Robustness of Weerhandi, S. (1995). ANOVA under unequal error vari-
variance tests for randomized complete block data. Com- ances. Biometrics 51 589–599.
mun. Statist. Simulation 25 961–977. Weinberg, W. (1908). Uber den Nachweis der Vererbung
Scheffe, H. (1959). The Analysis of Variance. Wiley, New beim Menschen.Jaresh. Verein f. Vaterl. Naturk. In Wut-
York.MR0116429 temberg 64 364–382.
Schom, C. B. and Kit, J. M. (1980). Genetic and Weir, B.(1996).Genetic Data Analysis II.Sinauer,Sunder-
environmental-control of avian embryos response to a ter- land, MA.
atogen. Poultry Science 59 473–478. Welch, B. L. (1938). The significance of the difference be-
Schucany, W. R. and Ng, H. K. T. (2006). Preliminary tween two means when the population variances are un-
goodness offittestsfornormality donotvalidatetheone- equal. Biometrika 29 350–362.
samplestudentt.Comm.Statist.52275–2286.MR2338931 Welch, B. L. (1951). On the comparison of several mean
Shorack,G.R.(1969).Testingandestimatingratiosofscale values: An alternative approach. Biometrika 38 330–336.
parameters. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 64 999–1013. MR0046617
Sprott, D. A.andFarewell, V. T.(1993).Thedifference Wilcox,R.R.(1989).Comparingthevariancesofdependent
between two normal means. Amer. Statist. 47 126–128. groups. Psychometrika 54 305–315.
Star,B.,Stoffels,R.J.andSpencer,H.G.(2007).Evo- Yitnosumarto,S.andO’Neill,M.E.(1986).OnLevene’s
lutionoffitnessandallelefrequenciesinapopulationwith testsofvariancehomogeneity.Aust.J.Statist.28230–241.
spatially heterogeneous selection pressures. Genetics 177 MR0860468
1743–1751. Zheng, G., Freidlin, B., Li, Z. and Gastwirth, J. L.
Tabain, M. (2001). Variability in frictive production and (2003).Choiceofscoresintrendtestsforcase-controlstud-
spectra: Implications for the hyper- and hypo- and quan- ies of candidate-gene associations. Biometrical Journal 45
taltheories of speech production. Language and Speech 44 335–348. MR1973305
57–94. Zimmerman, D. W. (2004). A note on preliminary tests
van Belle, G. (2002). Statistical Rules of Thumb. Wiley, of variances. British J. Math. Statist. Psych. 57 173–181.
New York.MR1886359 MR2087822