The Genomic HyperBrowser: inferential genomics
at the sequence level
Sandve et al.
Sandveetal.GenomeBiology2010,11:R121
Sandveetal.GenomeBiology2010,11:R121
SOFTWARE Open Access
The Genomic HyperBrowser: inferential genomics
at the sequence level
Geir K Sandve1, Sveinung Gundersen2, Halfdan Rydbeck1,3,5, Ingrid K Glad4, Lars Holden3, Marit Holden3,
Knut Liestøl1,5, Trevor Clancy2, Egil Ferkingstad3, Morten Johansen6, Vegard Nygaard6, Eivind Tøstesen6,
Arnoldo Frigessi3,7, Eivind Hovig1,2,3,6*
The immense increase in the generation of genomic scale data poses an unmet analytical challenge, due to a lack
of established methodology with the required flexibility and power. We propose a first principled approach to
statistical analysis of sequence-level genomic information. We provide a growing collection of generic biological
investigations that query pairwise relations between tracks, represented as mathematical objects, along the
Rationale offers flexible export of user-defined tracks and regions.
The combination of high-throughput molecular techni- Galaxy provides a richer, text-centric suite of operations.
ques and deep DNA sequencing is now generating EpiGraphpresentsasolidsetofstatisticalroutinesfocused
detailed genome-wide information at an unprecedented on analysis of user-defined case-control regions. The
scale. As complete human genomic information at the recently introduced UCSC Cancer Genomics Browser
detail of the ENCODE project [1] is being made avail- visualizesclinicalomicsdata,aswellasprovidingpatient-
able for the full genome, it is becoming possible to centricstatisticalanalyses.
query relations between many organizational and infor- We have developed novel statistical methodology and
mational elements embedded in the DNA code. These a robust software system for comparative analysis of
elements can often best be understood as acting in con- sequence-level genomic data, enabling integrative sys-
cert in a complex genomic setting, and research into tems biology, at the intersection of genomics, computa-
functional information typically involves integrational tional science and statistics. We focus on inferential
aspects. The knowledge that may be derived from such investigations, where two genomic annotations, or
analyses is, however, presently only harvested to a small tracks, are compared in order to find significant devia-
degree. As is typical in the early phase of a new field, tion from null-model behavior. Tracks may be defined
research is performed using a multitude of techniques by the researcher or extracted from the sizable library
and assumptions, without adhering to any established provided with the system. The system is open-ended,
principled approaches. This makes it more difficult to facilitating extensions by the user community.
compare, reproduce and realize the full implications of
the various findings. Results
The available toolbox for generic genome scale anno- Overview
tation comparison is presently relatively small. Among Oursystemisbasedonanabstractrepresentationofgen-
the more prominent tools are those embedded within eric genomic elements as mathematical objects.Hypoth-
the genome browsers, or associated with them, such as esesofinterestaretranslatedintomathematicalrelations.
Galaxy [2], BioMart [3], EpiGRAPH [4] and UCSC Can- Conceptsofrandomizationandtrackstructurepreserva-
cer Genomics Browser [5]. BioMart at this point mostly tionareusedtobuildcomplexproblem-specificnullmod-
elsoftherelationbetweentwotracks.Formalinferenceis
performed at a global or local scale, taking confounder
*Correspondence:ehovig@ifi.uio.no
1DepartmentofInformatics,UniversityofOslo,Blindern,0316Oslo,Norway tracksintoaccountwhennecessary(Figure1).
Fulllistofauthorinformationisavailableattheendofthearticle
©2010Sandveetal.;licenseeBioMedCentralLtd.ThisisanopenaccessarticledistributedunderthetermsoftheCreativeCommons
anymedium,providedtheoriginalworkisproperlycited.
Sandveetal.GenomeBiology2010,11:R121 Page3of13
Biological
Data US Track 1
inside?
Null model Statistical test
Track 1 (UP): Preserve all Monte Carlo Exact
Preserve segment lengths
Track 2 (US):
Randomize positions
Local results Global results
Results (or Test statistic, Test statistic
Mean of null dist.,
Mean of null dist.
Genome pos.
Masked away
Figure1Flowdiagramofthemathematicsofgenomictracks.Genomictracksarerepresentedasgeometricobjectsonthelinedefinedby
thebasepairsofthegenomesequence:(unmarked(UP)ormarked(MP))points,(unmarked(US)ormarked(MS))segments,andfunctions(F).
Thebiologistidentifiesthetwotrackstobecompared,andtheGenomicHyperBrowserdetectstheirtype.Thebiologicalquestionofinterestis
statedintermsofmathematicalrelationsbetweenthetypesofthetwotracks.Therelevantquestionsareproposedbythesystem.Thebiologist
thenselectsthequestionandneedstospecifythenullhypothesis.Forthispurposesheiscalledtodecideaboutwhatstructuresarepreserved
ineachtrack,andhowtorandomizetherest.Thereafter,theGenomicHyperBrowseridentifiestherelevantteststatistics,andcomputesactual
P-values,eitherexactlyorbyMonteCarlotesting.Resultsarethenreported,bothforaglobalanalysis,answeringthequestiononthewhole
genome(orareaofstudy),andforalocalanalysis.Here,theareaisdividedintobins,andtheanswerisgivenperbin.P-values,test-statistic,and
effectsizesarereported,astablesandgraphics.Significanceisreportedwhenfound,aftercorrectionformultipletesting.
Abstract representation of genomic elements reduced to points (single base pairs) on the genome.
A genome annotation track is a collection of objects of a The expression values of a gene, or the alleles of a SNP,
specific genomic feature, such as genes, with base-pair- are non-positional information parts and are attributed
specific locations from the start of chromosome 1 to the as ‘marks’ (numerical or categorical) to the correspond-
end of chromosome Y. Tracks vary in biological content, ing positional objects, that is, segments or points.
but also in the form of the information they contain. A Finally, a track of DNA melting assigns a temperature
track representing genes contains positional information to each base pair, describing a ‘function’ on the genome.
that can be reduced to ‘segments’ (intervals of base We thus define five genomic types: unmarked points
pairs) along the genome. A track of SNPs can be (UP), marked points (MP), unmarked segments (US),
Sandveetal.GenomeBiology2010,11:R121 Page4of13
marked segments (MS) and functions (F). These five types (see Additional file 2 for mathematical details).
types completely represent every one-dimensional Note that information reduction of a track to a simpler
geometry with marks. type(forexample,segmentstopoints)mayopenupaddi-
tionalanalyticalopportunities, and are handled dynami-
Catalogue of investigations callybythesystem-forexample,bytreatingsegmentsas
We translate biological hypotheses of interest into a theirmiddlepoints.
study of mathematical relations between genomic tracks,
leading to a large collection of possible generic Global and local inference
investigations. Aglobalanalysisinvestigatesifacertainrelationbetween
Consider the relation between histone modifications twotracksisfoundinadomainasawhole.Alocalanaly-
and gene expression, as investigated by visual inspection sisisbasedonpartitioningthedomainintosmallerunits,
in [6] (Figure S1 in Additional file 1). The question is called bins, and performing the analysis in each unit
whether the number of nucleosomes with a given his- separately.Localanalysiscanbeusedtoinvestigateifand
tone modification (represented as type UP), counted in where two tracks display significant concordant or dis-
a region around the transcription start site (TSS) of a cordant behavior, and thus be used to generate hypoth-
gene, correlates with the expression of the gene. The eses on the existence of biological mechanisms
second track is represented as marked segments (MS). explaining such perturbations. Local investigations may
This study of histone modifications and gene expres- also be used to examine global results in more detail.
sions can then be phrased as a generic investigation The length of each bin defines the scale of the analysis.
between a pair of tracks (T1, T2) of type UP and MS: Inference is then based on the computation of P-values,
are the number of T1 points inside T2 segments corre- locallyineachbin,orglobally,underthenullmodel.
lated with T2 marks? Figure 2 shows the results when To illustrate the value of local analysis, we consider
repeating this analysis for all histone modifications viral integration events in the human genome. These
studied in [6], and different regions around the TSS. See may result in disease and may also be a consequence of
Section 1 in Additional file 1 for a more detailed exam- retroviral gene therapy. Derse et al. [7] examined inte-
ple investigation, analyzing the genome coverage by gration for six types of retroviruses, with different viral
different gene definitions. integrases, thus having different integration sites (type
In the context of the catalogue of investigations, the UP). Using these data, we asked whether there are hot-
genomic types are minimal models of information con- spots of integration inside 2-kb flanking regions of pre-
tent. In the above example, nucleosome modifications dicted promoters (type US), that is, whether and where
are only used for counting, and thus considered the points are falling inside the segments more than
unmarked points (UP), even though they are typically expected by chance. Figure 3 displays the hotspots as
represented in the file system as marked or unmarked calculated P-values in bins across the genome, using the
segments. As the gene-related properties of interest are subset of murine leukemia virus (MLV) sites. We find
the genome segments in which the nucleosomes are locations of increased integration, thus generating
counted, as well as the corresponding gene expression hypotheses on the role of integration site sequences and
values (marks), T2 is of the type marked segments (MS). their context.
The choice of genomic type clarifies the content of a Local analysis may be used to avoid drawing incorrect
track, and also restricts which analyses are appropriate. conclusions from global investigations. Consider the
Investigations regarding the length of the elements of a repressivehistone modificationH3K27me3 asstudiedin
track are, for instance, relevant for genes, but not for [8]. Data from ChIP-chip experiments on mouse chro-
SNPs and DNA melting temperatures. mosome 17 were analyzed, finding that H3K27me3 falls
Thefivegenomictypesleadto15unorderedpairs(T1, in domains that are enriched in short interspersed
T2) of track type combinations, with each combination nuclearelement(SINE)anddepletedinlonginterspersed
defining a specific set of relevant analyses. For instance, nuclearelement(LINE)repeats.Usingthelineofenquiry
theUP-UScombinationdefinesseveral investigationsof raisedin[8],weaskedwhetherH3K27me3 regions(type
potentialinterest:aretheT1pointsfallinginsidetheT2 US) significantly overlap with SINE repeats (type US),
segments more than expected by chance? Do the points but here using formal statistical testing at the base pair
accumulatemoreatthebordersofthesegments,instead level.Thechosennullmodelonlyallowslocalrearrange-
ofbeingspreadevenlywithin?Dothepointsfallcloserto mentsofgenomicelements(formoredetail,seenextsec-
the segments than expected? A growing collection of tion).Thispreserveslocalbiologicalstructure,butallows
abstractmathematicalversionsofbiologicalquestionsis forsomecontrolledlevelofrandomness.
provided. We have currently implemented 13 different Performingthistestgloballyonthewholechromosome
analyses,filling8ofthe15possiblecombinationsoftrack 17 leads to rejection of the null hypothesis (P = 10-4),
inline with[8]. However,a local analysisleadstoa dee- shown in Table 1. The null model examined in the first
perunderstanding.Ata5-Mbpscale,nosignificantfind- column, which does not preserve the dependency
ings were obtained in any of the 19 bins (10% false between neighboring base pairs, produces lower
discovery rate (FDR)-corrected). The frequency of P-values. Unrealistically simple null models may thus
H3K27me3 segmentsvariesconsiderablyalong chromo- lead to false positives. In fact, two simulated indepen-
some17(FigureS2inAdditionalfile1),whichmaycause dent tracks may appear to have a significant association
the observed discrepancy between local and global if their individual characteristics are not appropriately
results. modeled (Section 2 in Additional file 1). In this example,
the choice between the biologically more reasonable null
Precise specification of null models models is difficult. The two other columns of Table 1
A crucial aspect of an investigation is the precise forma- include models that preserve more of the biological
lization of the null model, which should reflect the com- structure. The fact that these models do not lead to
bination of stochastic and selective events that clear rejection of the null hypotheses suggests that we in
constitutes the evolution behind the observed genomic this case lack strong evidence against the null hypoth-
feature. esis. Thus, examining the results obtained for a set of
Consider again the example of H3K27me3 versus different null models may often contribute important
repeating elements. In the chosen null model, we pre- information. The null model should reflect biological
served the repeat segments exactly, but permuted the realism, but also allow sufficient variation to permit the
positions of the H3K27me3 segments, while preserving construction of tests. A set of simulated synthetic tracks
segment and intersegment lengths. We then computed is provided as an aid for assessing appropriate null mod-
the total overlap between the segments, and used a els (Additional file 3).
Monte Carlo test to quantify the departure from the The Genomic HyperBrowser allows the user to define
null model. The effect of using alternative null models is anappropriatenullmodelbyspecifying(a)apreservation
(cid:88)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:79)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:71)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:46)
(cid:23)(cid:17)(cid:19)
(cid:22)(cid:17)(cid:19)
(cid:21)(cid:17)(cid:19)
(cid:20)(cid:17)(cid:19)
(cid:19)(cid:17)(cid:19)
(cid:20)(cid:17)(cid:19)(cid:239)
● ● ● ●● ●
(cid:20)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:28)(cid:46)(cid:22)(cid:43) (cid:21)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:23)(cid:46)(cid:22)(cid:43) (cid:20)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:19)(cid:21)(cid:46)(cid:23)(cid:43) (cid:22)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:23)(cid:46)(cid:22)(cid:43) (cid:20)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:23)(cid:46)(cid:22)(cid:43) (cid:20)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:24)(cid:46)(cid:37)(cid:21)(cid:43) (cid:61)(cid:36)(cid:21)(cid:43) (cid:20)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:26)(cid:21)(cid:46)(cid:22)(cid:43) (cid:22)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:25)(cid:22)(cid:46)(cid:22)(cid:43) (cid:20)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:25)(cid:22)(cid:46)(cid:22)(cid:43) (cid:20)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:28)(cid:26)(cid:46)(cid:22)(cid:43) (cid:20)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:21)(cid:53)(cid:22)(cid:43) (cid:21)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:21)(cid:53)(cid:22)(cid:43) (cid:21)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:22)(cid:53)(cid:23)(cid:43) (cid:21)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:28)(cid:46)(cid:22)(cid:43) (cid:21)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:28)(cid:26)(cid:46)(cid:22)(cid:43) (cid:21)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:26)(cid:21)(cid:46)(cid:22)(cid:43) (cid:22)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:19)(cid:21)(cid:46)(cid:23)(cid:43) (cid:22)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:28)(cid:46)(cid:22)(cid:43) (cid:22)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:28)(cid:26)(cid:46)(cid:22)(cid:43) (cid:22)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:26)(cid:21)(cid:46)(cid:22)(cid:43)
Sandveetal.GenomeBiology2010,11:R121 Page5of13
● (cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:3)(cid:78)(cid:69)(cid:3)(cid:88)(cid:83)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:80)
● (cid:20)(cid:3)(cid:78)(cid:69)(cid:3)(cid:88)(cid:83)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:80)
● (cid:20)(cid:3)(cid:78)(cid:69)(cid:3)(cid:71)(cid:82)(cid:90)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:80)
● (cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:3)(cid:78)(cid:69)(cid:3)(cid:71)(cid:82)(cid:90)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:80)
● (cid:54)(cid:76)(cid:74)(cid:81)(cid:76)(cid:73)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:3)(cid:31)(cid:3)(cid:19)(cid:17)(cid:19)(cid:24)
● (cid:49)(cid:82)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:74)(cid:81)(cid:76)(cid:73)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:87)
Figure2Generegulationbyhistonemodifications.Thecorrelationbetweenoccupancyof21differenthistonemodificationsandgene
expressionwithin4differentregionsaroundtheTSS(up-anddownstream,1and20kb),sortedbycorrelationin1-kbupstreamregions.Sixteen
of21histonemodificationsshowsignificantcorrelationin1-kbupstreamregions,whileinspectionoftheactualvalueofKendall’stau(TableS1
inAdditionalfile1)showsverylittleeffectsizefor6ofthese16(<0.1).
0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000
rule for each track, and (b) a stochastic process, describ- example, these preservation options for unmarked seg-
ing how the non-preserved elements should be rando- ments can be assumed: (i) preserve all, as in data; (ii)
mized. Preservation fixes elements or characteristics of preserve segments and intervals between segments, in
a track as present in the data. For each genomic type, number and length, but not their ordering; (iii) preserve
we have developed a hierarchy of less and less strict only the segments, in number and length, but not their
preservation rules, starting from preserving the entire position; (iv) preserve only the number of base pairs in
track exactly (Section 3 in Additional file 1). For segments, not segment position or number. Depending
detcerroc−RDF
Sandveetal.GenomeBiology2010,11:R121 Page6of13
Chromosomes
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 202122 X
Genome position (Mbps)
Figure3Viralintegrationsites.Plotoffalsediscoveryrate(FDR)-adjustedP-valuesalongthegenome,in30-Mbpbins.SmallP-valuesindicate
regionswheremurineleukemiavirus(MLV)integratesinside2-kbregionsaroundFirstEFpromotersmorefrequentlythanbychance.TheFDR
cutoffat10%isshownasadashedline.Theinsetofalocalarea(chromosome1:153,250,001-153,450,000)indicatesFirstEFpromotersexpanded
by2kbinbothdirections,MLVintegrationsites,RefSeqgenes,andunflankedFirstEFsites.
Table 1Significant binsofthe overlap test between H3K27me3segments andSINE repeats under various null models
Tracksto Preservetotalnumberofbase Preservesegmentlengths,but Preservesegmentandintersegmentlengths,but
randomize pairscovered randomizeposition randomizepositions
H3K27me3 10/19 1/19 0/19
SINE 10/19 5/19 4/19
H3K27me3and 10/19 5/19 4/19
ThenumberofsignificantbinsoftheoverlaptestbetweenH3K27me3segmentsandSINErepeatsunderdifferentpreservationandrandomizationrulesforthe
nullmodel.Thetestwasperformedin19binsonmousechromosome17,withtheMEFB1cellline.(UseoftheMEFFcelllinegavesimilarresults;TableS2in
Additionalfile1).Inthiscase,lesspreservationofbiologicalstructureleadstosmallerP-values.Also,randomizingtheSINEtrackgavesmallerP-valuesthan
randomizingtheH3K27me3track(orboth).
on the test statistic T, the level of preservation and the file 1). In the absence of a confounder, it is thus tempt-
chosen randomization, P-values are computed exactly, ing to conclude that there is an interesting relation
asymptotically or by standard or sequential Monte between DNA melting and coding regions, for which
Carlo [9,10]. functional implications have been previously discussed
[15,17,18].
Confounder tracks An alternative view is that the GC content, being
The relation between two tracks of interest may often higher inside exons than outside, contains information
be modulated by a third track. Such a third track may about exon location that is simply carried over, or
act as a confounder, leading, if ignored, to dubious con- decoded, by a melting analysis, thus acting as a confoun-
clusions on the relation between the two tracks of der. We have developed a methodology to investigate
interest. such situations further. Non-preserved elements of a
Consider the relation of coding regions to the melting null model can be randomized according to a non-
stability of the DNA double helix. Melting forks have homogeneous Poisson process with a base-pair-varying
been found to coincide with exon boundaries [11-15]. intensity, which can depend on a third (or several) mod-
Although few studies have reported statistical measures ulating genomic tracks [19,20]. We have defined an
of such correlation [11], the correlation is confirmed by algebra for the construction of intensities, where tracks
a straightforward investigation. Tracks (type F) repre- are combined, to allow rich and flexible constructions of
senting the probabilities of melting fork locations [16] in randomness (see Materials and methods).
Saccharomyces cerevisiae, were compared to tracks con- To investigate the influence of GC content on the
taining all exon boundaries (Figure 4). We asked if the exon-melting relation, we first generated a pair of
melting fork probabilities (P) were higher than expected custom tracks (type F), assigning to each base the value
at the exon boundaries (E) than elsewhere. In the null given by the GC content in the 100-bp left and right
model, the function was conserved, while points were flanking regions, respectively, weighted by a linearly
uniformly randomized in each chromosome. Monte decreasing function. These two functions were used,
Carlo testing was carried out on the chromosomes sepa- together with the exon boundary track, to create an
rately, giving P-values <0.0005 (Table S3 in Additional intensity curve proportional to the probability of exon
points, given GC content (see Materials and methods).
When performing the same analysis as before, but now
0.6 usingthenullmodelbasedonthisintensitycurve(rather
0.5 0.75 than assuming uniformity), a significant relationship
was found in only one yeast chromosome (Table S3 in
0.3 Additionalfile1).Inconclusion,thereisamelting-exon
0.2 0.25 relationship in yeast, but it may simply be a conse-
quenceofdifferencesinGCcontentattheexonbound-
141000 142000 143000 144000 145000 aries(highGCinside,low GCoutside),whichmay exist
for biological reasons not involving melting fork
locations.
Resolving complexity: system architecture
The Genomic HyperBrowser is an integrated, open-
source system for genome analysis. It is continually
evolving, supporting 28 different analyses for signifi-
cance testing, as well as 62 different descriptive
ytilibaborp
Sandveetal.GenomeBiology2010,11:R121 Page7of13
RR LRLRL R L GC
Position on chr I (bp)
Figure4Comparisonofexonboundarylocationsandmelting
forkprobabilitypeaks.Independentanalyseswerecarriedouton
leftandrightexonboundariesascomparedtoleft-andright-facing
meltingforks,respectively.Intheupperpart,dashedverticallines
indicateleft(L,red)andright(R,blue)exonboundaries.Inthe
lowerpart,probabilitiesofleft-andright-facingmeltingforks
appearasredandbluepeaks,respectively.Theblackcurveshows
theGCcontentina100-bpslidingwindow(valuesonrightaxis).
Sandveetal.GenomeBiology2010,11:R121 Page8of13
statistics. The system currently hosts 184,500 tracks. results are needed from other modules. The backbone
Most of these represent literature-based information, automatically checks whether the selected tracks meet
previously mostly utilized in network-based approaches the requirements, and if so, makes sure the intermediate
[21]. As natural language based text mining allows for computations are carried out in correct order. Redun-
the identification of a wide variety of biological entities, dant computations are avoided through the use of a
we have generated tracks representing genomic locations RAM-based memoization scheme. The system also pro-
associated with terms for the complete gene ontology vides a component-based framework for Monte Carlo
tree, all Medical Subject Heading (MeSH) terms, chemi- tests, where any test statistic can be combined with any
cals, and anatomy. relevant randomization algorithm, simplifying develop-
The system is implemented in Python [22], a high- ment. In addition, a framework for writing unit and
level programming language that allows fast and robust integration tests [24] is included. Further details on the
software development. A main weakness of Python com- system architecture are provided in Section 4 in Addi-
pared to languages like C++ is its slower performance. tional file 1.
Thus, a two-level architecture has been designed. At the
highest level, Python objects and logic have been used Step-by-step guide to HyperBrowser analysis
extensively to provide the required flexibility. At the One of the main goals of the Genomic HyperBrowser is
base-pair level, data are handled as low-level vectors, to facilitate sophisticated statistical analyses. A range of
combining near-optimal storage with efficient indexing, textual guides and screencasts are available in the help
allowing the use of vector operations to ensure speed. section at the web page, demonstrating execution of var-
Interoperability with standard file formats in the field ious analyses, how to work with private data, and more.
[23] is provided by parallel storage of original file for- To give an impression of the user experience, we here
mats and preprocessed vector representations. To provide a step-by-step guide to the analysis of broad
reduce the memory footprint of analyses on genome- local enrichment (BLOC) segments versus SINE repeats,
wide data, an iterative divide-and-conquer algorithm is as discussed in the section on ‘Precise specification of
automatically carried out when applicable. A further null models’.
speedup is achieved by memoizing intermediate results First, we open ‘hyperbrowser.uio.no’ in a web browser
to disk, automatically retrieving them when needed for and we select the ‘Perform analysis’ tool under ‘The
the same or different analyses on the same track(s) at Genomic HyperBrowser’ in the left-hand menu. We
any subsequent time, by any user. select the mouse genome (mm8) and continue to select
The system provides a web-based user interface with a tracks of interest. As the first track, we select ‘Chroma-
low entry point. However, the complex interdependen- tin’-’Histone modifications’-’BLOC segments’-’MEFB1’.
cies between the large body of available tracks, a num- These are the BLOC segments according to the algo-
ber of syntactically different analyses, and a range of rithm of Pauler et al. [8] for the MEFB1 cell line. As the
choices for constructing null models, all pose challenges second track, we select ‘Sequence’-’Repeating elements’-
to the concepts of simplicity and ease of use. In order to ’SINE’. Now that both tracks have been selected, a list
simplify the task of making choices, a step-wise of relevant investigations is presented in the interface
approach has been implemented, displaying only the (that is, investigations that are compatible with the
relevant options at each stage. This guided approach genomic types of the two tracks: US versus US). We
hides unnecessary complexities from the researcher, select the question of ‘Overlap?’ in the ‘Hypothesis test-
while confronting her with important design choices as ing’ category, and the options relevant for this analysis
needed. We rely on a dynamic system to infer appropri- are subsequently displayed in the interface. The different
ate options, aiding maintenance. The list of selectable choices for ‘Null model’ will produce the various num-
tracks is based on scans of available files on disk. The bers in Table 1 (six different choices are directly avail-
list of relevant questions is based on short runs of all able from the list. The other variants can be achieved by
implemented analyses, using a minimal part of the reversing the selection order of the tracks). The original
actual data from the selected tracks. For each analysis, a BLOC paper [8] focused on chromosome 17. We want
set of relevant options is defined. The dynamics of the to perform a local analysis along this chromosome,
system also provides automatic removal of analyses that avoiding the first three megabases that are centromeric.
fail to run, enhancing system robustness. Under‘Regionandscale’wethuschooseto‘Comparein’
Allowing extensibility along with efficiency and system acustomspecifiedregion, writing‘chr17:3m-’as‘Region
dynamics is a challenge. The complexities of the soft- of the genome’ and writing ‘5 m’ (5 megabases) as ‘Bin
ware solutions are hidden in the backbone of the size’.Clickingthe‘Startanalysis’buttonwillthenperform
system, simplifying coding of statistical modules. Each an appropriate statistical test according to the selected
module declares the data types it supports and which nullmodelassumption,andoutputtextualandgraphical
Sandveetal.GenomeBiology2010,11:R121 Page9of13
uploaded to the Galaxy history and then selected in the
first track menu as ‘– From history (bed, wig) –’-’[your
BLOC history element]’. For information on how to use
the Galaxy system, we refer to the Galaxy web site [25].
Discussion
The current leap in high-throughput sequencing tech-
nology is opening the way for a range of genome-wide
annotations beyond the presently abundant gene-centric
data. Not least, chromatin-related data are becoming
increasingly important for understanding higher-level
organization and regulation of the genome [26].
As is typical for a subfield that has not reached
maturation, analysis of new massive sequence-level data
is performed on a per-project basis. For instance, a
paper on the ENCODE project describes how inference
can be done by Monte Carlo testing, sampling bins for
one of the real tracks at random genome locations
under the null hypothesis [1]. Independently, a newer
study of histone modifications instead permuted bins of
data for one of the tracks [27]. Although genomic visua-
lization tools have been available for several years, few
generic tools exist for inference at the sequence level.
The following aspects distinguish our work from
currently available systems. First, we focus on genomic
information of a sequential nature, that is, with specific
base-pair locations on a genome, and thus not restricted
to only genes. Second, it focuses on the comparison of
pairs of genomic tracks, possibly taking others into
Figure 5 Screenshots of the Genomic HyperBrowser. (a)
account through the concept of intensity tracks. Third,
Screenshotofthemaininterfaceforselectinganalysisoptions.The
selectionsfortheexamplerelatingH3K27me3BLOCstoSINE all comparisons are performed using formal statistical
repeatshavebeenpre-selected.Intheinterface,theuserselectsa testing. Fourth, we provide analyses on any scale, from
genomebuildfollowedbytwotracks.Alistofrelevant genome-wide studies to miniature investigations on par-
investigationsisthenpresented,basedonthegenomictypesofthe
ticular loci. Fifth, we offer flexible choices of null models
twotracks.Afterselectinganinvestigation,theinterfacepresents
for exploration and choice where relevant. Finally, we
theuserwithachoiceofnullmodels,alternativehypothesesand
otherrelevantoptions.(b)Screenshotoftheresultsoftheanalysis. provide a user interface where the user describes the
Thequestionaskedbytheuserispresentedatthetop,inthiscase: data and the null models, while the system based on
‘Are‘MEFB1(BLOCsegments)’overlapping‘SINE(Repeating
this chooses the appropriate statistical test. Comparing
elements)’morethanexpectedbychance?’Afirst,simplisticanswer
this to the EpiGRAPH and Galaxy frameworks, which
isthenpresented:‘Nosupportfromdataforthisconclusioninany
bin’.Amorepreciseanswerfollows,detailinganyglobalP-values,a we believe are the closest existing systems, we find that
summaryoflocalFDR-correctedP-values,theparticularsetofnull both require substantial technical expertise when choos-
andalternativehypothesestested,inadditiontoalegendofthe ing the correct analysis and options. EpiGRAPH is
teststatisticthathasbeenused.FurtherlinkstoaPDFfile focused on a specific type of scenario that, according to
containingthestatisticaldetailsofthetest,andtomoredetailed
our cataloguing, amounts to the comparison of
tablesofrelevantstatisticsforboththeglobalandthelocalanalysis
unmarked points or segments versus categorically
arealsoincluded.Theglobalresulttablealsoincludeslinkstoplots
andexportopportunitiesfortheindividualstatistics. marked segments (with mark being case or control).
Galaxy provides a simple user interface, is rich in tools
for manipulating and analyzing datasets of diverse for-
results to a new Galaxy history element. Figure 5a mats, but has little support for formal statistical testing.
showstheuserinterfacecoveringallselectionsaboveand Note also that our system is tightly connected to Galaxy
Figure 5b shows the answer page that results from this and can make use of all the tools provided within
analysis. Galaxy.
This example assumed the BLOC segments were We provide tools for abstraction and cataloguing of
already in the system. If not, they could simply be what we believe are typical questions of broad interest.
Sandveetal.GenomeBiology2010,11:R121 Page10of13
The abstractions of genomic data, the proposing of pro- mapping of the three-dimensional organization of the
totype investigations, and the careful attention given to DNA and chromatin in the nucleus is still only in its
null models simplifies statistical inference for a range of beginnings. Consequently, the impact of this organiza-
possible research topics. Our approach invites research- tion on cell regulation is still largely unresolved. How-
ers to build relevant null models in a controlled manner, ever, the advent of methods like Hi-C [29] permits
so that specific biological assumptions can be realisti- detailed maps of three-dimensional DNA interactions to
cally represented by preservation, randomness and be combined with coarser methods of mapping of other
intensity based confounders. In addition, time used for elements. It appears that looking simultaneously at mul-
repetitive tasks like file parsing and calculation of tiple scales seems important for understanding the
descriptive statistics may be significantly reduced. dynamics of different functional aspects, from chromo-
Our system is highly extensible. The software is open somal domains down to the nucleosome scale. The need
source, inviting the community to add new investiga- for taking multiple scales into account has recently been
tions and tools. Attention has been given to compo- emphasized in both theoretical and analytical settings
nent-based coding and simple interfaces, facilitating [30,31]. Consequently, statistical genomics needs to con-
extensions of the system. sider several scales when proper analytical routines are
The highly specialized nature of many research inves- developed. Our approach is open to three-dimensional
tigations poses a major challenge for a generic system extensions, where the bins, which are flexibly selected in
such as the one presented here. Even though a range of the system, will become three-dimensional volumes, and
analyses and options are provided, chances are that at a local comparison will be within each volume. What
given level of complexity, functionality beyond what is appears much more complex is the level of dependence
provided by a generic system will be needed. Still, the of such volumes. But as the three-dimensional organiza-
time and effort used to reach such a point may be shor- tion of the genome will become increasingly known,
tened considerably, and it should in many cases be pos- appropriate volume topologies will be possible, so that
sible to meet demands through custom extensions. neighboring volumes representing three-dimensional
Genomic mechanisms commonly involve more than contiguity may be used as a basis for statistical tests.
two tracks, and the current focus on pair-wise interroga-
tions is limiting. Our methodology allows the incorpora- Conclusions
tion of additional tracks through the concept of an By introducing a generic methodology to genome analy-
intensity track that modulates the null hypothesis, acting sis, we find that a range of genomic data sets can be
as a confounder. However, the investigation of genuine represented by the same mathematical objects, and that
multi-track interactions is not yet possible within the a small set of such objects suffice to describe the bulk
system, as complex modeling and testing of multiple of current data sets. Similarly, a range of biological
dependencies will be required. investigations can be reduced to similar statistical ana-
Attention should be given to the trade-off between lyses. The need for precise control of assumptions and
fine resolution and lack of precision. When large bins other parameters can furthermore be met by generic
are considered, there may be too little homogeneity, concepts such as preservation and randomization, local
while small bins may contain too little data. There is analysis (binning) and confounder tracks.
also an unresolved trade-off relating to preservation of Applying these ideas on a sample set of genomic
tracks in null-hypotheses construction: too little preser- investigations underlines that the generic concepts fit
vation may give unrealistically small P-values, while too naturally to concrete analyses, and that such a generic
strong preservation may give too limited randomness. treatment may expose vagueness of biological conclu-
On a more specific note, a set of tissue-specific analy- sions or expose unforeseen issues. A re-analysis of the
tical options would be beneficial with respect to many relation between BLOC segments of histone modifica-
types of experimental data - for example, chromatin, tion and SINE repeats shows that conclusions regarding
expression and also gene subset tracks. Such options are direct overlap at the base-pair level depends on the ran-
now under development. domizations used in the significance analysis. Using bio-
Novel sequencing technologies are instrumental in logically reasonable null models, the correspondence
realizing the personalized genomes [28], and with them between BLOC segments and SINE repeats appears not
the task of identifying phenotype-associated information to be due to overlap at the base-pair level, but rather
contained in each genome. An imminent challenge in seems to be due to local variation in intensities of both
understanding cellular organization is that of the three tracks. This does not directly oppose the original con-
dimensions of the genome. While a number of genomes clusions, but brings further insight into the nature of
have been sequenced, and a number of important cellu- the relation. Similarly, an analysis of the relation
lar elements have been mapped on a linear scale, the between DNA melting and exon location confirms the
Sandveetal.GenomeBiology2010,11:R121 Page11of13
conclusion from previous studies that exon boundaries in Additional file 1 for the melting-exon example,
coincide with gradients of melting temperature. How- where each track depends on a function of the GC
ever, taking GC content into account as a possible con- content.
founder, the analysis does not suggest a direct
functional relation between melting and exons. Instead, Software system
it suggests that the association is due to the relationship The Genomic HyperBrowser [30] is implemented in
of both exons and melting tracks to GC content. Python[22],version2.7.Itrunsasastand-aloneapplica-
We believe the generic concepts and challenges identi- tiontightlyconnectedtotheGalaxyframework[2],using
fied by our work will trigger community efforts to theversiondated2010-10-04.Theuserinterfaceisbased
improve genome analysis methodology. The Genomic on Mako templates for Python [32], version 0.2.5, and
HyperBrowser demonstrates the feasibility of applying JavascriptlibraryJquery[33],version1.4.2. Thesoftware
our approach to large-scale genomic datasets, providing usesNumPy [34], version 1.5.1rc1, fordisk basedvector
a concrete basis for further research and development in mapping and fast vector operations. R [35], version
inferential genomics. We thus consider the solutions 2.10.1, is used for plotting and basic statistical routines,
presented here more like a start than an end of this using the RPy API [36], version 1.0.3. The software is
important endeavor. open source andfreely available,usingGPL [37] version
3, and can be downloaded from [30]. The Genomic
Materials and methods HyperBrowser runs on a dedicated Linux server, with
Statistical methods largecomputationsoffloadedtotheTitancluster[38].
Atrackisdefinedoverthewholegenomeoronlyinparts
ofit,maskingawaytherest.Inalocalanalysis,statistical Biological example: histone modifications versus gene
tests are performed in each bin with sufficient sample expression
size. Resizing of bins allows for localization of events Raw histone modification data [39] were preprocessed
(similarities, differences, and so on, between the two using the NPS (Nucleosome Positioning from Sequen-
tracks)withflexibleprecision.Preservationrulesleadsto cing) software [40], using peak detection, leading to
conditional P-values that are not necessarily ordered, nucleosome positioning information as short segments,
even if the preservation mechanism is incremental. Sta- treated as unmarked points (UP). Raw microarray
tisticaltestshavebeentriedonsimulateddata,alsowhen expression values [41] were used to represent gene
modelassumptionsarenotcompletelyfulfilled.Standard expression, in line with [6]. Direct comparison of the
MonteCarlorequiresdecidingon thenumberofMonte expression levels of individual probes is not generally
Carlo samples. We suggest at least two to five times the justified. As Barski et al. [6] compares sets of 1,000
number of tests, in order to allow for FDR adjustment. genes each, the direct comparison of values between
Additionally, we adopt sequential Monte Carlo, where groups may be justified by noise averaging (although not
the algorithm continues sampling until the observed discussed in [6]). Using Kendall’s rank correlation test, a
statistichasbeenexceededagivennumberoftimes(say similar reduction of error is obtained. Detailed correla-
20)[9].ThisgivesbetterestimatesofsmallP-valueswith tion values for the different histone modifications are
overall reduced computations. Intensity tracks are used given in Table S1 in Additional file 1. The distribution
todefinenon-standardnullhypothesis.Severalstrategies of histone modifications relative to TSS is given for two
forbuildingintensitycurvesaredescribedinSection3in different modifications in Figure S4 in Additional file 1.
Additional file 1. Intensity curves allow performing ran-
domizationsthatmimicanothertrack(oracombination Biological example: histone modifications versus
of tracks),usefultoaccountforconfoundingeffects.For repeating elements
unmarked points, the intensity curve can be any regular ChIP-seqdataonhistonemodification[39,42]werepre-
functionl (b)wherebisthepositionalong,say, achro- processed using the SICER software [43], which returns
mosome.Ifl (b)=c(constant),pointsareuniformlydis- clusters of neighboring nucleosomes as islands unlikely
tributed. As another example, l (b) can be a kernel to have appeared by chance, using an appropriate ran-
densityestimatebasedonthetrackofobservedpoints.In dom background model. These clusters are treated as
general,theintensityl (b)maydependonseveraldiffer- unmarked segments (US). The ChIP-chip data of
enttracksg ,g ,...,g ,throughafunctions,sothatl (b) H3K27me3positionswereobtaineddirectlyfromPauler
= s(g (b), g (b), ..., g (b)), for example, l (b) = c + Σbg et al. [8], and were preprocessed by them using their
1 2 k 0 i i
(b). An important case that requires a special choice of BLOCssoftware,whichreturnsbroadlocalenrichments,
intensitytrackiswhenthecomparisonbetweentwotracks alsotreatedasunmarkedsegments(US).Detailedoverlap
T and T might be confounded by a third, confounder, results between repeats and different histone modifica-
track T . This is discussed in further detail in Section 5 tionsourcesaregiveninTableS2inAdditionalfile1.
Sandveetal.GenomeBiology2010,11:R121 Page12of13
Biological example: exons versus DNA melting Competinginterests
The melting fork probability tracks P (x) and P (x) used EivindHovigisashareholderofPubGene,Inc.Allotherauthorsdeclarethat
L R theyhavenocompetinginterests.
in this study were obtained using the Poland-Scheraga
model [44]. To make the correction for GC content, a Received:27August2010 Revised:8December2010
pair of GC-based function tracks, L(x) and R(x), were Accepted:23December2010 Published:23December2010
created using a moving window approach. Let E (E )
L R References
be the left (right) exon boundaries. For testing the melt-
1. TheENCODE(ENCyclopediaOfDNAElements)Project. Science2004,
ing-exon relation in tracks (E , P ), an intensity track 306:636-640.
was created based on L(x), R(x) and E (and similarly for 2. GiardineB,RiemerC,HardisonRC,BurhansR,ElnitskiL,ShahP,ZhangY,
L. BlankenbergD,AlbertI,TaylorJ,MillerW,KentWJ,NekrutenkoA:Galaxy:
tracks (E , P )). See Section 5 in Additional file 1 for
R R aplatformforinteractivelarge-scalegenomeanalysis.GenomeRes2005,
more details. 15:1451-1455.
3. PruessM,KerseyP,ApweilerR:TheIntegr8project–aresourcefor
genomicandproteomicdata.InSilicoBiol2005,5:179-185.
Additional material 4. BockC,HalachevK,BuchJ,LengauerT:EpiGRAPH:user-friendlysoftware
forstatisticalanalysisandpredictionof(epi)genomicdata.GenomeBiol
2009,10:R14.
Additionalfile1:Supplementarymaterial.Miscellaneous
5. ZhuJ,SanbornJZ,BenzS,SzetoC,HsuF,KuhnRM,KarolchikD,ArchieJ,
supplementarymaterial:genecoverageexample.Ontheimportanceof
LenburgME,EssermanLJ,KentWJ,HausslerD,WangT:TheUCSCCancer
realisticnullmodels.Onmathematicsofgenomictracks.Onsystem
GenomicsBrowser.NatMethods2009,6:239-240.
architecture.OnExonDNAmeltingexample.Supplementaryfiguresand
6. BarskiA,CuddapahS,CuiK,RohTY,SchonesDE,WangZ,WeiG,
tables.
ChepelevI,ZhaoK:High-resolutionprofilingofhistonemethylationsin
Additionalfile2:Statisticaltests.Detaileddescriptionofthestatistical thehumangenome.Cell2007,129:823-837.
testsimplementedinthesoftwaresystem. 7. DerseD,CriseB,LiY,PrinclerG,LumN,StewartC,McGrathCF,HughesSH,
Additionalfile3:Supplementarynoteonsimulation.Descriptionof MunroeDJ,WuX:HumanT-cellleukemiavirustype1integrationtarget
basicalgorithmsforsimulatingsynthetictracks,usedtoassessstatistical sitesinthehumangenome:comparisonwiththoseofother
tests. retroviruses.JVirol2007,81:6731-6741.
8. PaulerFM,SloaneMA,HuangR,ReghaK,KoernerMV,TamirI,SommerA,
AszodiA,JenuweinT,BarlowDP:H3K27me3formsBLOCsoversilent
genesandintergenicregionsandspecifiesahistonebandingpattern
onamouseautosomalchromosome.GenomeRes2009,19:221-233.
Abbreviations
9. BesagJ,CliffordP:SequentialMonteCarlop-values.Biometrika1991,
BLOC:broadlocalenrichment;bp:basepair;F:function;FDR:falsediscovery
78:301-304.
rate;kb:kilobasepairs;LINE:longinterspersednuclearelement;Mbp:mega
10. ManlyBFJ:Randomization,BootstrapandMonteCarloMethodsinBiology
basepairs;MP:markedpoint;MS:markedsegment;SINE:shortinterspersed
BocaRaton,FL:ChapmanandHall;2007.
nuclearelement;SNP:single-nucleotidepolymorphism;TSS:transcription
11. JostD,EveraersR:GenomewideapplicationofDNAmeltinganalysis.J
startsite;UP:unmarkedpoint;US:unmarkedsegment.
PhysCondensedMatter2009,21:034108.
12. KingGJ:Stability,structureandcomplexityofyeastchromosomeIII.
Acknowledgements
NucleicAcidsRes1993,21:4239-4245.
WegratefullyacknowledgeChIP-chipdataprovisionfromFlorianMPauler,
13. LiuF,TostesenE,SundetJK,JenssenTK,BockC,JerstadGI,ThillyWG,
andhelpfulcommentsonthemanuscriptfromMagnusLieHetland,Sylvia
HovigE:Thehumangenomicmeltingmap.PLoSComputBiol2007,3:e93.
RichardsonandHåvardRue.GroNilsenisacknowledgedforsomeplotting
14. SuyamaA,WadaA:Correlationbetweenthermalstabilitymapsand
functions,andPeterWiedswangforadministrativeassistance.Wethankthe
geneticmapsofdouble-strandedDNAs.JTheorBiol1983,105:133-145.
ScientificComputingGroupatUSITforprovidingfriendlyandhelpful
15. YeramianE:GenesandthephysicsoftheDNAdouble-helix.Gene2000,
assistanceonsystemadministration.WealsothankPubGene,Inc.forkind
255:139-150.
assistanceinthedevelopmentofliteraturetracks.Additionalfundingwas
16. TøstesenE,SandveGK,LiuF,HovigE:SegmentationofDNAsequences
kindlyprovidedbyEMBIO,UiOandHelseSør-Øst.Thisworkwasperformed
intotwostateregionsandmeltingforkregions.JPhysCondensedMatter
inassociationwith‘StatisticsforInnovation’,aCentreforResearch-Based
2009,21:034109.
InnovationfundedbytheResearchCouncilofNorway.
17. CarlonE,MalkiML,BlosseyR:Exons,introns,andDNAthermodynamics.
PhysRevLett2005,94:178101.
Authordetails
18. HanaiR,SuyamaA,WadaA:Vestigesoflostintronsinthethermal
1DepartmentofInformatics,UniversityofOslo,Blindern,0316Oslo,Norway.
stabilitymapofDNA.FEBSLett1988,226:247-249.
2DepartmentofTumorBiology,TheNorwegianRadiumHospital,Oslo
19. CoxDR,IshamV:PointProcessesBocaRaton,FL:ChapmanandHall;1980.
UniversityHospital,Montebello,0310Oslo,Norway.3StatisticsForInnovation,
20. GrandellJ:MixedPoissonProcessesBocaRaton,FL:ChapmanandHall;1997.
NorwegianComputingCenter,0314Oslo,Norway.4Departmentof
21. JenssenTK,LaegreidA,KomorowskiJ,HovigE:Aliteraturenetworkof
Mathematics,UniversityofOslo,Blindern,0316Oslo,Norway.5Centrefor
humangenesforhigh-throughputanalysisofgeneexpression.Nat
CancerBiomedicine,TheNorwegianRadiumHospital,OsloUniversity
Genet2001,28:21-28.
Hospital,Montebello,0310Oslo,Norway.6InstituteforMedicalInformatics,
TheNorwegianRadiumHospital,OsloUniversityHospital,Montebello,0310
html].
Oslo,Norway.7DepartmentofBiostatistics,InstituteofBasicMedical
23. KentWJ,SugnetCW,FureyTS,RoskinKM,PringleTH,ZahlerAM,
Sciences,UniversityofOslo,Blindern,0317Oslo,Norway.
HausslerD:ThehumangenomebrowseratUCSC.GenomeRes2002,
12:996-1006.
Authors’contributions
24. BeckK:TestDrivenDevelopmentLondon:Addison-WesleyProfession;2002.
GKS,AFandEHconceivedtheapproach,GKS,SGandMJdevelopedthe
software,GKS,SG,HR,TC,VNandEHdevelopednoveltracktypes,IKG,LH,
26. Lieberman-AidenE,vanBerkumNL,WilliamsL,ImakaevM,RagoczyT,
MH,KL,EFandAFdevelopedthestatisticalconcepts,GKS,SGandHRtested
TellingA,AmitI,LajoieBR,SaboPJ,DorschnerMO,SandstromR,
andvalidatedthesystem,andGKS,SG,HR,ETandEHdevelopedthe
BernsteinB,BenderMA,GroudineM,GnirkeA,StamatoyannopoulosJ,
biologicalexamples.Allauthorsparticipatedinthemanuscriptdevelopment,
MirnyLA,LanderES,DekkerJ:Comprehensivemappingoflong-range
andreadandapprovedthefinalmanuscript.
Sandveetal.GenomeBiology2010,11:R121 Page13of13
interactionsrevealsfoldingprinciplesofthehumangenome.Science InvitationalDatabase(H-InvDB),acomprehensiveannotationresource
2009,326:289-293. forhumangenesandtranscripts.NucleicAcidsRes2008,36:D793-799.
27. WangZ,ZangC,RosenfeldJA,SchonesDE,BarskiA,CuddapahS,CuiK,
acetylationsandmethylationsinthehumangenome.NatGenet2008, Citethisarticleas:Sandveetal.:TheGenomicHyperBrowser:inferential
40:897-903. genomicsatthesequencelevel.GenomeBiology201011:R121.
29. Lieberman-AidenE,vanBerkumNL,WilliamsL,ImakaevM,RagoczyT,
TellingA,AmitI,LajoieBR,SaboPJ,DorschnerMO,SandstromR,
BernsteinB,BenderMA,GroudineM,GnirkeA,StamatoyannopoulosJ,
MirnyLA,LanderES,DekkerJ:Comprehensivemappingoflong-range
interactionsrevealsfoldingprinciplesofthehumangenome.Science
2009,326:289-293.
30. NaumovaN,DekkerJ:Integratingone-dimensionalandthree-
dimensionalmapsofgenomes.JCellSci123:1979-1988.
31. KnochTA,GokerM,LohnerR,AbuseirisA,GrosveldFG:Fine-structured
multi-scalinglong-rangecorrelationsincompletelysequencedgenomes
-features,origin,andclassification.EurBiophysJ2009,38:757-779.
34. OliphantTE:InGuidetoNumPy.Editedby:SpanishForkUT.Trelgol
Publishing;2006:.
35. TeamR:R:ALanguageandEnvironmentforStatisticalComputingVienna:
Austria;RFoundationforStatisticalComputing;2006.
rpy.sf.net].
39. BarskiA,ZhaoK:GenomiclocationanalysisbyChIP-Seq.JCellBiochem
2009,107:11-18.
40. ZhangY,ShinH,SongJS,LeiY,LiuXS:Identifyingpositioned
nucleosomeswithepigeneticmarksinhumanfromChIP-Seq.BMC
Genomics2008,9:537.
41. SuAI,WiltshireT,BatalovS,LappH,ChingKA,BlockD,ZhangJ,SodenR,
HayakawaM,KreimanG,CookeMP,WalkerJR,HogeneschJB:Ageneatlas
ofthemouseandhumanprotein-encodingtranscriptomes.ProcNatl
AcadSciUSA2004,101:6062-6067.
42. MikkelsenTS,KuM,JaffeDB,IssacB,LiebermanE,GiannoukosG,AlvarezP,
BrockmanW,KimTK,KocheRP,LeeW,MendenhallE,O’DonovanA,
PresserA,RussC,XieX,MeissnerA,WernigM,JaenischR,NusbaumC,
LanderES,BernsteinBE:Genome-widemapsofchromatinstatein
pluripotentandlineage-committedcells.Nature2007,448:553-560.
43. ZangC,SchonesDE,ZengC,CuiK,ZhaoK,PengW:Aclustering
approachforidentificationofenricheddomainsfromhistone
modificationChIP-Seqdata.Bioinformatics2009,25:1952-1958.
44. PolandD,ScheragaHA:TheoryofHelix-CoilTransitionsinBiopolymersNew
York:AcademicPress;1970.
45. PruittKD,HarrowJ,HarteRA,WallinC,DiekhansM,MaglottDR,SearleS,
FarrellCM,LovelandJE,RuefBJ,HartE,SunerMM,LandrumMJ,AkenB,
AylingS,BaertschR,Fernandez-BanetJ,CherryJL,CurwenV,DicuccioM,
KellisM,LeeJ,LinMF,SchusterM,ShkedaA,AmidC,BrownG,
DukhaninaO,FrankishA,HartJ,etal:Theconsensuscodingsequence
(CCDS)project:Identifyingacommonprotein-codinggenesetforthe
humanandmousegenomes.GenomeRes2009,19:1316-1323.
46. PruittKD,TatusovaT,KlimkeW,MaglottDR:NCBIReferenceSequences:
currentstatus,policyandnewinitiatives.NucleicAcidsRes2009,37:
D32-36.
47. HubbardT,BarkerD,BirneyE,CameronG,ChenY,ClarkL,CoxT,CuffJ,
CurwenV,DownT,DurbinR,EyrasE,GilbertJ,HammondM,HuminieckiL, Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
KasprzykA,LehvaslaihoH,LijnzaadP,MelsoppC,MonginE,PettettR, and take full advantage of:
PocockM,PotterS,RustA,SchmidtE,SearleS,SlaterG,SmithJ,
SpoonerW,StabenauA,etal:TheEnsemblgenomedatabaseproject.
• Convenient online submission
NucleicAcidsRes2002,30:38-41.
48. WilmingLG,GilbertJG,HoweK,TrevanionS,HubbardT,HarrowJL:The • Thorough peer review
vertebrategenomeannotation(Vega)database.NucleicAcidsRes2008,
• No space constraints or color figure charges
36:D753-760.
49. YamasakiC,MurakamiK,FujiiY,SatoY,HaradaE,TakedaJ,TaniyaT, • Immediate publication on acceptance
SakateR,KikugawaS,ShimadaM,TaninoM,KoyanagiKO,BarreroRA, • Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
GoughC,ChunHW,HabaraT,HanaokaH,HayakawaY,HiltonPB,
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
KanekoY,KannoM,KawaharaY,KawamuraT,MatsuyaA,NagataN,
NishikataK,NodaAO,NurimotoS,SaichiN,SakaiH,etal:TheH-
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit