]NM.oib-q[
1v7821.2080:viXra
The diffusive influx and carrier efflux have a
strong effect on the bistability of the
Escherichia coli
Jason T. Noel
Department of Chemical Engineering, University of Florida, Gainesville,
FL 32611-6005.
Sergei S. Pilyugin
Department of Mathematics, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL 32611-8105.
Atul Narang
Department of Chemical Engineering, University of Florida, Gainesville,
FL 32611-6005.
In the presence of gratuitous inducers, the lac operon of Escherichia coli exhibits
bistability. Most models in the literature assume that the inducer enters the cell
via the carrier (permease), and exits by a diffusion-like process. The diffusive influx
and carrier efflux are neglected. However, analysis of the data shows that in non-
induced cells, the diffusive influx is comparable to the carrier influx, and in induced
cells, the carrier efflux is 7 times the diffusive efflux. Since bistability entails the
coexistence of steady states corresponding to both non-induced and induced cells,
neitheroneofthesefluxescanbeignored.Here,weformulateamodelaccountingfor
both fluxes. We show that: (a) The thresholds of bistability are profoundly affected
by both fluxes. The diffusive influx reduces the on threshold by enhancing inducer
accumulation in non-induced cells. The carrier efflux increases the off threshold by
decreasing inducer accumulation in inducedcells. (b) Simulations of the model with
experimentally measured parameter values are in good agreement with the data for
IPTG. However, there are discrepancies with respect to the data for TMG. They
are most likely due to two features missing from the model, namely, the variation
of the inducer exclusion effect and the specific growth rate with the lactose enzyme
levels. (c) The steady states and thresholds obtained in the presence of both fluxes
arewellapproximated bysimpleanalytical expressions.Theseexpressionsprovidea
rigorous framework for the preliminary design of the lac genetic switch in synthetic
biology.
Key words: Mathematical model, induction, lactose operon, hysteresis
Preprint submitted to Elsevier October 23, 2018
1 Introduction
The lac operon is a paradigm of the mechanisms controlling gene regulation.
This interest was stimulated by the hope that insights into the mechanism
of lac induction would shed light on the central problem of development,
namely, the mechanism by which genetically identical cells acquire distinct
phenotypes (Monod, 1947; Spiegelman, 1948).
Many of the early studies of the lac operon were concerned with the kinetics
of enzyme induction in the presence of gratuitous inducers, such as thiomethyl
galactoside (TMG) and isopropyl thiogalactoside (IPTG). The use of such
inducers was important because they enabled the kinetics of enzyme synthesis
to be separated from the masking effects of dilution. This was achieved by
growingthecellsinamediumcontainingagratuitousinducer(whichpromotes
enzyme synthesis, but not growth), and non-galactosidic carbon sources, such
as succinate, glycerol, and glucose (which support growth, but not enzyme
synthesis).
These early studies showed that the enzyme synthesis rate was not uniquely
determinedbythecompositionofthemedium.IfglucoseandTMGwereadded
simultaneously to a culture of E. coli ML30 growing on succinate, there was
almost no synthesis of β-galactosidase; however, if glucose was added 20 mins
after the addition of TMG, β-galactosidase was synthesized for up to 130
generations (Fig. 1a). Thus, enzyme synthesis is bistable: Pre-induced cells
remain induced, and non-induced cells remain non-induced.
Cohn and Horibata found that the existence of bistability depended crucially
upon the existence of lac permease (LacY): It disappeared in lacY− (cryp-
tic), but not lacZ − , mutants (Cohn and Horibata, 1959). They proposed that
bistability occurred due to the destabilizing effect of the positive feedback
generated by lac permease. More precisely, they observed that:
This permease not onlyaccumulates galactosides intracellularly, but itssyn-
thesis is induced by the galactosides, which it accumulates. The permease
may therefore be described as a“self-inducing”system, for which a general-
ized schema might be drawn.
Thisgeneralizedschema,showninFig.1b,waspostulatedbeforethemolecular
Email address: narang@che.ufl.edu(Atul Narang).
1 Corresponding author. Tel: + 1-352-392-0028; fax: + 1-352-392-9513
Action of enzyme
Substrate Product
Synthesis of enzyme
Figure 1. (a) Bistability during growth of E. coli ML30 on succinate, glucose, and
TMG (Cohn and Horibata, 1959, Fig. 4). If glucose and TMG are added simultane-
ously to a culture growing on succinate, there is no β-galactosidase synthesis ((cid:7)). If
glucose is added 20 min after the addition of TMG, the enzyme is synthesized ((cid:4))
at a rate that is 50% of the rate observed when only TMG is added to the culture
(N).(b)KineticschemeproposedbyCohnandHoribata(Cohn and Horibata,1959,
p. 611). Here, the enzyme represents lac permease; the substrate and product refer
to extracellular and intracellular TMG, respectively.
mechanismofinductionwasdiscoveredbyJacobandMonod(Jacob and Monod,
1961).
Some years after the discovery of the induction mechanism, Babloyantz and
Sanglier formulated a mathematical model, which was based on the Cohn-
Horibata scheme, but described enzyme induction in terms of the now well
established Jacob-Monod mechanism (Babloyantz and Sanglier, 1972). They
showed that the model yielded the bistability observed in experiments. Chung
and Stephanopoulos formulated a similar model, the main difference being
that repressor-operator and repressor-inducer binding were assumed to be in
quasi-equilibrium (Chung and Stephanopoulos, 1996). This model is given by
the equations
= r −r −r x, r ≡ V e , r ≡ k (x−s). (1)
s x g s s x x
= r+ −r − −r e, r+ ≡ V x , r − ≡ k − e (2)
dt e e g e e 1+α+K2x2 e e
where x and s denote the intracellular and extracellular TMG concentrations,
respectively; e denotes the permease activity; r is the specific growth rate on
the non-galactosidic carbon source(s); r is the specific rate of TMG uptake by
the permease; r is the net specific rate of TMG efflux by diffusion; and r+,r −
Figure 2. Bistability of the lac operon during growth of E. coli K12 MG1655 on
succinateandsuccinate+glucose(Ozbudak et al.,2004,Figs.2band2c).(a)Bista-
bility during growth on succinate and various concentrations of extracellular TMG.
The (normalized) green fluorescence provides a measure of the steady state activ-
ity of the lac operon. The upper (resp., lower) panel shows the green fluorescence
observed when an induced (resp., non-induced) inoculum is grown exponentially on
a mixture of succinate and various concentrations of extracellular TMG. Bistabil-
ity occurs at extracellular TMG concentrations between the off and on thresholds
of 3 and 30 µM, respectively, defined as the extracellular TMG concentrations at
which <5% of the cells are in their initial state. (b) Bistability persists even if glu-
cose is added to the mixture of succinate and TMG. The lower (△) and upper (N)
curves show the off and on thresholds observed at various glucose concentrations.
The dashed curves show the thresholds predicted by the model with the parameter
values in Table 1.
denote the specific rates of permease synthesis and degradation, respectively.
The expression for r+ is based on a molecular model which assumes that the
lac operon contains one operator, and the lac repressor contains two identi-
cal inducer-binding sites (Yagil and Yagil, 1971). The parameter, K , is the
association constant for the repressor-inducer binding; and α is jointly pro-
portional to the intracellular repressor level and the association constant for
repressor-operatorbinding. Evidently, α isameasure oftherepression,defined
as the ratio, r+| / r+| .
e x→∞ e x=0
Although the experiments done by Cohn and coworkers provided clear evi-
dence of bistability during growth on TMG and succinate/glucose, they did
notinvestigatethevariationoftheenzymelevels withTMGandglucoselevels,
and the effect of glucose on the key molecular mechanisms of lac regulation,
namely, CRP-cAMP activation and inducer exclusion. Recently, Ozbudak et
al. addressed these issues by inserting two reporter operons into the chromo-
some of Escherichia coli K12 MG1655 (Ozbudak et al., 2004).
• Thereporterlac operon,placedunder thecontrolofthelac promoter,coded
for green fluorescent protein (GFP) instead of the lac enzymes. Thus, the
GFP intensity of a cell provided a measure of the lac enzyme level.
• The reporter gat operon, placed under the control of the constitutive gat
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
Scaled RFP intensity
Figure 3. Variation of the scaled red and green fluorescence intensities during ex-
ponential growth of E. coli K12 MG1655 in the presence of succinate, TMG, and
various concentrations of glucose. (a) The scaled red and green fluorescence inten-
sities are identical at all glucose concentrations (Ozbudak et al., 2004, Fig. 3b).
(b) The scaled red fluorescence intensity decreases with the concentration of glu-
cose (Ozbudak et al., 2004, Fig. 3a). The curve shows the fit to Eq. (25).
promoter, coded for the red fluorescent protein (RFP) instead of the gat
enzymes. The RFP intensity of a cell provided a measure of its CRP-cAMP
level.
To assess the effect of various TMG and glucose levels on lac bistability, they
exposed non-induced and induced cells to a fixed concentration of succinate,
and various concentrations of TMG and glucose. It was observed that:
(1) When the cells were grown in the presence of succinate and various con-
centrations of TMG, they exhibited bistability (Fig. 2a).
(2) This bistability persisted even if glucose was added to the mixture of
succinate and TMG, but the thresholds increased with the concentration
of extracellular glucose (Fig. 2b).
They also showed that both observations were mirrored by the bifurcation di-
agram for the modified Chung-Stephanopoulos model, obtained by neglecting
the diffusive influx (i.e., the term, k s, in Eq. (1) was assumed to be zero).
To quantify the lac repression due to glucose-mediated reduction of CRP-
cAMP levels, they measured the average green and red fluorescence intensi-
ties of cells grown overnight in a medium containing a high concentration of
TMG, a fixed concentration of succinate, and various concentrations of glu-
cose. They found that the green and red fluorescence intensities, scaled by the
corresponding values observed in a medium containing no glucose, were equal
at all glucose concentrations (Fig. 3a). Furthermore, the normalized RFP in-
tensity decreased 5-fold at saturating glucose concentrations (Fig. 3b). Ozbu-
dak et al. assumed that the GFP intensity is proportional to the maximum
lac induction rate, and the RFP intensity is proportional to the CRP-cAMP
level. Given these two assumptions, it was concluded from Figs. 3a and b
Figure4.Thekinetics of inductionanddiffusiveinfluxin thecrypticmutant,E. coli
ML3 (Herzenberg, 1959, Figs. 1 and 4). (a) Variation of the scaled induction rate
with extracellular TMG and IPTG levels. The full curves show the fits to the data
obtained with Eq. (3) and the parameter values α = 40, αˆ = 1200, K
for IPTG, and K
= 470 µM for TMG. (b) Existence and kinetics of the diffusive
influx. The cryptic mutant hydrolyzes ONPG, and the hydrolysis rate increases
linearly with the extracellular TMG level. The permease activity is expressed in
−1.
that the maximum lac induction rate is proportional the CRP-cAMP level,
and decreases 5-fold at saturating concentrations of glucose. This is somewhat
higher than the maximum possible cAMP-mediated repression in E. coli K12
MG1655. Recently, Kuhlman et al. found that during growth of this strain on
saturating concentrations of 0.5% glucose and 1 mM IPTG, variation of the
extracellular cAMP level from 0 to 10 mM produces no more than a 3-fold
change in lac expression (Kuhlman et al., 2007, Fig. 1B).
The modified Chung-Stephanopoulosmodel considered by Ozbudak et al. pro-
vides an excellent point of departure for quantifying lac bistability. However,
it suffers from three deficiencies.
The induction kinetics are incorrect The Yagil and Yagil model of lac
induction is not consistent with the structure of the lac operon and repres-
sor. Indeed, the lac operon contains two auxiliary operators, O and O , in
addition to the main operator, O , and the lac repressor contains four (not
two) inducer-binding sites (Lewis, 2005). Furthermore, these structural fea-
tures play a crucial role in the formation of DNA loops, the key determinants
oflac repression(Oehler et al.,1990,1994)andinduction(Oehler et al.,2006).
Molecular models taking due account of the 3 operators and 4 inducer-binding
sites yield the lac induction rate
where K is the association constant for repressor-inducer binding, and α,αˆ
arerelatedtothetherepressionstemmingfromrepressor-operatorbindingand
DNAlooping,respectively (Kuhlman et al.,2007;Narang,2007).Equation(3)
yields good fits to the induction curves obtained with various strains (Narang,
2007, Fig. 11) and gratuitous inducers (Fig. 4a).
The diffusive influx is absent It is well known that there is a diffusive
influx. Herzenberg showed the existence of the diffusive influx by measuring
the ONPG hydrolysis rate in wild-type and cryptic cells.2 He found that even
cryptic cells hydrolyzed ONPG, andthehydrolysis rateincreased linearlywith
the extracellular ONPG concentration (Fig. 4b). It follows that gratuitous
inducers can enter the cells by a permease-independent mechanism, which can
formally be described by diffusive (first-order) kinetics.
Now, it may be permissible to neglect the diffusive influx in induced cells
because such cells contain such large permease levels that the inducer is im-
ported almost entirely by the permease. However, non-induced cells contain
only ∼0.1% of the permease in induced cells (Maloney and Wilson, 1973). In
such cells, it seems unlikely that the diffusive influx is negligible. As we show
below, this conjecture is supported by the data.
The carrier efflux is absent The existence of the carrier efflux was sug-
gested in early studies with gratuitous inducers (Koch, 1964). However, Mal-
oney and Wilson were the first to quantify its effect (Maloney and Wilson,
1973). To this end, they measured the steady state intracellular TMG levels
in cells induced to various levels, and then exposed to chloramphenicol plus
0.24 mM extracellular TMG. The data obtained, shown in Fig. 5a, cannot
be reconciled with models, such as the Chung-Stephanopoulos model, that
account only for the carrier influx and diffusion. Indeed, since enzyme synthe-
sis is blocked in the presence of chloramphenicol, the Chung-Stephanopoulos
model implies that the steady state intracellular TMG level is given by the
expression
x ≈ s+ , V ≡ V e, (4)
(cid:18) x(cid:19) 1
obtained from (1) by ignoring the negligibly small dilution term. It follows
that if cells containing various permease levels are exposed to chloramphenicol
and a fixed extracellular TMG level, the intracellular TMG level, x, should
increase linearly with V, the specific activity of the permease. However, the
experiments show that x increases linearly only if V is small — it saturates
at large values of V (closed circles in Fig. 5a).
2 The ONPG hydrolysis rate in intact cells is proportional to the rate at which
ONPG (Herzenberg, 1959) or TMG (Maloney and Wilson, 1973, Fig. 1) permeate
the cell.
0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
Scaled permease activity
ralullecartnI
Figure 5. Existence and quantification of the carrier efflux. (a) When E. coli K12
CA8000, induced to various levels, is exposed to chloramphenicol and 0.24 M extra-
cellular TMG, the steady state intracellular TMG level increases nonlinearly with
the permease activity (Maloney and Wilson, 1973, Fig. 5). The permease activity is
normalized by the activity of fully induced cells (43.5 µmoles TMG per min per mL
ofcellwater).ThefullcurveshowsthefitobtainedfromEq.(5)withtheexperimen-
tally measured parameters, s = 0.24 mM, K = 0.8 mM, k = 0.14 min
best fit parameter estimate, K = 84 mM. The dashed line shows the intracellular
TMGlevelpredicted byEq.(4).(b)Fluxratios estimated from (5).Infullyinduced
cells, the carrier efflux is ∼ 7 times the diffusive efflux. In non-induced cells, which
have a scaled permease activity of ∼0.001, the diffusive influx is comparable to the
carrier influx.
To resolve thisdiscrepancy, MaloneyandWilsonpostulatedthat thepermease
catalyzes both influx and efflux, i.e., the steady state intracellular TMG level
satisfies the equation
(cid:18) 1 2 (cid:19)
where the term, Vx/(K +x), accounts for the carrier efflux. They measured
K ,k ,andshowed that(5) yields agoodfittothedata,providedK ischosen
to be 84 mM (full curve in Fig. 5a).
With the help of Eq. (5), they explained their data as follows. If the cells
have low enzyme levels, the intracellular TMG levels are so small compared
to K that the carrier efflux is negligible. Thus, (5) reduces to (4), and the
intracellular level increases linearly with V (dashed line in Fig. 5a). However,
at large enzyme levels, the intracellular TMG level becomes so high that the
steadystateiscompletely determinedbythefirsttwo termsof (5), namely,the
carrier influx and efflux. The intracellular TMG level is therefore independent
of the enzyme activity.
The foregoing physical argument assumes that the carrier efflux is negligible
in non-induced cells, and diffusion is negligible in induced cells. These assump-
tions are consistent with the mathematical model. Indeed, given Eq. (5) and
the above parameter values, we can plot the two ratios, carrier efflux:diffusive
efflux and diffusive influx:carrier influx, as a function of the enzyme activity
(Fig. 5b). The plots show that in induced cells, the carrier influx is ∼1000
times the diffusive influx (full line), and the carrier efflux is almost ∼7 times
the diffusive efflux (dashed line). In non-induced cells, on the other hand, the
carrier efflux is negligible compared to the diffusive efflux, but the diffusive
influx is comparable to the carrier influx.
It is therefore clear that the carrier efflux cannot be ignored in induced cells,
and the diffusive influx cannot be neglected in non-induced cells. Since bista-
bility entails the coexistence of steady states corresponding to both induced
and non-induced cells, neither the carrier efflux nor the diffusive influx can
be neglected. Yet, one or both the fluxes have been ignored in most models
of lac bistability (Chung and Stephanopoulos, 1996; van Hoek and Hogeweg,
2006; Narang and Pilyugin, 2007; Ozbudak et al., 2004; Santill´an et al., 2007;
Tian and Burrage, 2005). To be sure, both fluxes were included in one of the
models (Vilar et al., 2003), but their influence on bistability was not analyzed.
The goal of this work is analyze this effect.
Recently, we studied the effect of DNA looping on the dynamics of the mod-
ified Chung-Stephanoupoulos model (Narang and Pilyugin, 2007). Here, we
formulate and analyze an extended model of lac transcription that takes due
account of DNA looping as well as the diffusive influx and the carrier efflux.
We find that:
(1) The diffusive influx has no effect on the off threshold, but it significantly
reduces the on threshold.
(2) The carrier efflux has no effect on the on threshold, but it significantly
increases the off threshold.
Weshowthattheonandoffthresholdscanberepresented bysimpleanalytical
expressions.
Fig. 6 shows the kinetic scheme of the model. Here, E denotes lac permease;
S and X denote the extracellular and intracellular inducer, respectively; GFP
and RFP denote the green and red fluorescent protein synthesized by the
reporter lac and constitutive gat operons, respectively; and GLU, SUC, GLY
denote glucose, succinate, and glycerol. We assume that:
(1) Theconcentrationsofthepermease,intracellularinducer,GFP,andRFP,
denoted e, x, g, and r, respectively, are based on the volume of the cells
−1).
The concentrations of the extracellular inducer and glucose,
denoted s and G, respectively, are based on the volume of the reactor
Figure 6. Kinetic scheme of the model.
−1).
The rates of all the processes are based on the volume of the
cells (mol h −1 L −1). We shall use the term specific to emphasize this
point.
The choice of these units implies that if the concentration of any intra-
cellular component, Z, is z mol L
then the evolution of z in batch
cultures is given by
where r+ and r − denote the specific rates of synthesis and degradation
of Z in mol h
and r is the specific growth rate in h
−1.
(2) The specific growth rate is given by
where r denotes the specific growth rate in the absence of glucose (i.e.,
in the presence of pure succinate), and φ (G) is an increasing function
of the extracellular glucose concentration, G, satisfying φ (0) = 1, which
accounts for the increase of the specific growth rate produced by addition
of glucose to a culture growing on succinate.
(3) Thesaturationconstantforcarrierefflux,K ,issolargethatx/(K +x) ≈
x/K . Hence, the net carrier-mediated specific uptake rate of S is
(cid:18) 1 2(cid:19)
where V e is the specific activity of the permease in the absence of glu-
cose, and φ (G) is a decreasing function of G such that φ (0) = 1, which
accountsforthereductionofthespecificactivityduetoinducerexclusion.
(4) The net specific rate of expulsion of X by diffusion follows the kinetics
(5) The intracellular inducer stimulates the transcription of the native and
reporter lac operons, resulting in the synthesis of the lac enzymes and
GFP, respectively.
(a) The specific synthesis rate of the permease, E, is
e e0 e,lac 2 4
where V is the specific synthesis rate in fully induced cells growing
onsuccinate(G = 0);φ (G)isadecreasing functionofGsatisfying
φ (0) = 1, which accounts for the repression of transcription due
to reduction of CRP-cAMP levels in the presence of glucose; K is
the association constant for repressor-inducer binding; and α,αˆ char-
acterize the repression due to repressor-operator binding and DNA
looping, respectively.
Thevaluesofαandαˆ are20–50and∼1200,respectively, whichreflect
the fact that more than 95% of the total repression, 1+α+αˆ, is due
to the formation of DNA loops (Oehler et al., 1990, 1994). The dis-
sociation constant for repressor-inducer binding, K
is 7–30 µM for
IPTG (Narang, 2007, Table 1). It is 10 times higher for TMG, based
on a simple analysis of the data with Scatchard plots (Barkley et al.,
1975, Table I). A similar estimate is obtained when Eq. (3) is used
to fit the data shown in Fig. 4a. Assuming α = 40 and αˆ = 1200, the
best fits to this data are obtained when the dissociation constants for
IPTG and TMG are assumed to be 24 and 470 µM, respectively.
(b) The specific synthesis rate of GFP is
GFP e0 e,lac 2 4
where αˆ < αˆ. This expression is obtained by assuming that the
promoters of the reporter and native lac operons are identical, so
that both operons have the same maximum specific synthesis rates
in the absence of glucose, and are subject to the very regulation
by CRP-cAMP and repressor-operator binding. However, the two
operonsdiffer withrespect to regulationby DNAloopingbecause the
reporter lac operon lacks the auxiliary operator, O . This precludes
the formation of DNA loops by interaction between O and O .
Ozbudak et al. estimated the total repression of the lac reporter,
1 + α + αˆ , to be 170 (Ozbudak et al., 2004), which implies that
αˆ ≈ 130.
(6) The specific synthesis rate of RFP follows the constitutive kinetics
RFP r0 e,gat
where V is the specific synthesis rate of RFP in the absence of glucose,
and φ (G) is a decreasing function of G such that φ (0) = 1, which
e,gat e,gat
accounts for the CRP-cAMP effect exerted in the presence of glucose.
(7) Protein degradation is negligible.
Given these assumptions, the mass balances yield
s0 s x g0 g
(cid:18) 1 2(cid:19)
dt e0 e,lac 1+α/(1+K x) 2 +αˆ/(1+K x) 4 g0 g
dt e0 e,lac 1+α/(1+K x) 2 +αˆ /(1+K x) 4 g0 g
r0 e,gat g0 g
It is convenient to rescale these equations. Ozbudak et al. scaled the GFP
and RFP intensities by the corresponding intensities observed during steady
exponential growthonsuccinate andexcess TMG, butno glucose.Under these
conditions,Eqs.(8)–(10)implythate,g,andr havethevaluesV /r ,V /r ,
e0 g0 e0 g0
andV /r ,respectively. Thus, weareledtodefinethedimensionless variables
V /r V /r V /r
e0 g0 e0 g0 r0 g0
If we scale the remaining variables, x and t, as follows,
we arrive at the dimensionless equations
x m0 s x g
(cid:18) 1 2(cid:19)
with the dimensionless parameters,
r s K V (V /r )/k
g0 i s0 e0 g0 x
x k K−1 i K−1 m0 K−1
Here, τ is the ratio of the time constant for inducer expulsion by diffusion
relative to the time constant for growth on succinate (r
σ is the ex-
tracellular inducer concentration, measured in units of K
κ and κ are the
saturation constants for carrier uptake and expulsion, respectively, measured
in units of K
−1.
The parameter, δ , is related to the steady state intracellular inducer level
attained in fully induced cells exposed to chloramphenicol, succinate, and sat-
urating inducer levels, if the carrier efflux is somehow abolished. Indeed, since
r = 0.4 h −1, k = 0.14 min −1, and φ . 2, the dilution term, τ φ χ, in (11)
g,0 x g x g
is negligibly small compared to the diffusive efflux, χ. The steady states are
therefore given by the relations
χ = , (16)
ρ = . (19)
Equation (16) provides the steady state intracellular inducer level in cells
exposed to fixed concentrations of chloramphenicol and succinate, and any
given concentrations of extracellular inducer and glucose. If the carrier efflux
issomehowabolished(κ → ∞),andthemediumcontainsnoglucose(φ = 1),
the steady state intracellular inducer level is given by the equation
If the cells are fully induced (ǫ = 1) and the extracellular inducer level is
saturating (σ ≫ κ ), the above equation becomes
where the first term was neglected because in induced cells, the diffusive influx
is vanishingly small compared to the carrier influx. Thus, δ is the steady
state intracellular inducer level, measured in units of K
that is attained in
fullyinducedcellsexposedtochloramphenicol, succinate, andsaturatinglevels
of extracellular inducer, provided the carrier efflux is somehow abolished.
We can estimate the value of δ K
by observing that (20) is the dimension-
less analog of (4). Indeed, multiplying (20) by K
yields the relation
which, upon comparison with (4), gives
ǫ = .
Since V = 43.5 µmoles min
in fully induced cells, we conclude that
= V/k = 310 mM.
If the medium contains the inducer, succinate, and possibly glucose, but no
chloramphenicol, enzyme synthesis is not blocked. Instead, it responds to the
prevailing intracellular inducer concentration, and the enzyme level evolves to-
ward the steady state given by (17). In this case, the steady state intracellular
inducer level satisfies the relation
m 1 s e,lac
obtained by substituting (17) in (16). Here, φ(G) ≤ 1 captures the cumulative
effect of glucose due to inducer exclusion, catabolite repression, and enzyme
dilution; and δ (G) is a measure of the steady state intracellular inducer level
in fully induced cells exposed to succinate, glucose, and saturating inducer
levels.
We are particularly interested in:
(1) The variation of the steady states with the extracellular inducer concen-
tration at any given glucose level (for example, G = 0, in Fig. 2a). This
is completely determined by Eq. (21): Given any σ and G, the equation
can be solved for χ, which can then be substituted in (17)–(18) to ob-
tain the corresponding ǫ and γ. We shall refer to (21) as the equilibrium
condition.
(2) The variation of the thresholds with the extracellular glucose concen-
tration (Fig. 2b). These thresholds are the points at which the steady
state bifurcates (i.e., changes its stability or multiplicity). It is shown in
Appendix A that a steady state bifurcates only if it satisfies the relation
(cid:20) 2 1 (cid:21)
We shall refer to this equation as the bifurcation condition.
Thus, the steady states are completely determined by the equilibrium con-
dition, whereas the thresholds must satisfy the equilibrium and bifurcation
conditions.
3 Results and Discussion
3.1 The effect of dilution
To simulate the effect of the diffusion influx and the carrier efflux, we need the
function, φ(G) ≡ φ φ /φ . In the course of estimating this function, we shall
also resolve the discrepancy between the magnitudes of the cAMP-mediated
repression reported by Ozbudak et al. and Kuhlman et al.
It follows from (18) and (19) that when the cells are grown in the presence of
excess TMG, the ratio of the steady state GFP and RFP intensities is given
= .
Since this ratio was observed to be 1 all glucose concentrations (Fig. 3a), the
lac and gat operons respond identically to CRP-cAMP, i.e.,
e,lac e,gat e
Moreover, thesteady state RFPandGFPintensities aregiven by theequation
It follows that the 5-fold decline of ρ and γ at saturating glucose concentra-
tions, shown in Fig. 3b, represents the combined effect of reduced CRP-cAMP
levels and enhanced dilution (as opposed to the the sole effect of reduced
CRP-cAMP levels).
The effect of the reduced CRP-cAMP level, φ , cannot be estimated unless
the effect of enhanced dilution, φ , is known. Ozbudak et al. did not report
the specific growth rates at various glucose concentrations, but experiments
show that (Narang et al., 1997):
• When E. coli K12 is grown on saturating levels of succinate + glucose, the
cells consume only glucose during the first exponential growth phase.
• The maximum specific growth rate on glucose (0.74 h
is roughly 2 times
that on succinate (0.44 h
−1).
It follows that at saturating glucose concentrations, φ ≈ 2. Since ρ ≈ 1/5
undertheseconditions,(24)yieldsφ = ρφ = 2/5.Thus,roughlyhalfofthe5-
folddeclineinFig.3bisduetotheenhanceddilutionrateatsaturatingglucose
concentrations. ReductionoftheCRP-cAMP levels accountsfortheremaining
2.5-fold decline, which is consistent with the data obtained by Kuhlman et al.
Parameter values used in the simulations. All the parameter values, except K
are assumed to be the same for TMG and IPTG.
Parameter Value and reference
K 0.68 mM (Ozbudak et al., 2004)
K 84 mM (Maloney and Wilson, 1973)
0.3 mM for TMG (Herzenberg, 1959)
0.007 mM for IPTG (Oehler et al., 2006)
α 40 (Oehler et al., 1994)
αˆ 1200 (Oehler et al., 1994)
αˆ 130 (Ozbudak et al., 2004)
φ /φ See Eq. (25)
φ See Eq. (26)
(Maloney and Wilson, 1973)
In view of (24), we can assume that
= 1−0.84 , (25)
which represents the best fit obtained to the data in Fig. 3b.
It remains to specify the function, φ , which characterizes the intensity of in-
ducerexclusion. Weassumethatthesaturationconstantsforinducerexclusion
and cAMP activation/dilution are the same (7.6 µM). Experiments show that
the lactose uptake rate decreases 2-fold in the presence of high glucose concen-
trations (McGinnis and Paigen, 1969, Fig. 3). Thus, we are led to postulate
the expression,
We shall discuss the implications of the foregoing assumption later on.
3.2 The effect of the diffusive influx and carrier efflux
Alltheparametersrequiredtostudytheeffectofthediffusiveinfluxandcarrier
efflux are now available (Table 1). Most of the simulations shown below were
done with the parameter values for TMG. However, at the end of this section,
we shall show the simulation for IPTG, and compare it with the experimental
data.
Figure 7. Variation of the steady states with the extracellular TMG level, σ, at
G = 0 in the absence of diffusive influx and carrier efflux. (a) Enzyme activity (full
line) and green fluorescence intensity (dashed line). (b) Intracellular TMG level.
We shall begin by considering the base case of no diffusive influx or carrier
efflux. To this base case, we shall add the diffusive influx and the carrier efflux,
one at a time, to examine their effects on the steady states and the thresholds.
Finally, we shall show that that the general model containing both fluxes is
essentially a composite of the two special cases accounting for the diffusive
influx and carrier efflux.
3.2.1 No diffusive influx or carrier influx
In the absence of the diffusive influx and the carrier efflux, the equilibrium
condition (21) becomes
We can determine the variation of the steady states with σ at any given G by
solving this equation for χ, and substituting it in (17) and (18). However, this
approach can only be implemented numerically. It is more convenient to solve
(27) for σ, thus obtaining
The variation of the steady state ǫ, γ, and χ with σ is then given by the
respectively, where ǫ(χ,G), γ(χ,G), and σ(χ,G) are given by (17), (18), and
(28), respectively.
Figure 7a shows the variation of the steady state ǫ and γ with σ at G = 0.
Both variables are bistable over the very same ∼10-fold range of extracellular
TMG concentrations. Furthermore, the GFP intensity and enzyme activity of
the induced cells areidentical (ǫ,γ ≈ 1), but the GFPintensity of non-induced
cells is significantly higher than their enzyme activity.
200 400 600 800 1000
Figure8. Variation of theon andoff thresholdsintheabsenceof diffusiveinfluxand
carrier efflux. (a) Variation of the on threshold (upper full curve) and off threshold
(lower full curve) with δ . The dashed vertical lines represent the values of δ at
which the thresholds become infinitely large. The dotted vertical lines represent the
values of δ at G = 0 and G = 1000 µM. (b) If δ = 10 < 1/f (χ ), there is
no bistability. (c) If δ = 80, which lies between 1/f (χ ) and 1/f (χ ), there is
bistability, but no on threshold. (d) Variation of the off threshold (lower curve) and
on threshold (upper curve) with the glucose concentration, G.
The foregoing trends can be understood in terms of the variation of the intra-
cellular TMG levels with σ (Fig. 7b). In non-induced cells, the GFP intensity
is significantly higher than the enzyme activity because the intracellular TMG
levels are so small compared to K −1 that the reporter and native lac operons
are transcribed at their basal rates. Since the reporter lac operon lacks O ,
its basal transcription rate, 1/(1+α+αˆ ) = 1/170, is ∼7 times higher than
that of the native lac operon, 1/(1 + α + αˆ) = 1/1241. In induced cells, on
the other hand, the inducer levels are so high that the repressor is completely
inactivated, and both operons are transcribed at the very same (maximal)
rates. Finally, the thresholds for ǫ and γ are the same because (17) and (18)
imply that ǫ and γ are increasing functions of χ. Hence
are zero precisely when dσ/dχ = 0. Since dσ/dχ is zero at σ ≈ 0.03 and
σ ≈ 0.3, so are dσ/dǫ and dσ/dγ.
Weareparticularlyinterested inthevariationoftheonandoffthresholdswith
G, the concentration of extracellular glucose. In this regard, it is worth noting
two points. First, since ǫ and γ always have the same thresholds, it suffices to
focusoneitheroneofthesevariables.Inthesimulationsthatfollow,wepresent
only the enzyme activities. Second, although we are interested in the variation
of the thresholds with G, we shall begin by determining their variation with
δ . As we show below, this immediately yields their variation with G because
δ is a monotonically decreasing function of G.
In the absence of the carrier efflux, the bifurcation condition (22) becomes
The thresholds satisfy (27) and (29), which imply that
It is shown in Appendix B that (30) has exactly two positive roots, χ < χ ,
and they satisfy the relation, f (χ ) < f (χ ). The loci of the on and off
thresholds are therefore given by the equations
m χ 1 m χ 2
which define two decreasing curves on the δ σ-plane (Fig. 8a). Furthermore:
• The on and off thresholds become infinitely large when δ approaches
1/f (χ ) and 1/f (χ ), respectively (dashed lines in Fig. 8a).
• When δ ≫ 1/f (χ ) > 1/f (χ ), (31) reduces to
Thus, the curves are hyperbolic, and the ratio of the on threshold to the off
threshold equals the constant, f (χ )/f (χ ).
Taken together, these results imply that if δ > 1/f (χ ), there is bistability
with finite on and off thresholds (Fig. 7); if δ < 1/f (χ ), there is no bista-
bility (Fig. 8b); and finally, if 1/f (χ ) < δ < 1/f (χ ), there is bistability
with a finite off threshold, but no on threshold (Fig. 8c). We shall elaborate
on the last case shortly.
The variation of the off and on thresholds with the glucose level, G, follows
immediately from Fig. 8a. Indeed, as G increases from 0 to 1000 µM, δ ≡
δ m0 φ decreases from δ m0 to δ m∞ ≡ δ m0 φ| G=1000 , shown by the dotted vertical
lines in Fig. 8a. It follows that as G increases, the on and off thresholds as well
as the ratio of the on to off threshold increase. Furthermore, the off threshold
exists for all 0 ≤ G ≤ 1000 µM, whereas the on threshold ceases to exist for
some G < 1000 µM.
We can get explicit expressions for the variation of the thresholds with G by
letting δ = δ φ(G) in (31), thus obtaining
m0 χ 1 m0 χ 2
Since φ decreases with G, σ increases with G. Thus, on the Gσ-plane, the
thresholds are represented by two increasing curves (Fig. 8d). As expected,
these curves diverge with increasing glucose levels, with the on threshold be-
coming unbounded at G ≈ 100 µM.
Thedisappearanceoftheonthresholdat intermediatevaluesofδ isanexam-
ple of irreversible bistability (Laurent and Kellershohn, 1999, p. 421). Indeed,
it is evident from Fig. 8c that synthesis of the enzymes in induced cells can be
switched off by gradually decreasing the extracellular inducer concentration.
However, once the enzyme synthesis has been switched off in this manner, it
cannot switched on again by any gradual increase of the extracellular inducer
concentration. Irreversible bistability is thought to play an important role in
development becauseitfurnishes amechanism forchangingthecellular pheno-
type permanently. However, it is biologically implausible in the case of the lac
operon. Due to the existence of the diffusive influx, non-induced (and in fact,
even cryptic cells) can always be induced by exposing them to sufficiently
high extracellular inducer levels (Fig. 4a). We show below that irreversible
bistability disappears in the presence of the diffusive influx.
3.2.2 Diffusive influx, but no carrier efflux
In the absence of the carrier efflux, (21) becomes
which can be solved for σ to obtain
(cid:20) q (cid:21)
The variation of the steady state ǫ, γ, and χ with σ is given by the parametric
σ(χ,G) are given by (17) and (33), respectively.
Figure 9a compares the variation of the steady state permease activities with
σ at G = 0 in the presence (full curve) and absence (dashed curve) of the
0.01 0.02 0.05 0.1 0.2 0.5 1
Figure 9. Comparison of the steady states at G = 0 in the presence (full lines)
and absence (dashed lines) of the diffusive influx. (a) Variation of the steady state
permeaseactivity,ǫ,withtheextracellular TMGlevel,σ.(b)Variation ofthesteady
state intracellular TMG concentration, χ, with the extracellular TMG level, σ.
diffusive flux. It is evident that the diffusive flux has no effect on the off
threshold, but it significantly reduces the on threshold. The physical reason
for this is as follows. The off threshold is a property of the induced cells.
These cells contain such high permease levels that the diffusive influx makes
virtually no contribution to the accumulation of TMG (see upper branches
of the curves in Fig. 9b). In contrast, the on threshold is a property of the
non-induced cells, which contain such low enzyme levels that the diffusive
influx significantly improves the accumulation of TMG (see lower branches of
the curves in Fig. 9b). This enhanced accumulation of TMG decreases the on
threshold.
We have shown above that in the absence of glucose, the diffusive influx influ-
ences only the on threshold. Is this true even in the presence of glucose? We
can address this question by constructing the loci of the on and off thresholds
on the δ σ-plane. To this end, observe that the thresholds satisfy the equilib-
rium condition (32) and the bifurcation condition (29). These two equations
can be solved for σ and δ to obtain the relations
which provide the parametric representation, {δ (χ),σ(χ)}, of the thresholds
on the δ ,σ-plane. The full curve in Fig. 10a shows a plot of this represen-
tation. It consists of an upper branch and a lower branch, which represent
the on and off thresholds, respectively. Since these two branches meet in a
cusp, bistability is reversible whenever it exists: Either both or none of the
thresholds occur at any given δ . As expected, irreversible bistability, which
corresponds to the existence of only one of the thresholds, disappears in the
presence of the diffusive flux. Importantly, this conclusion does not depend
Figure 10. Variation of the on and off thresholds in the presence of the diffusive
influx. (a) Variation of the on and off thresholds with δ . The lower and upper full
curves, defined by (34) and (35), represent the off and on thresholds, respectively,
in the presence of the diffusive influx. The full circle shows the cusp at which the
thresholds merge. The lower and upper dashed curves, defined by (31), represent
the off and on thresholds, respectively, in the absence of the diffusive influx. The
dottedverticallinesshowthevaluesofδ atG = 0andG = 1000µM.(b)Variation
of the off threshold (lower curve) and on threshold (upper curve) with the glucose
concentration, G.
on the precise values of the parameter values chosen for the simulations. It
is shown in Appendix C that the geometry of the curves representing the
thresholds is preserved, regardless of the parameter values.
To address the question posed above, it is useful to compare the thresholds in
the presence of the diffusive influx with those obtained in its absence (dashed
curves in Fig. 10a). This comparison shows that there are 3 distinct regimes.
When δ & 2000, the full and dashed curves coincide, i.e., the diffusive in-
flux has no effect on both thresholds. At large δ , the permease is so active
that even in the non-induced cells, the diffusive influx makes no contribution
to inducer accumulation. When 100 . δ .2000, the lower full and dashed
curves coincide, but the upper full curve is significantly lower than the upper
dashed curve. The influence of the diffusive influx is therefore identical to that
observed at G = 0: It has no effect on the off threshold, and significantly de-
creases the on threshold. At these intermediate δ , the enzyme activity of the
induced cells remains so large that the diffusive influx makes no contribution
to inducer accumulation, but the enzyme activity of the non-induced cells be-
comes so small that the diffusive influx does enhance inducer accumulation.
Finally, when δ . 100, the enzyme activity becomes so small that the diffu-
sive flux contributes significantly toinducer accumulationinbothnon-induced
and induced cells. In fact, at sufficiently small δ , the inducer accumulates al-
most entirely by diffusion, i.e., χ ≈ σ. Since the intracellular TMG level is
independent of the enzyme level, there is no positive feedback, and hence, no
bistability. This is manifested in Fig. 10a by the formation of a cusp at which
the two thresholds merge.
The qualitative variation of the thresholds with the glucose concentration can
be inferred from Fig. 10a. Indeed, as the glucose concentration is increased
from 0 to 1000 µM, δ
decreases from δ
to δ m∞, shown by the dotted lines
in the figure. Evidently, as G increases, both thresholds increase, but the ratio
of the on to off threshold decreases (in contrast to the increase observed in the
absence of diffusive flux).
The quantitative variation of the thresholds with G is obtained by observing
that (35) yields
⇒ G(χ) = φ
The locus of the thresholds on the Gσ-plane is therefore given by the para-
metric representation, {G(χ),σ(χ)}, where G(χ) and σ(χ) are given by (36)
and (34), respectively. Figure 10b shows that this representation yields two
increasing curves that approach each other as G increases.
3.2.3 Carrier efflux, but no diffusive influx
In this case, (21) becomes
χ = , (37)
which can be solved for σ to obtain
The variation of the steady state ǫ and χ with σ is given by the parametric
σ(χ,G) are given by (17) and (38), respectively.
Figure 11a shows the variation of the enzyme activity with σ at G = 0 in
the presence (full curve) and absence (dashed curve) of the carrier influx. Ev-
idently, the carrier efflux has no effect on the on threshold, but it significantly
increases the off threshold. This is because κ is so large that the carrier ef-
flux is negligible in non-induced cells, which contain relatively small enzyme
and inducer levels (Fig. 11b). However, the carrier efflux significantly reduces
the the intracellular TMG level of the induced cells. The net effect of this
reduction is to increase the off threshold of the induced cells.
Itisinstructiveonceagaintostudythevariationofthethresholdswithδ .The
thresholds satisfy the equilibrium condition (37) and the bifurcation condition
Figure 11. Comparison of the steady states at G = 0 in the presence (full lines) and
absence (dashed lines) of the carrier efflux. (a) Variation of the steady state enzyme
activity with the extracellular TMG level. (b) Variation of the intracellular TMG
concentration with the extracellular TMG level.
(22), which can be solved for δ and σ to obtain
f f !
These relations define the parametric representation, {δ (χ),σ(χ)}, of the
bifurcation curve on the δ σ-plane.
Figure12acomparesthethresholdsinthepresenceofcarrierefflux(fullcurves)
with those obtained in its absence (dashed curves). Evidently, when δ . 100,
the carrier efflux has no effect on both thresholds. Under this condition, the
enzyme activity andtheintracellularTMG level areso small thatcarrier efflux
is negligible even in the induced cells. As δ increases, carrier efflux from
the induced cells becomes more significant, and the off threshold becomes
progressively larger than that predicted in the absence of the carrier flux.
When δ & 104, the enzyme activity is so large that even the non-induced
cells are subject to carrier efflux. At sufficiently large δ , the off threshold
merges with the on threshold at a cusp, beyond which there is no bistability.
Thebistabilitydisappearsbecauseunderthiscondition,theintracellularTMG
which is independent of the enzyme level. The destabilizing effect of positive
feedback therefore vanishes, and the prospect of bistability is eliminated.
Once again, the qualitative variation of the thresholds with G can be inferred
from Fig. 12a. As G increases from 0 to 1000 µM, δ decreases from δ to
δ m∞, shown by the dotted lines in the figure. Evidently, as G increases, so
do the on and off thresholds, as well as the ratio of the on to off threshold.
Furthermore, since diffusive influx is absent, there is irreversible bistability:
Figure12. Variation of theon andoff thresholdsinthepresenceof thecarrier efflux.
(a) Variation of the on and off thresholds with δ . The lower and upper full curves,
defined by (39) and (40), represent the off and on thresholds, respectively, in the
presence of the carrier efflux. The full circle shows the cusp at which the thresholds
merge.Thelowerandupperdashedcurves,definedby (31),representtheoff andon
thresholds,respectively, intheabsenceof thecarrierefflux.Thedotted verticallines
show the values of δ at G = 0 and G = 1000 µM. (b) Variation of theoff threshold
(lower curve) and on threshold (upper curve) with the glucose concentration, G.
The off threshold exists for all G, whereas the on threshold disappears at some
G < 1000 µM.
The quantitative variation of the thresholds with G follows from (39), which
δ m0 f f ! "δ m0 f f !#
The variation of the thresholds with G is given by the parametric representa-
tion, {G(χ),σ(χ)}, where G(χ) and σ(χ) are given by (41) and (40), respec-
tively. This representation defines two increasing curves departing from each
other (Fig. 12b).
We conclude by observing that the geometry of the thresholds (full curves in
Figure 12a) does not depend on the precise values of the parameters used in
the simulations (see Appendix D for details).
3.2.4 Diffusive influx and carrier efflux
In this case, the steady state intracellular TMG level is given by (21), which
can be solved for σ to obtain
(cid:20) q (cid:21)
where p ≡ χ(1+δ f/κ ). The variation of the steady state ǫ and χ with σ is
given by the parametric curves, {σ(χ,G),ǫ(χ,G)} and {σ(χ,G),χ)}, respec-
Figure 13. Comparison of the steady states of the general model (full curves) with
the steady states in the presence of diffusive flux (short-dashed curves) and carrier
efflux (long-dashed curves). (a) Variation of the enzyme activity with the extra-
cellular TMG level. (b) Variation of the intracellular TMG concentration with the
extracellular TMG level.
tively, where ǫ(χ,G) and σ(χ,G) are given by (17) and (42), respectively.
Fig. 13 compares the steady state profiles obtained at G = 0 in the presence
of the diffusive influx and carrier efflux (full curves) with those obtained in the
presence ofthediffusive influxonly(short-dashedcurves) andthecarrierefflux
only (long-dashed curves). It is evident that the upper and lower branches
of the steady state curve, representing the induced and non-induced cells,
respectively, are a composite of the steady states obtained in the presence of
the diffusive influx and carrier efflux. Indeed, the lower branch of the full curve
coincides with the lower branch of short-dashed curve, and the upper branch
of the full curve coincides with the upper branch of the long-dashed curve. It
followsthatthesteadystatesandthresholdofthenon-induced(resp.,induced)
cells is well approximated by the model accounting for only the diffusive flux
(resp., carrier efflux). The reason for this is clear from the above discussion
of the special cases. In the absence of glucose, the diffusive influx influences
the TMG accumulation of non-induced cells only — it is vanishingly small
in induced cells. Likewise, carrier efflux influences the TMG accumulation of
induced cells only — it plays no role in non-induced cells.
The foregoing arguments were based on the steady state profiles obtained
at G = 0, i.e., δ = δ . It turns out that they are true at almost all δ .
This becomes clear if we compare the thresholds for the general case with the
thresholds obtained in the presence of diffusive influx or carrier efflux. The
thresholds for the general case satisfy (21) and (22), which can be rewritten
102 103 104
0 200 400 600 800 1000
Figure14.Variationoftheonandoffthresholdsinthepresenceofthediffusiveinflux
and the carrier efflux. (a) Variation of the on and off thresholds with δ . The lower
and upper full curves, defined by (43) and (44), represent the off and on thresholds,
respectively, in the presence of diffusive influx and carrier efflux. The full circles
show the cusps at which the thresholds merge. The short-dashed curves, defined by
(34) and (35), represent the thresholds in the presence of the diffusive influx only.
The long-dashed curves, defined by (39) and (40), represent the thresholds in the
presence of the carrier efflux only. The dotted vertical lines show the values of δ
at G = 0 and G = 1000 µM. (b) Variation of the on and off thresholds with the
glucose concentration, G.
" κ 2 # " κ 2 # κ 2
δ = . (44)
The first equation can be solved to obtain σ(χ), which can then be substituted
in (44) to obtain δ (χ). These functions determine the thresholds via the
parametric representation, {δ (χ),σ(χ)}.
Figure14acomparesthethresholdsthusobtained(fullcurves)withthethresh-
olds obtained in the presence of diffusive influx (short-dashed curves) and car-
rier efflux (long-dashed curves). The thresholds exist only on a finite interval
— they terminate in a cusp at both small and large δ . Over almost its en-
tire range of existence, the upper branch of the full curve overlaps with the
upper branch of the short-dashed curve, which represents the on threshold in
the presence of the diffusive flux. Likewise, the lower branch of the full curve
coincides with the lower branch of the long-dashed curve, which represents
the off threshold in the presence of the carrier flux. Thus, the thresholds of
the general case are a composite of the two special cases. The on (resp., off)
threshold is well approximated by (34) and (35) [resp., (39) and (40)], which
represent the thresholds in the presence of only the diffusive flux (resp., carrier
efflux).
0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
Scaled enzyme activity
ralullecartnI
Figure 15. Comparison of the observed and predicted effects of inducer exclu-
sion in S. typhimurium SB3939 transfected with a plasmid encoding the lac
operon (Mitchell et al., 1982,Fig. 5A). Theopen triangles showthe steady state in-
tracellular TMGlevelincells inducedtovariouslevels,andexposedtoacarbon-free
mediumcontaining1mMTMG.Thefulltriangles showtheintracellular TMGlevel
attained if the medium contains 1 mM TMG and 10 mM α-methylglucoside. The
full curve shows the fit to the data obtained with Eq. (45) and the parameter val-
ues, φ | = 1, k = 0.14 min
s = 1 mM, K = 0.8 mM, and K = 41 mM.
s G=0 x 1 2
The dashed curve shows the fit to the data with the same equation and parameter
values, the only difference being that φ | = 0.5.
ItisevidentfromFig.14athatasGincreases,boththresholdsincrease,butthe
ratioofontooffthresholdscanincrease,decrease,orpassthroughamaximum.
For the parameter values shown in Table 1, δ m0 and δ m∞ are such that the
ratio passes through a maximum. The precise variation of the thresholds with
G is given by the parametric curve, {G(χ),σ(χ)}, where
arelationthatfollowsimmediatelyfrom(44).Thisparametriccurveconsistsof
two increasing curves that diverge at low glucose concentrations, and converge
at high glucose concentrations (Fig. 14b).
3.2.5 Comparison of the model simulations with the data for TMG
Comparison of the model simulations (dashed lines in Fig. 2b) with the data
shows that the simulated off thresholds are higher, and the simulated on
thresholds are lower, than the corresponding thresholds observed experimen-
tally. Part of this discrepancy probablystems fromthe fact thatthe parameter
values, which correspond to various strains of E. coli, are somewhat different
from those shown in Table 1. However, the analysis of the data suggests that
there are two additional sources of the discrepancy.
Dependence of φ on the the enzyme activity The model assumes that
the effect of inducer exclusion, characterized by the function φ , is completely
determined by the extracellular glucose level. However, the data in Fig. 15
implies that φ also depends on the activity of the permease. The open tri-
angles in the figure show the steady state intracellular TMG levels in cells
induced to various levels, and then exposed to a carbon-free medium contain-
ing 1 mM TMG. The full triangles show the steady state intracellular levels
attained when the carbon-free medium contains 1 mM TMG and 10 mM α-
methylglucoside (αMG), a non-metabolizable analog of glucose that mimics
its inducer exclusion effect. It is clear from the data that inducer exclusion
is significant in cells containing low enzyme levels, but it disappears in fully
induced cells.
Ifφ iscompletelydetermined bytheextracellularglucoseconcentration,there
isnocombinationofmodelparametersthatcancapturethedatainFig.15. To
see this, observe that the data was obtained in a carbon-free medium, which
prevents efficient enzyme synthesis. The appropriate equation for modeling
the data is therefore given by the following variant of Eq. (5)
s x 1 k (x−s)
s K +s K +x x φ (G) s − x
(cid:18) 1 2 (cid:19) s K1+s K2+x
Since the extracellular TMG level, s, is constant (1 mM), the above equation
implies that at any given x, the enzyme activity in the absence of αMG (or
glucose) is φ (G) times the activity in the presence of αMG. This contradicts
the data. At x ≈ 30 mM, for instance, the enzyme activity in the absence of
αMG is roughly half the activity in the presence of 10 mM αMG. However, at
x ≈ 40 mM, the activities are the same in the absence and presence of αMG.
The molecular explanation for the data in Fig. 15 suggests that φ depends
not only on G, but also on the prevailing enzyme level (Mitchell et al., 1982).
Indeed, inducer exclusion occurs because the uptake of αMG or glucose results
in the formation of dephosphorylated enzyme IIAglc (a transport enzyme for
glucose), which inhibits lac permease by binding to it. In fully induced cells,
the permease level is so high that most of it is essentially free of IIAglc. As the
permease level decreases, so does the inhibition due to LacY-IIAglc binding.3
Thus, the magnitude of the inducer exclusion effect depends on the prevailing
permease level.
The model, which ignores the dependence of φ on the permease level, pro-
vides a good fit to the data obtained in the absence of α-MG (full line in
Fig. 15). However, it fails to capture the data obtained in the presence of α-
MG (dashed line in Fig. 15). It overestimates the inducer exclusion effect in
induced cells, and underestimates this effect in cells containing lower enzyme
levels. Consequently, the observed off threshold is expected to be lower, and
3 No data was obtained at scaled enzyme activities below ∼ 0.25 because the re-
combinant strain used in these experiments was quasi-constitutive.
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
Scaled activity
Figure 16. Variation of the specific growth rate due to induction of lac. (a) During
growth of E. coli B in thepresence of succinate and TMG, fullinduction of the cells
reducesthespecificgrowthby∼30%(Novick and Weiner,1957,Table2).(b)During
growth of E. coli K12 MG1655 in the presence of glycerol and IPTG, full induction
reduces the specific growth rate by only ∼5% (Dekel and Alon, 2005, Fig. 2a).
the observed on threshold is expected to be higher, than the corresponding
thresholds predicted by the model.
Dependence of r on the enzyme activity The model assumes that
in the absence of glucose, the specific growth rate is a fixed constant, r .
However, the data shows that the specific growth rate varies significantly with
the enzyme level of the cells (Fig. 16a). When the cells are exposed to 0.5 mM
TMG, the specific growth rate is ∼30% lower than that of non-induced cells,
and the graph suggests that the specific growth rate declines further at higher
extracellular TMG levels. The reduced specific growth rateof theinduced cells
serves to decrease the off threshold because the lower the specific growth rate,
the higher the enzyme and intracellular TMG levels.
Inearlierwork,westudiedthedynamicsofgrowthonlactose(Narang and Pilyugin,
2007). There, we showed that bistability is suppressed during growth on lac-
tose because the specific growth rate increases with the enzyme level, thus
enhancing the stabilizing effect of dilution. Since the specific growth rate de-
creases with the enzyme level during growth on TMG, it is plausible to expect
that in this case, the stabilizing effect of dilution is depressed, and the bistable
regime is enlarged.
3.2.6 Comparison of the model simulations with the data for IPTG
The above arguments suggest that the discrepancy between the data and the
simulations would be reduced if the experiment was performed in the absence
of glucose with a gratuitous inducer that does not result in a significant reduc-
tion of the specific growth rate. This conclusion seems to be consistent with
the data.
Figure 17. Comparison of the data and the simulation for bistability with IPTG.
(a) Variation of the observed steady state β-galactosidase activity of E. coli K12
with extracellular IPTG levels at G = 0 (Laurent et al., 2005, Fig. 7). (b) Variation
of the simulated enzyme activity with extracellular IPTG levels at G = 0. The
dissociation constant, K
was assumed to be 7 µM. All other parameters were
assumed to be the same as those used for simulating the experiments with TMG.
It turns out that when the cells aregrown inthe presence of IPTG, thespecific
growth rate of the induced cells is only ∼5% smaller than the specific growth
rate of the non-induced cells (Fig. 16b). Recently, Laurent et al. measured the
variation of the enzyme activity with the extracellular IPTG levels in the ab-
sence ofglucose(Fig.17a).They foundthatthemeanactivity doesnot display
the discrete all-or-none response observed by Ozbudak et al. (presumably due
to the physiological heterogeneity of the cells and the inherent stochasticity
of the induction process). However, there is clear evidence of bistability in
the 5-fold range, 0.3–1.5 µM, which is significantly smaller than the 10-fold
range shown in Fig. 2a. The IPTG concentrations supporting bistability are
significantly smaller than those observed by Ozbudak et al — the off and on
thresholds are 0.3 and 1.5 µM (compared to 3 and 30 µM in Fig. 2a). This
is because the affinity of IPTG for the repressor is an order of magnitude
higher than that for TMG. Simulation of the model with K
= 7 µM yields
results that are in reasonable agreement with the data obtained by Laurent et
al (Fig. 17b).
It remains to be seen if an extension of the model, accounting for the depen-
dence of φ andr onthe prevailing enzyme level, canresolve the discrepancy
with respect to the data for TMG.
4 Conclusions
Analysis of the experimental data shows that the diffusive influx and carrier
efflux have a profound effect on inducer accumulation in non-induced and
induced cells, respectively. Since bistability entails the coexistence of steady
states corresponding to both non-induced and induced cells, neither one of
these fluxes can be neglected. We analyzed a model of lac bistability taking
due account of the diffusive influx and carrier efflux. We find that:
(1) The diffusive influx decreases the on threshold.
(2) The carrier influx increases the off threshold.
(3) Over a wide range of permease activities, the diffusive influx has no ef-
fect on the off threshold, and the carrier efflux has no effect on the on
threshold. Since each of these fluxes influences only one of the thresholds,
the combined effect of these fluxes can be captured by simple analytical
expressions corresponding to two limiting cases.
(4) Simulations of the model show good agreement with the data for IPTG.
(5) There is a significant discrepancy with respect to the data for TMG.
Analysis of the data suggests that this discrepancy is due to the depen-
dence of the inducer exclusion effect and the specific growth rate on the
prevailing lactose enzyme levels.
Acknowledgements
This research was supported in part with funds from the National Science
Foundation under contract NSF DMS-0517954. We are grateful to Stefan
Oehler (IMBB-FoRTH) for discussions regarding the regulation of the lac
operon.