Under consideration for publication in Theory and Practice of Logic Programming 1
The Magic of Logical Inference in Probabilistic
Programming
Bernd Gutmann, Ingo Thon, Angelika Kimmig, Maurice Bruynooghe and Luc De Raedt
Department of Computer Science, Katholieke Universiteit Leuven,
Celestijnenlaan 200A - bus 2402, 3001 Heverlee, Belgium
{firstname.lastname}@cs.kuleuven.be
submitted 1 January 2003; revised 1 January 2003; accepted 1 January 2003
Today,manydifferentprobabilisticprogramminglanguagesexistandevenmoreinference
mechanismsfortheselanguages.Still,mostlogicprogrammingbasedlanguagesuseback-
ward reasoning based on SLD resolution for inference. While these methods are typically
computationally efficient, they often can neither handle infinite and/or continuous distri-
butions,norevidence.Toovercometheselimitations,weintroducedistributionalclauses,
avariationandextensionofSato’sdistributionsemantics.Wealsocontributeanovelap-
proximateinferencemethodthatintegratesforwardreasoningwithimportancesampling,
a well-known technique for probabilistic inference. To achieve efficiency, we integrate two
logicprogrammingtechniquestodirectforwardsampling.Magicsetsareusedtofocuson
relevant parts of the program, while the integration of backward reasoning allows one to
identify and avoid regions of the sample space that are inconsistent with the evidence.
1 Introduction
The advent of statistical relational learning (Getoor and Taskar 2007; De Raedt
etal.2008)andprobabilisticprogramming(DeRaedtetal.2008)hasresultedina
vast number of different languages and systems such as PRISM (Sato and Kameya
2001), ICL (Poole 2008), ProbLog (De Raedt et al. 2007), Dyna (Eisner et al.
2005), BLPs (Kersting and De Raedt 2008), CLP(BN) (Santos Costa et al. 2008),
BLOG (Milch et al. 2005), Church (Goodman et al. 2008), IBAL (Pfeffer 2001),
and MLNs (Richardson and Domingos 2006). While inference in these languages
generallyinvolvesevaluatingtheprobabilitydistributiondefinedbythemodel,often
conditioned on evidence in the form of known truth values for some atoms, this
diversityofsystemshasledtoavarietyofinferenceapproaches.Languagessuchas
IBAL, BLPs, MLNs and CLP(BN) combine knowledge-based model construction
to generate a graphical model with standard inference techniques for such models.
Some probabilistic programming languages, for instance BLOG and Church, use
sampling for approximate inference in generative models, that is, they estimate
probabilities from a large number of randomly generated program traces. Finally,
probabilistic logic programming frameworks such as ICL, PRISM and ProbLog,
combine SLD-resolution with probability calculations.
So far, the second approach based on sampling has received little attention in
1v2515.7011:viXra
2 B. Gutmann, I. Thon, A. Kimmig, M. Bruynooghe, L. De Raedt
logic programming based systems. In this paper, we investigate the integration
of sampling-based approaches into probabilistic logic programming frameworks to
broaden the applicability of these. Particularly relevant in this regard are the abil-
ity of Church and BLOG to sample from continuous distributions and to answer
conditional queries of the form p(q|e) where e is the evidence. To accommodate
(continuous and discrete) distributions, we introduce distributional clauses, which
define random variables together with their associated distributions, conditional
upon logical predicates. Random variables can be passed around in the logic pro-
gram and the outcome of a random variable can be compared with other values by
meansofspecialbuilt-ins.Toformallyestablishthesemanticsofthisnewconstruct,
we show that these random variables define a basic distribution over facts (using
the comparison built-ins) as required in Sato’s distribution semantics (Sato 1995),
and thus induces a distribution over least Herbrand models of the program. This
contrastswithpreviousinstancesofthedistributionsemanticsinthatwenolonger
enumerate the probabilities of alternatives, but instead use arbitrary densities and
distributions.
From a logic programming perspective, BLOG (Milch et al. 2005) and related
approaches perform forward reasoning, that is, the samples needed for probability
estimation are generated starting from known facts and deriving additional facts,
thusgeneratingapossibleworld.PRISMandrelatedapproachesfollowtheopposite
approach of backward reasoning, where inference starts from a query and follows
a chain of rules backwards to the basic facts, thus generating proofs. This differ-
ence is one of the reasons for using sampling in the first approach: exact forward
inference would require that all possible worlds be generated, which is infeasible in
most cases. Based on this observation, we contribute a new inference method for
probabilisticlogicprogrammingthatcombinessampling-basedinferencetechniques
withforwardreasoning.Ontheprobabilisticside,theapproachusesrejectionsam-
pling (Koller and Friedman 2009), a well-known sampling technique that rejects
samples that are inconsistent with the evidence. On the logic programming side,
we adapt the magic set technique (Bancilhon et al. 1986) towards the probabilistic
setting,therebycombiningtheadvantagesofforwardandbackwardreasoning.Fur-
thermore, the inference algorithm is improved along the lines of the SampleSearch
algorithm(GogateandDechter2011),whichavoidschoicesleadingtoasamplethat
cannotbeusedintheprobabilityestimationduetoinconsistencywiththeevidence.
We realize this using a heuristic based on backward reasoning with limited proof
length, the benefit of which is experimentally confirmed. This novel approach to
inferencecreatesanumberofnewpossibilitiesforapplicationsofprobabilisticlogic
programming systems, including continuous distributions and Bayesian inference.
This paper is organized as follows: we start by reviewing the basic concepts in
Section2.Section3introducesthenewlanguageanditssemantics,Section4anovel
forward sampling algorithm for probabilistic logic programs. Before concluding, we
evaluate our approach in Section 5.
The Magic of Logical Inference in Probabilistic Programming 3
2 Preliminaries
2.1 Probabilistic Inference
Adiscreteprobabilisticmodeldefinesaprobabilitydistributionp(·)overasetΩof
basic outcomes, that is, value assignments to the model’s random variables. This
distribution can then be used to evaluate a conditional probability distribution
p(q|e)= p(q∧e), also called target distribution. Here, q is a query involving random
variables, and e is the evidence, that is, a partial value assignment of the random
variables1.Evaluatingthistargetdistributioniscalledprobabilisticinference(Koller
and Friedman 2009). In probabilistic logic programming, random variables often
correspond to ground atoms, and p(·) thus defines a distribution over truth value
assignments, as we will see in more detail in Sec. 2.3 (but see also De Raedt et al.
2008). Probabilistic inference then asks for the probability of a logical query being
true given truth value assignments for a number of such ground atoms.
In general, the probability p(·) of a query q is in the discrete case the sum over
those outcomes ω ∈ Ω that are consistent with the query. In the continuous case,
the sum is replaced by an (multidimensional) integral and the distribution p(·) by
a (product of) densities F(·) That is,
(cid:90) (cid:90)
where 1 (ω) = 1 if ω |= q and 0 otherwise. As common (e.g. (Wasserman 2003))
we will use for convenience the notation xdF(x) as unifying notation for both
discrete and continuous distributions.
AsΩis oftenverylargeoreveninfinite,exactinferencebased onthesummation
in (1) quickly becomes infeasible, and inference has to resort to approximation
techniques based on samples, that is, randomly drawn outcomes ω ∈ Ω. Given a
large set of such samples {s ,...,s } drawn from p(·), the probability p(q) can be
estimated as the fraction of samples where q is true. If samples are instead drawn
from the target distribution p(·|e), the latter can directly be estimated as
1 (cid:88)
However, sampling from p(·|e) is often highly inefficient or infeasible in practice,
as the evidence needs to be taken into account. For instance, if one would use
the standard definition of conditional probability to generate samples from p(·), all
samplesthatarenotconsistentwiththeevidencedonotcontributetotheestimate
and would thus have to be discarded or, in sampling terminology, rejected.
More advanced sampling methods therefore often resort to a so-called proposal
distribution which allows for easier sampling. The error introduced by this sim-
plification then needs to be accounted for when generating the estimate from the
1 If e contains assignments to continuous variables, p(e) is zero. Hence, evidence on continuous
valueshastobedefinedviaaprobabilitydensityfunction,alsocalledasensormodel.
4 B. Gutmann, I. Thon, A. Kimmig, M. Bruynooghe, L. De Raedt
set of samples. An example for such a method is importance sampling, where each
sample s has an associated weight w . Samples are drawn from an importance dis-
tribution π(·|e),andweightsaredefinedasw = p(si|e).Thetruetargetdistribution
can then be estimated as
1 (cid:88)
where W = w is a normalization constant. The simplest instance of this algo-
rithmisrejectionsampling asalreadysketchedabove,wherethesamplesaredrawn
from the prior distribution p(·) and weights are 1 for those samples consistent with
the evidence, and 0 for the others. Especially for evidence with low probability,
rejectionsamplingsuffersfromaveryhighrejectionrate,thatis,manysamplesare
generated,butdonotcontributetothefinalestimate.Thisisknownastherejection
problem. One way to address this problem is likelihood weighted sampling, which
dynamically adapts the proposal distribution during sampling to avoid choosing
values for random variables that cause the sample to become inconsistent with the
evidence.Again,thisrequirescorrespondingmodificationsoftheassociatedweights
in order to produce correct estimates.
2.2 Logical Inference
A(definite)clauseisanexpressionoftheformh :- b ,...,b ,wherehiscalledhead
and b ,...,b is the body. A program consists of a set of clauses and its semantics
isgivenbyitsleastHerbrandmodel.Thereareatleasttwowaysofusingadefinite
clause in a logical derivation. First, there is backward chaining, which states that
to prove a goal h with the clause it suffices to prove b ,...,b ; second, there is
forward chaining, which starts from a set of known facts b ,...,b and the clause
and concludes that h also holds (cf. (Nilsson and Mal(cid:32)iszyn´ski 1996)). Prolog em-
ploysbackwardchaining(SLD-resolution)toanswerqueries.SLD-resolutionisvery
efficientbothintermsoftimeandspace.However,similarsubgoalsmaybederived
multipletimesifthequerycontainsrecursivecalls.Moreover,SLD-resolutionisnot
guaranteedtoalwaysterminate(whensearchingdepth-first).Usingforwardreason-
ing, on the other hand, one starts with what is known and employs the immediate
consequenceoperatorT untilafixpointisreached.Thisfixpointisidenticaltothe
least Herbrand model.
Definition 1 (T operator). Let P be a logic program containing a set of definite
clauses and ground(P) the set of all ground instances of these clauses. Starting
from a set of ground facts S the T operator returns
T (S)={h|h :- b ,...,b ∈ground(P) and {b ,...,b }⊆S}
2.3 Distribution Semantics
Sato’s distribution semantics (Sato 1995) extends logic programming to the prob-
abilistic setting by choosing truth values of basic facts randomly. The core of this
The Magic of Logical Inference in Probabilistic Programming 5
semantics lies in splitting the logic program into a set F of facts and a set R of
rules. Given a probability distribution P over the facts, the rules then allow one
to extend P into a distribution over least Herbrand models of the logic program.
Such a Herbrand model is called a possible world.
More precisely, it is assumed that DB =F ∪R is ground and denumerable, and
thatnoatominF unifieswiththeheadofaruleinR.Eachtruthvalueassignment
toF givesrisetoauniqueleastHerbrandmodelofDB.Thus,aprobabilitydistribu-
tionP overF candirectlybeextendedintoadistributionP overthesemodels.
Furthermore, Sato shows that, given an enumeration f ,f ,... of facts in F, P
can be constructed from a series of finite distributions P(n)(f = x ,...,f = x )
provided that the series fulfills the so-called compatibility condition, that is,
F 1 1 n n F 1 1 n+1 n+1
3 Syntax and Semantics
Sato’sdistributionsemantics,assummarizedinSec.2.3,providesthebasisformost
probabilistic logic programming languages including PRISM (Sato and Kameya
2001),ICL (Poole2008), CP-logic(Vennekenset al.2009)and ProbLog(DeRaedt
et al. 2007). The precise way of defining the basic distribution P differs among
languages, though the theoretical foundations are essentially the same. The most
basic instance of the distribution semantics, employed by ProbLog, uses so-called
probabilistic facts. Each ground instance of a probabilistic fact directly corresponds
to an independent random variable that takes either the value “true” or “false”.
Theseprobabilisticfactscanalsobeseenasbinaryswitches,cf.(Sato1995),which
againcanbeextendedtomulti-aryswitchesorchoicesasusedbyPRISMandICL.
Forswitches,atmostoneoftheprobabilisticfactsbelongingtotheswitchis“true”
according to the specified distribution. Finally, in CP-logic, such choices are used
in the head of rules leading to the so-called annotated disjunction.
Hybrid ProbLog (Gutmann et al. 2010) extends the distribution semantics with
continuous distributions. To allow for exact inference, Hybrid ProbLog imposes
severe restrictions on the distributions and their further use in the program. Two
sampledvalues,forinstance,cannotbecomparedagainsteachother.Onlycompar-
isonsthatinvolveonesampledvalueandonenumberconstantareallowed.Sampled
values may not be used in arithmetic expressions or as parameters for other distri-
butions, for instance, it is not possible to sample a value and use it as the mean of
a Gaussian distribution. It is also not possible to reason over an unknown number
of objects as BLOG (Milch et al. 2005) does, though this is the case mainly for
algorithmic reasons.
Here, we alleviate these restrictions by defining the basic distribution P over
probabilisticfactsbasedonbothdiscreteandcontinuousrandomvariables.Weuse
a three-step approach to define this distribution. First, we introduce explicit ran-
domvariablesandcorrespondingdistributionsovertheirdomains,bothdenotedby
terms. Second, we use a mapping from these terms to terms denoting (sampled)
outcomes, which, then, are used to define the basic distribution P on the level of
6 B. Gutmann, I. Thon, A. Kimmig, M. Bruynooghe, L. De Raedt
probabilistic facts. For instance, assume that an urn contains an unknown number
ofballswherethenumberisdrawnfromaPoissondistributionandwesaythatthis
urncontainsmanyballsifitcontainsatleast10balls.Weintroducearandomvari-
able number, and we define many :- dist gt((cid:39)(number),9). Here, (cid:39)(number) is the
Herbrand term denoting the sampled value of number, and dist gt((cid:39)(number),9)
is a probabilistic fact whose probability of being true is the expectation that this
value is actually greater than 9. This probability then carries over to the derived
atom many as well. We will elaborate on the details in the following.
3.1 Syntax
Inalogicprogram,followingSato,wedistinguishbetweenprobabilisticfacts,which
are used to define the basic distribution, and rules, which are used to derive addi-
tional atoms.2 Probabilistic facts are not allowed to unify with any rule head. The
distribution over facts is based on random variables, whose distributions we define
through so called distributional clauses.
Definition 2 (Distributional clause). A distributional clause is a definite clause
withanatomh∼D intheheadwhere∼isabinarypredicateusedininfixnotation.
For each ground instance (h ∼ D :- b ,...,b )θ with θ being a substitution
over the Herbrand universe of the logic program, the distributional clause de-
fines a random variable hθ and an associated distribution Dθ. In fact, the dis-
tribution is only defined when (b ,...,b )θ is true in the semantics of the logic
program. These random variables are terms of the Herbrand universe and can
be used as any other term in the logic program. Furthermore, a term (cid:39)(d) con-
structed from the reserved functor (cid:39)/1 represents the outcome of the random vari-
able d. These functors can be used inside calls to special predicates in dist rel =
{dist eq/2,dist lt/2,dist leq/2,dist gt/2,dist geq/2}. We assume that there is a
fact for each of the ground instances of these predicate calls. These facts are the
probabilisticfacts ofSato’sdistributionsemantics.Notethatthesetofprobabilistic
factsisenumerableastheHerbranduniverseoftheprogramisenumerable.Aterm
(cid:39)(d)linkstherandomvariabledwithitsoutcome.Theprobabilisticfactscompare
the outcome of a random variable with a constant or the outcome of another ran-
dom variable and succeed or fail according to the probability distribution(s) of the
random variable(s).
Example 1 (Distributional clauses).
nballs∼poisson(6). (3)
color(B)∼ [0.7:b,0.3:g] :- between(1,(cid:39)(nballs),B). (4)
diameter(B,MD)∼gamma(MD/20,20) :- between(1,(cid:39)(nballs),B),
mean diameter((cid:39)(color(B)),MD). (5)
2 Arulecanhaveanemptybody,inwhichcaseitrepresentsadeterministicfact.
The Magic of Logical Inference in Probabilistic Programming 7
The defined distributions depend on the following logical clauses:
mean diameter(C,5) :- dist eq(C,b).
mean diameter(C,10) :- dist eq(C,g).
between(I,J,I) :- dist leq(I,J).
between(I,J,K) :- dist lt(I,J), I1 is I+1,between(I1,J,K).
Thedistributional clause (3) modelsthe numberof ballsas aPoisson distribution
with mean 6. The distributional clause (4) models a discrete distribution for the
random variable color(B). With probability 0.7 the ball is blue and green otherwise.
Note that the distribution is defined only for the values B for which between(1,(cid:39)
(nballs),B)succeeds.Executionofcallstothelattergiverisetocallstoprobabilistic
factsthatareinstancesofdist leq(I,(cid:39)(nballs))anddist lt(I,(cid:39)(nballs)).Similarly,
the distributional clause (5) defines a gamma distribution that is also conditionally
defined. Note that the conditions in the distribution depend on calls of the form
mean diameter((cid:39)(color(n)),MD)withnavaluereturnedbybetween/3.Execution
of this call finally leads to calls dist eq((cid:39)(color(n)),b) and dist eq((cid:39)(color(n)),g).
It looks feasible, to allow (cid:39)(d) terms everywhere and to have a simple pro-
gram analysis insert the special predicates in the appropriate places by replacing
< /2, > /2, ≤ /2, ≥ /2 predicates by dist rel/2 facts. Though extending unifica-
tion is a bit harder: as long as a (cid:39)(h) term is unified with a free variable, standard
unificationcanbeperformed;onlywhentheothertermisboundanextensionisre-
quired.Inthispaper,weassumethatthespecialpredicatesdist eq/2,dist lt/2,
dist leq/2, dist gt/2, and dist geq/2 are used whenever the outcome of a ran-
dom variable need to be compared with another value and that it is safe to use
standard unification whenever a (cid:39)(h) term is used in another predicate.
For the basic distribution on facts to be well-defined, a program has to fulfill a
set of validity criteria that have to be enforced by the programmer.
Definition 3 (Valid program). A program P is called valid if:
(V1) In the relation h ∼ D that holds in the least fixpoint of a program, there is
a functional dependency from h to D, so there is a unique ground distribution D
for each ground random variable h.
(V2) Theprogramis distribution-stratified,thatis,thereexistsafunctionrank(·)
that maps ground atoms to N and that satisfies the following properties: (1) for
each ground instance of a distribution clause h ∼ D :- b ,...b holds rank(h ∼
D >rank(b ) (for all i). (2) for each ground instance of another program clause:
h :- b ,...b holds rank(h) ≥ rank(b ) (for all i). (3) for each ground atom b
that contains (the name of) a random variable h, rank(b)≥rank(h∼D) (with
h∼D the head of the distribution clause defining h).
(V3) All ground probabilistic facts or, to be more precise, the corresponding indi-
cator functions are Lebesgue-measurable.
(V4) Each atom in the least fixpoint can be derived from a finite number of prob-
abilistic facts (finite support condition (Sato 1995)).
8 B. Gutmann, I. Thon, A. Kimmig, M. Bruynooghe, L. De Raedt
Together, (V1) and (V2) ensure that a single basic distribution P over the
probabilistic facts can be obtained from the distributions of individual random
variables defined in P. The requirement (V3) is crucial. It ensures that the series
of distributions P(n) needed to construct this basic distribution is well-defined.
Finally,thenumberoffactsoverwhichthebasicdistributionisdefinedneedstobe
countable.Thisistrue,aswehaveafinitenumberofconstantsandfunctors:those
appearing in the program.
3.2 Distribution Semantics
WenowdefinetheseriesofdistributionsP(n)wherewefixanenumerationf ,f ,...
of probabilistic facts such that i < j =⇒ rank(f ) ≤ rank(f ) where rank(·) is
a ranking function showing that the program is distribution-stratified. For each
predicate rel/2∈dist rel, we define an indicator function as follows:
1 if rel(X ,X ) is true
I1 (X ,X )= 1 2 (6)
0 if rel(X ,X ) is false
Furthermore,wesetI0 (X ,X )=1.0−I1 (X ,X ).Wethenusetheexpected
rel 1 2 rel 1 2
value of the indicator function to define probability distributions P(n) over finite
sets of ground facts f ,...,f . Let {rv ,...rv } be the set of random variables
these n facts depend on, ordered such that if rank(rv ) < rank(rv ), then i < j
(cf. (V2) in Definition 3). Furthermore, let f = rel (t ,t ), x ∈ {1,0}, and
i i i1 i2 j
θ−1 ={(cid:39)(rv )/V ,...,(cid:39)(rv )/V }. The latter replaces all evaluations of random
variables on which the f depend by variables for integration.
P(n)(f =x ,...,f =x )=E[Ix1 (t ,t ),...,Ixn (t ,t )] (7)
F 1 1 n n rel1 11 12 reln n1 n2
(cid:90) (cid:90)
rel1 11 12 reln n1 n2 rv1 1 rvm m
Example2(BasicDistribution). Letf ,f ,...=dist lt((cid:39)(b1),3),dist lt((cid:39)(b2),(cid:39)
(b1)),.... The second distribution in the series then is
dist lt dist lt
(cid:90) (cid:90)
= (Ix1 (V1,3),Ix2 (V2,V1))dD (V1)dD (V2)
dist lt dist lt b1 b2
By now we are able to prove the following proposition.
Proposition 1. Let P be a valid program. P defines a probability measure P
over the set of fixpoints of the T operator. Hence, P also defines for an arbitrary
formula q over atoms in its Herbrand base the probability that q is true.
Proof sketch. It suffices to show that the series of distributions P(n) over facts
(cf. (7)) is of the form that is required in the distribution semantics, that is, these
are well-defined probability distributions that satisfy the compatibility condition,
cf.(2).Thisisadirectconsequenceofthedefinitionintermsofindicatorfunctions
and the measurability of the underlying facts required for valid programs.
The Magic of Logical Inference in Probabilistic Programming 9
3.3 T Semantics
In the following, we give a procedural view onto the semantics by extending the
T operator of Definition 1 to deal with probabilistic facts dist rel(t ,t ). To do
so, we introduce a function ReadTable(·) that keeps track of the sampled val-
ues of random variables to evaluate probabilistic facts. This is required because
interpretations of a program only contain such probabilistic facts, but not the un-
derlyingoutcomesofrandomvariables.Givenaprobabilisticfactdist rel(t1,t2),
ReadTable returns the truth value of the fact based on the values of the random
variables h in the arguments, which are either retrieved from the table or sampled
according to their definition h∼D as included in the interpretation and stored in
case they are not yet available.
Definition 4 (Stochastic T operator). Let P be a valid program and ground(P)
the set of all ground instances of clauses in P. Starting from a set of ground facts
S the ST operator returns
(cid:110) (cid:12)
ST (S):= h (cid:12) h :- b ,...,b ∈ground(P) and ∀ b : either b ∈S or
P (cid:12) 1 n i i
ReadTable(b )=true
(cid:1)(cid:111)
ReadTableensuresthatthebasicfactsaresampledfromtheirjointdistribution
as defined in Sec. 3.2 during the construction of the standard fixpoint of the logic
program. Thus, each fixpoint of the ST operator corresponds to a possible world
whose probability is given by the distribution semantics.
4 Forward sampling using Magic Sets and backward reasoning
Inthissectionweintroduceournewmethodforprobabilisticforwardinference.To
thisaim,wefirstextendthemagicsettransformationtodistributionalclauses.We
then develop a rejection sampling scheme using this transformation. This scheme
also incorporates backward reasoning to check for consistency with the evidence
during sampling and thus to reduce the rejection rate.
4.1 Probabilistic magic set transformation
The disadvantage of forward reasoning in logic programming is that the search
is not goal-driven, which might generate irrelevant atoms. The magic set trans-
formation (Bancilhon et al. 1986; Nilsson and Ma(cid:32)liszyn´ski 1996) focuses forward
reasoning in logic programs towards a goal to avoid the generation of uninteresting
facts. It thus combines the advantages of both reasoning directions.
Definition 5 (Magic Set Transformation). If P is a logic program, then we use
Magic(P) to denote the smallest program such that if A :- A ,...,A ∈P then
• A :- c(A ),A ,...,A ∈Magic(P) and
• for each 1≤i≤n: c(A ) :- c(A ),A ,...,A ∈Magic(P)
10 B. Gutmann, I. Thon, A. Kimmig, M. Bruynooghe, L. De Raedt
Themeaningoftheadditionalc/1atoms(c=call)isthatthey“switchon”clauses
whentheyareneededtoproveaparticulargoal.Ifthecorrespondingswitchforthe
head atom is not true, the body is not true and thus cannot be proven. The magic
transformation is both sound and complete. Furthermore, if the SLD-tree of a goal
isfinite,forwardreasoninginthetransformedprogramterminates.Thesameholds
if forward reasoning on the original program terminates.
Wenowextendthistransformationtodistributionalclauses.Theideaisthatthe
distributional clause for a random variable h is activated when there is a call to a
probabilistic fact dist rel(t ,t ) depending on h.
Definition 6 (Probabilistic Magic Set Transformation). For program P, let P be
P without distributional clauses. M(P) is the smallest program s.t. Magic(P ) ⊆
M(P) and for each h∼D :- b ,...,b ∈P and rel∈{eq,lt,leq,gt,geq}:
• h∼D :- (c(dist rel((cid:39)(h),X));c(dist rel(X,(cid:39)(h))),b ,...,b .∈M(P).
• c(b ) :- (c(dist rel((cid:39)(h),X));c(dist rel(X,(cid:39)(h))),b ,...,b .∈M(P).
Then PMagic(P) consists of:
• aclausea p(t ,...,t ) :- c(p(t ,...,t )),p(t ,...,t )foreachbuilt-inpred-
1 n 1 n 1 n
icate (including dist rel/2 for rel∈{eq,lt,leq,gt,geq}) used in M(P).
• aclauseh :- b(cid:48),...,b(cid:48) foreachclauseh :- b ,...,b ∈M(P)whereb(cid:48) =a b
1 n 1 n i i
if b uses a built-in predicate and else b(cid:48) =b .
Note that every call to a built-in b is replaced by a call to a b; the latter pred-
icate is defined by a clause that is activated when there is a call to the built-in
(c(b)) and that effectively calls the built-in. The transformed program computes
the distributions only for random variables whose value is relevant to the query.
Thesedistributionsarethesameasthoseobtainedinaforwardcomputationofthe
original program. Hence we can show:
Lemma 1. Let P be a program and PMagic(P) its probabilistic magic set trans-
formation extended with a seed c(q). The distribution over q defined by P and by
PMagic(P) is the same.
Proof sketch. Inbothprograms,thedistributionoverq isdeterminedbythedistri-
butions of the atoms dist eq(t ,t ), dist leq(t ,t ), dist lt(t ,t ), dist geq(t ,t ),
1 2 1 2 1 2 1 2
and dist gt(t ,t ) onwhich q dependsin a forward computationof theprogram P.
The magic set transformation ensures that these atoms are called in the forward
executionofPMagic(P).InPMagic(P),acalltosuchanatomactivatesthedis-
tributional clause for the involved random variable. As this distributional clause is
alogicprogramclause,soundnessandcompletenessofthemagicsettransformation
ensures that the distribution obtained for that random variable is the same as in
P. Hence also the distribution over q is the same for both programs.
4.2 Rejection sampling with heuristic lookahead
AsdiscussedinSection2.1,sampling-basedapproachestoprobabilisticinferencees-
timatetheconditionalprobabilityp(q|e)ofaqueryq givenevidenceebyrandomly
The Magic of Logical Inference in Probabilistic Programming 11
Algorithm 1 Main loop for sampling-based inference to calculate the conditional
probability p(q|e) for query q, evidence e and program L.
1: function Evaluate(L, q, e, Depth)
3: n+ :=0 n− :=0
4: while Not converged do
5:
(I,w):=STPMagic(L∗,L,e,Depth)
6: if q ∈I then n+ :=n++w else n− :=n−+w
Algorithm 2 Sampling one interpretation; used in Algorithm 1.
1: function STPMagic(L∗,L,e,Depth)
2: T pf :=∅, T dis :=∅, w :=1, I old :=∅, I new :=∅
4: I old :=I new
5: for all (h :- body) ∈L∗ do
6: split body in B PF (prob. facts) and B L (the rest)
7: for all grounding substitution θ such that B L θ ⊆I old do
8: s:=true, w d :=1
9: while s∧B PF (cid:54)=∅ do
10: select and remove pf from B PF
11: (b pf ,w pf ):=ReadTable(pfθ,I old ,T pf ,T dis ,L,e,Depth)
12: s:=s∧b pf w d :=w d ·w pf
13: if s then
14: if hθ ∈e− then return (I new ,0) (cid:46) check negative evidence
15: I new :=I new ∪{hθ} w :=w·w d
16: until I new =I old ∨w =0 (cid:46) Fixpoint or impossible evidence
17: if e+ ⊆I new then return (I new ,w) (cid:46) check positive evidence
18: else return (I new ,0)
generating a large number of samples or possible worlds (cf. Algorithm 1). The al-
gorithm starts by preparing the program L for sampling by applying the PMagic
transformation. In the following, we discuss our choice of subroutine STPMagic
(cf. Algorithm 2) which realizes likelihood weighted sampling. It is used in Algo-
rithm1,line5,togenerateindividualsamples.Ititeratesthestochasticconsequence
operatorofDefinition4untileitherafixpointisreachedorthecurrentsampleisin-
consistentwiththeevidence.Finally,ifthesampleisinconsistentwiththeevidence,
it receives weight 0.
Algorithm 3 details the procedure used in line 11 of Algorithm 2 to sample from
a given distributional clause. The function ReadTable returns the truth value of
the probabilistic fact, together with its weight. If the outcome is not yet tabled,
it is computed. Note that false is returned when the outcome is not consistent
withtheevidence.Involveddistributions,ifnotyettabled,aresampledinline5.In
12 B. Gutmann, I. Thon, A. Kimmig, M. Bruynooghe, L. De Raedt
Algorithm 3 Evaluating a probabilistic fact pf; used in Algorithm 2. Com-
putePF(pf,T ) computes the truth value and the probability of pf according
to the information in T .
1: function ReadTable(pf,I,T pf ,T dis ,L,e,Depth)
2: if pf ∈/ T pf then
3: for all random variable h occurring in pf where h∈/ T dis do
4: if h∼D ∈/ I then return (false,0)
5: if not Sample(h,D,T dis ,I,L,e,Depth) then return (false,0)
6: (b,w):= ComputePF(pf,T dis )
8: return (false,0) (cid:46) inconsistent with evidence
9: extend T pf with (pf,b,w)
10: return (b,w) as stored in T pf for pf
11: procedure Sample(h,D, T dis , I, L, e, Depth)
12: w h :=1, D(cid:48) :=D (cid:46) Initial weight, temp. distribution
13: if D(cid:48) =[p 1 :a 1 ,...,p n :a n ] then (cid:46) finite distribution
14: for p j :a j ∈D(cid:48) where dist eq(h,a j )∈e− do (cid:46) remove neg. evidence
15: D(cid:48) :=Norm(D(cid:48)\{p j :a j }), w h :=w h ×(1−p j )
16: if ∃v :dist eq((cid:39)(h),v)∈e+ and p:v∈D(cid:48) then
17: D(cid:48) :=[1:v], w h :=w h ×p
18: for p j :a j ∈D(cid:48) do (cid:46) remove choices that make e+ impossible
19: if ∃b∈e+: not MaybeProof(b,Depth,I∪{dist eq(h,a j )},L) or
20: ∃b∈e−: not MaybeFail(b,Depth,I∪{dist eq(h,a j )},L) then
21: D(cid:48) :=Norm(D(cid:48)\{p j :a j }), w h :=w h ×(1−p j )
22: if D(cid:48) =∅ return false
23: Sample x according to D(cid:48), extend T dis with (h,x) and return true
the infinite case, Sample simply returns the sampled value. In the finite case, it is
directed towards generating samples that are consistent with the evidence. Firstly,
all possible choices that are inconsistent with the negative evidence are removed.
Secondly,whenthereispositiveevidenceforaparticularvalue,onlythatvalueisleft
in the distribution. Thirdly, it is checked whether each left value is consistent with
all other evidence. This consistency check is performed by a simple depth-bounded
meta-interpreter.Forpositiveevidence,itattemptsatop-downproofoftheevidence
atomintheoriginalprogramusingthefunctionMaybeProof.Subgoalsforwhich
the depth-bound is reached, as well as probabilistic facts that are not yet tabled
are assumed to succeed. If this results in a proof, the value is consistent, otherwise
it is removed. Similarly for negative evidence: in MaybeFail, subgoals for which
the depth-bound is reached, as well as probabilistic facts that are not yet tabled
are assumed to fail. If this results in failure, the value is consistent, otherwise
it is removed. The Depth parameter allows one to trade the computational cost
associated with this consistency check for a reduced rejection rate.
The Magic of Logical Inference in Probabilistic Programming 13
Note that the modified distribution is normalized and the weight is adjusted in
each of these three cases. The weight adjustment takes into account that removed
elements cannot be sampled and is necessary as it can depend on the distributions
sampled so far which elements are removed from the distribution sampled in Sam-
ple(theclausebodiesofthedistributionclauseareinstantiatingthedistribution).
5 Experiments
We implemented our algorithm in YAP Prolog and set up experiments to answer
the questions
Q1 Does the lookahead-based sampling improve the performance?
Q2 How do rejection sampling and likelihood weighting compare?
To answer the first question, we used the distributional program in Figure 1,
which models an urn containing a random number of balls. The number of balls
is uniformly distributed between 1 and 10 and each ball is either red or green
with equal probability. We draw 8 times a ball with replacement from the urn
and observe its color. We also define the atom nogreen(D) to be true if and
only if we did not draw any green ball in draw 1 to D. We evaluated the query
P(dist eq((cid:39)(color((cid:39)(drawnball(1)))),red) |nogreen(D)) for D = 1,2,...,8.
Notethattheevidenceimpliesthatthefirstdrawnballisred,hencethattheprob-
ability of the query is 1; however, the number of steps required to proof that the
evidence is inconsistent with drawing a green first ball increases with D, so the
larger is D, the larger Depth is required to reach a 100% acceptance rate for the
sample as illustrated in Figure 1. It is clear that by increasing the depth limit,
each sample will take longer to be generated. Thus, the Depth parameter allows
one to trade off convergence speed of the sampling and the time each sample needs
to be generated. Depending on the program, the query, and the evidence there is
an optimal depth for the lookahead.
To answer Q2, we used the standard example for BLOG (Milch et al. 2005). An
urn contains an unknown number of balls where every ball can be either green or
blue with p = 0.5. When drawing a ball from the urn, we observe its color but do
not know which ball it is. When we observe the color of a particular ball, there is a
20%chancetoobservethewrongone,e.g.greeninsteadofblue.Wehavesomeprior
belief over the number of balls in the urn. If 10 balls are drawn with replacement
fromtheurnandwesaw10timesthecolorgreen,whatistheprobabilitythatthere
arenballsintheurn?Weconsidertwodifferentpriordistributions:inthefirstcase,
the number of balls is uniformly distributed between 1 and 8, in the second case,
it is Poisson-distributed with mean λ=6.
OnerunoftheexperimentcorrespondstosamplingthenumberN ofballsinthe
urn, the color for each of the N balls, and for each of the ten draws both the ball
drawn and whether or not the color is observed correctly in this draw. Once these
valuesarefixed,thesequenceofcolorsobservedisdetermined.Thisimpliesthatfor
afixednumberN ofballs,thereare2N·N10 possibleproofs.Incaseoftheuniform
distribution, exact PRISM inference can be used to calculate the probability for
14 B. Gutmann, I. Thon, A. Kimmig, M. Bruynooghe, L. De Raedt
numballs∼uniform([1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10]). 0.6
ball(M) :- between(1,numballs,M). 0.5
color(B)∼uniform([red,green]) :- ball(B). 0.3
draw(N) :- between(1,8,N).
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
nogreen(0).
ecnatpeccA
Depth limit for MaybeProof
nogreen(D) :- dist eq((cid:39)(color((cid:39)(drawnball(D)))),red), D2 is D−1, nogreen(D2).
drawnball(D)∼uniform(L) :- draw(D),findall(B,ball(B),L).
Fig. 1. The program modeling the urn (left); rate of accepted samples (right) for
evaluatingthequeryP(dist eq((cid:39)(color((cid:39)(drawnball(1)))),red)|nogreen(D))
for D =1,2,...,10 and for Depth=1,2,...,8 using Algorithm 1. The acceptance
rate is calculated by generating 200 samples using our algorithm and counting the
number of sample with weight larger than 0.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
ytilibaborP
Uniform Prior
True Posterior 0.16
Likelihood Weighting
Rejection Sampling 0.14
0 5 10 15 20
Number of balls in urn
ytilibaborP
Poisson Prior
True Posterior
Likelihood Weighting
Rejection Sampling
Number of balls in urn
Fig.2. Resultsofurnexperimentwithforwardreasoning.10ballswithreplacement
were drawn and each time green was observed. Left: Uniform prior over # balls,
right: Poisson prior (λ=6).
each given number of balls, with a total runtime of 0.16 seconds for all eight cases.
InthecaseofthePoissondistribution,thisisonlypossibleupto13balls,withmore
balls,PRISMrunsoutofmemory.Forinferenceusingsampling,wegenerate20,000
sampleswiththeuniformprior,and100,000withPoissonprior.Wereportaverage
results over five repetitions. For these priors, PRISM generates 8,015 and 7,507
samples per second respectively, ProbLog backward sampling 708 and 510, BLOG
3,008 and 2,900, and our new forward sampling (with rejection sampling) 760 and
731. The results using our algorithm for both rejection sampling and likelihood
weightingwithDepth=0areshowninFigure2.Asthegraphsshow,thestandard
deviation for rejection sampling is much larger than for likelihood weighting.
The Magic of Logical Inference in Probabilistic Programming 15
6 Conclusions and related work
Wehavecontributedanovelconstructforprobabilisticlogicprogramming,thedis-
tributional clauses, and defined its semantics. Distributional clauses allow one to
representcontinuousvariablesandtoreasonaboutanunknownnumberofobjects.
In this regard this construct is similar in spirit to languages such as BLOG and
Church, but it is strongly embedded in a logic programming context. This embed-
ding allowed us to propose also a novel inference method based on a combination
ofimportancesamplingandforwardreasoning.Thiscontrastswiththemajorityof
probabilistic logic programming languages which are based on backward reasoning
(possibly enhanced with tabling (Sato and Kameya 2001; Mantadelis and Janssens
2010)). Furthermore, only few of these techniques employ sampling, but see (Kim-
mig et al. 2011) for a Monte Carlo approach using backward reasoning. Another
key difference with the existing probabilistic logic programming approaches is that
the described inference method can handle evidence. This is due to the magic set
transformation that targets the generative process towards the query and evidence
and instantiates only relevant random variables.
P-log (Baral et al. 2009) is a probabilistic language based on Answer Set Prolog
(ASP). It uses a standard ASP solver for inference and thus is based on forward
reasoning, but without the use of sampling. Magic sets are also used in proba-
bilistic Datalog (Fuhr 2000), as well as in Dyna, a probabilistic logic programming
language (Eisner et al. 2005) based on rewrite rules that uses forward reasoning.
However, neither of them uses sampling. Furthermore, Dyna and PRISM require
thattheexclusive-explanationassumption.Thisassumptionstatesthatnotwodif-
ferentproofsforthesamegoalcanbetruesimultaneously,thatis,theyhavetorely
onatleastonebasicrandomvariablewithdifferentoutcome.Distributionalclauses
(and the ProbLog language) do not impose such a restriction. Other related work
includes MCMC-based sampling algorithms such as the approach for SLP (An-
gelopoulos and Cussens 2003). Church’s inference algorithm is based on MCMC
too, and also BLOG is able to employ MCMC. At least for BLOG it seems to be
requiredtodefineadomain-specificproposaldistributionforfastconvergence.With
regard to future work, it would be interesting to consider evidence on continuous
distributionsasitiscurrentlyrestrictedtofinitedistribution.Programanalysisand
transformation techniques to further optimize the program w.r.t. the evidence and
query could be used to increase the sampling speed. Finally, the implementation
could be optimized by memoizing some information from previous runs and then
use it to more rapidly prune as well as sample.
Acknowledgements
AngelikaKimmigandBerndGutmannaresupportedbytheResearchFoundation-
Flanders(FWO-Vlaanderen). This workis supportedbytheGOA project2008/08
Probabilistic Logic Learning and by the European Community’s Seventh Frame-
work Programme under grant agreement First-MM-248258.
16 B. Gutmann, I. Thon, A. Kimmig, M. Bruynooghe, L. De Raedt