The channel capacity and information density of
biochemical signaling cascades
Tatsuaki Tsuruyama*
*Department of Diagnostic Pathology, Center for Anatomical, Forensic Medical and
Pathological Research, Kyoto University Graduate School of Medicine,
Yoshida-Konoe-cho, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8315, Japan
*Send correspondence to: T. Tsuruyama
Department of Diagnostic Pathology, Kyoto University Graduate School of Medicine
1 Yoshida-Konoe-cho, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8501, Japan
Phone: +81-75-753-4473; Fax: +81-75-761-9591
E-mail: tsuruyam@kuhp.kyoto-u.ac.jp
Living cell signaling systems include multistep biochemical signaling reaction cascades
(BSCs) comprising modifications of molecular signaling proteins. Substantial data on
BSCs have been accumulated in the field of molecular biology and the analysis of
signaling systems requires qualitative evaluation. However, quantification of the
information and channel capacity of BSCs has not been focused on from the perspective
of information theory. In the current study, we aimed to derive basic equations for
describing the channel capacity and information density of BSCs using the fluctuation
theorem. From the results, channel capacity and information density can be described
using the average entropy production rate when the signaling system is minimally
redundant. The channel capacity could actually be calculated for the mitogen-activated
protein kinase BSC when it was minimally redundant. This quantitative method of
examination is applicable to the quantitative analysis of BSCs.
I. INTRODUCTION
Biological homeostatic systems are characterized by cellular biochemical
signaling reaction cascades (BSCs). Qualitative or semi-quantitative analysis of BSCs is
a key approach to studying molecular and cellular biology. On the other hand, an
analytical method based on the concept of a chemical reaction network recently
produced important results using numerical simulation, and computational/automated
methodologies have been developed to implement this concept [1-6]. However, the
application of this for BSCs and biological events has been limited. One of the main
reasons for the difficulty in the quantitative analysis of BSCs is the absence of a
theoretical basis. In the current study, we aimed to illustrate a general scheme for the
quantitative analysis of BSCs.
Herein, we use a simple model of BSCs as follows:
In scheme (1), we consider an open homogeneous reactor in contact with
chemostats of a signal mediator, M, which drive the BSC out of equilibrium.
An increase in the ligand A triggers the BSC when it binds to the receptor (R) A ,
activates A to S , and also induces the binding of M. Subsequently, S interacts with and
activates A to S , which, in turn, binds M. More generally, each activated signaling
molecule S potentially activates A . Signaling terminates when S translocates into the
nucleus, binds to a specific region of genomic DNA, and promotes the subsequent
transcription of RNA (Fig. 1).
II. METHODS
We have formulated a BSC as a system in which the concentration of modified
proteins fluctuates minimally around a steady-state value in the absence of a specific
signal event. Recently, fluctuation analysis has greatly advanced through the discovery
of the fluctuation theorem (FT) and Jarzynski’s equality [3,7,8]. We aimed to apply
these advances to the qualitative analysis of BSCs.
Once the signal event is triggered, a modified fluctuation will be amplified
beyond the minimal fluctuation. The amplified modified fluctuation steps are assigned a
step number j (1≤ j ≤ n) in which S molecules participate in the j-th (1≤ j ≤ n) step of
the BSC thus:
S : S =Se →Se+dS (2)
where e signifies the concentration of S at the initial state. In this step, we set the mean
entropy production rate to be <σ>. For instance, we can write a BSC thus:
S S S S S (2’)
1 2 3…, n-1 n
Here, S is the j-th signaling step having a certain duration t. The total duration of signal
events is:
We introduced the total number of signaling molecules Λ:
All of the signaling events Φ of total duration T are to be considered a priori as equally
probable. We obtain information I for the all of the given signal events, which is derived
from the above serial alphabetic sequences,
The rate at which information is transmitted in the channel is I/T. This limit defines the
capacity of the channel:
C = lim logΦ (6)
Here, we define the relative proportions p using the total number of signaling molecules
Λ:
The logarithm of the total signal event number Φ is given using Stirling’s
a p p roximation [9,10]:
We can rewrite (3) using (7) in the main text so that
We collect equations (7), (8), and (9), and maximize Φ using two parameters, α and β,
This is an application of Lagrange’s nondetermined coefficient determination method.
Differentiating (10), we obtain
Substituting (10) into (11), we obtain
⎣ j j j j⎦ j⎣ j j ⎦
Because dΛ and dp are independent variables, we can write
Substituting (14) into (13) yields
To satisfy (15), we set the left hand side to
From (16) and (14), we obtain
Subsequently, let us consider the inverse signaling cascade. Here we define as follows:
S : S =Se →Se−dS (19)
−j −j j j j
In this step, we set the mean entropy production rate to be <σ >. The negative suffix –j
implies inverse signal transmission against the assumed polarity of the cascade. Taken
together with the S signaling, a BSC is commonly described as comprising the
following steps: the first events trigger the modified signaling S and, after a sufficiently
long duration of demodification proceeds, the fluctuation decreases to a minimal value,
and the system recovers to its initial status (Figure 2).
For the inverse cascade, using a parameter β’, we have:
Using the mean entropy production rate <σ > for a sufficiently long
demodification duration (e.g., the reverse signaling duration) t , the FT combines the
BSCs S and S to give:
lim log j = σ (21)
Above, we noted that t << t (20) gives:
p = p exp σ t (22)
j −j −j −j
Eqs. (17) , (20), and (21) give:
In these actual BSCs, t << t , (23) gives:
Eq. (24) implies that the mean entropy production rates are independent of j, when the
given BSC is minimally redundant. Therefore, we can rewrite (22) as follows:
Using (23) and (24):
where ε is a small number.
III. Mutual Information in BSCs
Let us consider the mutual information in BSCs. In an actual BSC as depicted in
Fig. 3, activation of the j+1-th signal is delayed following activation of the j-th step:
when modification of S occurs, modification of S is not observed immediately. This
is because a signaling molecule protein slowly diffuses in the cytoplasm and it takes a
long time for it to interact with other signaling molecules. To an observer, modification
of S comes with the probability ø that S is unmodified, and the probability (1-ø) that
S is modified. Here we set ζ = [ø log ø + (1- ø ) log (1- ø)] and ζ = [ø log ø + (1-
j+1 j j j j j -j -j -j
ø ) log (1 - ø )]; 0 ≥ ζ ≥-1, 0 ≥ ζ ≥ -1. The entropy H and the conditional entropies
-j -j j -j j
H (S; S ) are given by:
H =−p logp − p logp (26)
j j j −j −j
j j j+1 j j
The active molecule S has the probability ø of coming through unmodified and a (1-ø )
probability of being deactivated (Fig. 3). To choose p and p in such a way as to
maximize them, we introduce the following function U using the undetermined
parameter λ:
U =−p logp − p logp −ζp +λ p + p (28)
j j j −j −j j j j −j
Setting the right-hand parts of (29) and (30) to zero and eliminating λ:
logp +ζ =logp (31)
Similarly, the inverse of reaction -j-th step (19), also depicted in Fig. 3, can be
examined in a similar manner:
H =−p logp − p logp = H (33)
−j j j −j −j j
−j j j−1 −j −j
We have introduced the following function U with the undetermined parameter λ’:
U =−p logp − p logp −ζ p +λ' p + p (35)
−j j j −j −j −j −j j −j
Setting the right-hands of Eq. (36) and (37) equal to zero and eliminating λ’,
logp =logp +ζ (38)
∴p = p exp ζ (39)
Comparing (21) and (39),
ζ =−ζ (40)
and we introduce mutual entropies:
Considering the forward and inverse orientation of a signaling cascade, the net mutual
entropy is given:
ΔH −ΔH = H −H S ;S − H −H S ;S
j −j j j j j−1 −j −j j−1 j
j j −j −j j j j −j
A comparison of (21), (34), and (22’) gives:
Using (43) and (44), the mutual information for a pair of j-th and - j-th steps is:
lim j −j = lim j j j −j = lim j j ( ) −j
In conclusion, the mutual information is given by the mean production rate of the
inverse step, when the BSC system is redundant.
IV. The channel capacity and information density of MAPK BSC
BSCs have been studied extensively using models of MAPK pathways, in which the
epidermal growth factor receptor, c-Raf, MAP kinase–extracellular signal-regulated
kinase kinase (MEK), and kinase–extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) are
phosphorylated constitutively following treatment with cytokines and other reagents.
This Ras-c-Raf- ERK BSC (RRE) and Ras-phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase-AKT BSC
(RKT) are ubiquitous signaling pathways that convey cell mitogenic and differentiation
signals from the cell membrane to the nucleus [11-22].
We aimed to evaluate redundancy in BSCs by adaptation into an actual signaling
cascade for calculating the channel capacity using previously reported data. We
obtained the following equation from Eqs (22) and (24) in reference to Figure 2:
The integration in the numerator in the third formula in Eq (46) was obtained from
the area ratio of the integration of the inactivated molecule’s concentration dS- from t
to T over the sum of integrations. As an example, we analyzed the data from
Petropavlovskaia et al. regarding the activation of BSCs in RIN-m5F rat islet cells
stimulated by two types of ligand: full-length recombinant islet neogenesis-associated
protein (rINGAP) and a 15-amino-acid fragment of INGAP-P [16]. The RRE and RKT
BSCs were analyzed. In detail,
Here, * represents activated signaling molecules. P and R represent the peptide
ligands and their receptor, respectively. M represents a signal mediator. We plotted –log
S for BSC durations t (j = 1, 2, and 3 for Ras, c-Raf, ERK), and it was possible to
perform regression analyses for calculating the channel capacity σin Eq (24) from the
gradient of the regression line. As a result, the RREs induced by INGAP-P and rINGAP
were verified to function in a minimally redundant fashion (n = 9, P = 2.3 × 10-4, Fig.
4A; and n = 6, P = 1.3 × 10–2, Fig. 4B) and the channel capacities were calculated as 3.3
× 10-2 bits/min and 1.7 × 10–2 bits/min, respectively. In contrast, the RKTs induced by
INGAP-P and rINGAP were not minimally redundant (P > 0.05, Fig. 4C; and P > 0.05,
Fig. 4D) and the channel capacities were not computable.
V. DISCUSSION
In this analysis, the equations for determining the basic properties of a
nonredundant BSC, including information density and channel capacity, were newly
formulated as Eq (45).
BSCs comprise complex networks and the reaction to such a network activates
both the redundant and the minimally redundant BSCs. Our quantification methodology
is available for distinguishing a given BSC from redundancy and could contribute to
evaluation of the activity of a BSC in the whole cellular signaling network.
In conclusion, this framework provides a useful platform for quantitatively
analyzing data on cell signaling pathways that are now being accumulated for
quantitative modeling of biological systems.
VI. METHODS
JMP Start Statistics version 9.0 (Statistical Discovery Software SAS Institute,
Cary, NC, USA) was used for all analyses.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by a Grant-in-Aid from the Ministry of Education, Culture,
Sports, Science, and Technology of Japan (Synergy of Fluctuation and Structure: Quest
for Universal Laws in Non-Equilibrium Systems, P2013-201 Grant-in-Aid for Scientific
Research on Innovative Areas, MEXT, Japan). There are no conflicts of interest.
FIGURE LEGENDS
Figure 1. Schematic of a reaction cascade. A is a ligand and A is a receptor that
mediates cellular responses to external environmental changes. Individual signaling
molecules S (activated forms of A) relay the activation of individual steps and the last
species S is translocated to the nucleus, where it controls gene expression.
Figure 2 A common time course of the j-th step. Fold changes in modification. The
ratio denotes the ratio at the steady state, normalized to 1. The integrals of S = ∫ t jdS
and S =∫ T dS are shown, which satisfy t << t =T- t
−j −j j -j j
Figure 3. Schematic representation of the relationship between inputs and outputs
at the j-th signaling step of a simple discrete channel.
Figure 4. Quantification of the MAPK signaling pathway.
(A, B) A regression analysis of log S was performed for signal duration (t) (min) in the
RRE with three steps. Regression lines are illustrated in the plots. The gradient of the
regression line represents the channel capacity.
(C, D) A regression analysis was performed in the RKT.
0 50 100 150 200
y = -0.0172x -3.432
R² = 0.6096
-1 0 50 100 150 200
y = -0.0336x -1.5121
-3 R² = 0.87112
Duration (min)(x)
Duration (min)(x)
0 50 100 150 200
-1 y = -0.0228x -1.692
R² = 0.46073
Duration (min)(x)
0 50 100 150 200
y = -0.0215x -1.6046
R² = 0.3994
Duration (min)(x)