NATURE REVIEWS DRUG DISCOVERY 13(2): 105-121 (2014)
The Role of Ligand Efficiency Measures in Drug Discovery
Andrew L. Hopkins, 1 György M. Keserű, 2 Paul D. Leeson, 3* David C. Rees, 4 Charles H. Reynolds 5
1. Division of Biological Chemistry and Drug Discovery, College of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, Dundee
DD1 5EH, United Kingdom. a.hopkins@dundee.ac.uk
2. Hungarian Academy of Sciences, 1025 Budapest, Pusztaszeri út 59-67, 1525 Budapest, P.O. Box 17, Hungary.
keseru.gyorgy@ttk.mta.hu
3. GlaxoSmithKline, Medicines Research Centre, Gunnels Wood Road, Stevenage, Hertfordshire, SG1 2NY,
United Kingdom. paul.d.leeson@GSK.com
4. Astex Pharmaceuticals , 436 Cambridge Science Park, Milton Road, Cambridge, CB4 0QA, United Kingdom.
David.Rees@astx.com
5. Gfree Bio, LLC, 3805 Old Easton Road, Doylestown, Pennsylvania 18902, United States.
creynolds@gfreebio.com
 Ligand efficiency measures quantify the molecular properties, particularly size and lipophilicity, of small
molecules that are required to gain binding affinity to a drug target. For example, ligand efficiency, is the
binding free energy per heavy atom count (LE = G/HA) and lipophilic ligand efficiency (LLE = pIC or Ki –
cLogP/D). There are additional efficiency measures for groups in a molecule, and for combinations of size and
lipophilicity.
 The application of ligand efficiency metrics has been widely reported in the selection and optimisation of
fragments, hits, and leads. In particular, optimisation of lipophilic ligand efficiency shows that it is possible to
increase affinity and reduce lipophilicity at the same time, even with challenging ‘lipophile-preferring’ targets.
 Mean ligand efficiency measures of molecules acting at a specific target, when combined with their drug-like
physical properties, is a practical means of estimating target ‘druggability.’ This is exemplified with 480 target-
assay pairs from the primary literature. Across these targets correlations between biological activity in vitro
and physical properties are generally weak, showing that increasing activity by increasing physical properties is
not always necessary.
 An analysis of 46 recently marketed oral drugs shows that they frequently have highly optimised ligand
efficiency and lipophilic ligand efficiencies for their target. Compared with ‘only-in-class’ oral drugs, on
average only 1.5% of all molecules per target possess superior combined ligand efficiency and lipophilic ligand
efficiency values.
 Optimising ligand efficiencies based on both molecular size and lipophilicity, when set in the context of the
specific target, has the potential to ameliorate the molecular inflation that pervades current practice in
medicinal chemistry, and to increase the developability of drug candidates.
Biographies
Andrew L. Hopkins
Andrew Hopkins won a British Steel scholarship to attend University of Manchester graduating with a First
Class Honours in Chemistry, in 1993. He undertook a doctorate in molecular biophysics at the University of
Oxford, from where he joined Pfizer, in 1998. After a career of nearly ten years in the pharmaceutical
industry, Andrew moved to the University of Dundee to take up the Chair of Medicinal Informatics and SULSA
Research Professor of Translational Biology, in the College of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, where he is
also the Director of SULSA – the Scottish Universities Life Sciences Alliance.
György M. Keserű
György Keserű (PhD, DSc) started his career at Sanofi heading a chemistry research lab. He moved to Gedeon
Richter in 1999 as the Head of Computer-aided Drug Discovery. In 2007 he was appointed as the Head of
Discovery Chemistry at Gedeon Richter. He contributed to the discovery of the antipsychotic Cariprazine®
that is under NDA filing. In January 2013 he became general director of the Research Center for Natural
Sciences at the Hungarian Academy of Sciences. His research interests include medicinal chemistry, drug
design, and in silico ADME. György has published over 160 papers and more than 10 books and book
chapters.
Paul D. Leeson
Paul Leeson’s 35-year industrial career began at Smith Kline and French Research Laboratories, and has taken
him to Merck Sharp and Dohme, then to Wyeth (USA), and from 1997-2011, AstraZeneca, where he was
head of medicinal chemistry at the Charnwood site and leader of AstraZeneca’s Global Chemistry Forum.
Since 2011 he has been a consultant for GlaxoSmithKline. Paul’s drug discovery contributions, published in
more than 150 papers, patents and book chapters, have been in the cardiovascular, neuroscience,
inflammation and respiratory therapy areas. He has a special interest in compound quality in relation to
pipeline attrition.
David C. Rees
David Rees joined Astex in 2003 and is Senior Vice President of Medicinal Chemistry. Prior to Astex he had
19 years’ experience at Parke-Davis, Cambridge then Organon, Scotland and AstraZeneca, Sweden. In 2007
David was a co-recipient of the Royal Society of Chemistry Malcolm Campbell Memorial Prize for the
discovery of Sugammadex (Bridion) which is marketed by Merck in over 40 countries. David is a co-author of
over 100 publications and patents and served as President of the Organic Division of the Royal Society of
Chemistry (2010-2013).
Charles H. Reynolds
Charles Reynolds is currently President of Gfree Bio, a modeling and structure-based design company in
suburban Philadelphia. Previously he was Senior Director of Discovery Technologies at Ansaris, led modeling
groups at Johnson & Johnson, and was a Research Fellow at Rohm and Haas (Dow). He received his BA from
Austin College and PhD from the University of Texas at Austin. Charles has published extensively on
modeling in drug discovery, and his views on the subject have been sought by organizations ranging from
C&E News to the Wall Street Journal. He is a Fellow of the American Chemical Society.
The judicious application of ligand or binding efficiencies, which quantify the molecular properties required
to gain binding affinity for a drug target, is gaining traction in the selection and optimisation of fragments,
hits, and leads. Retrospective analysis of recently marketed oral drugs shows that they frequently have
highly optimised ligand efficiency values for their target. Optimising ligand efficiencies based on both
molecular size and lipophilicity, when set in the context of the specific target, has the potential to ameliorate
the molecular inflation that pervades current practice in medicinal chemistry, and to increase the
developability of drug candidates.
Introduction
The properties of small-molecule drugs, especially those that are orally bioavailable, are concentrated in a
relatively narrow range of physicochemical space, known as ‘drug-like’ space.1,2 In studies of extensive
datasets of small molecules, the fundamental properties of molecular size, lipophilicity, shape and polarity
have been correlated, to varying degrees, with solubility3, membrane permeability4, metabolic stability,5,6
receptor promiscuity,7 in vivo toxicity,8,9 and attrition10,11 in drug development pipelines.
Lipophilicity and hydrogen bond donor count appear to be key properties, since these have remained
essentially constant in oral drugs over time.7,12,13,14,15 The median and mean molecular weight of approved
drugs has risen by only around 50Da (15%) over the past 3 decades, whilst the median and mean molecular
weight of synthesized experimental compounds has risen by over 100Da (30%).16 In contrast, the molecules
being published in the literature,15 and patented by the pharmaceutical industry,17 as well as those entering
clinical development pipelines,10 are more lipophilic, larger, and less three-dimensional14,18 than approved
oral drugs. Yet, compounds with higher molecular weight and higher lipophilicity face a higher probability of
failure at each stage of clinical development.10,19,20
The control of physical properties is dependent on the specific drug target, the mode of perturbation and the
target product profile - all of which may justify developing compounds which lie beyond the norm - and on
the variable drug discovery practices of originating institutions.7,17 Individual drug discovery projects often
justify the pursuit of molecules that have additional risk associated with suboptimal physicochemical
properties, as long as experimental project goals and target product profile criteria are met. However,
viewed in aggregate at a company portfolio level, physical properties of investigational drugs can have an
important influence on the overall attrition rates10,19,20 and therefore return on investment.
Three factors have been proposed to underlie the inflation in physicochemical properties 21,22 of
investigational drugs over the past three decades. Firstly, the discovery of initial hit compounds with inflated
physical properties has been linked to the rise of high-throughput screening (HTS).23 Larger and more
lipophilic compounds, potentially having greater binding affinity, are more likely to be detected in HTS
assays, which are often based on a single affinity end point. Secondly, the tendency of HTS methods to
identify large and lipophilic compounds is amplified by the observed tendency for the lead optimisation
process to inflate physical properties.24, 25 Thirdly, the portfolio of drug targets being tackled by the industry is
changing towards more chemically challenging and less druggable targets.20
We believe that the obsession with potency and the co-tendency to inflate molecular properties can be
remedied by monitoring and optimising ligand efficiencies instead of potency alone. Ligand efficiencies,
which are measures of in vitro biological activity corrected for the physical property ‘load’ of the molecule,
quantify how effectively the molecule uses its structural features in binding to the target. The ligand
efficiency concept26 was derived from the observation of the maximum affinities achievable by ligands is -1.5
kcal/mol/non-hydrogen atom (‘heavy’ stom), ignoring simple cations and anions27 and studies examining
functional group binding energy.28 Kuntz et al. presented binding free energy (G) per atom by dividing the
free energy of binding by the number of non-hydrogen (‘heavy’) atoms.27 Kuntz et al. postulated the potential
use of the binding energy per atom as a means to assess ligands throughout the drug discovery process.27
Transforming the data in this manner makes two assumptions. Firstly it assumes the assigns all of the
intermolecular interaction to the ligand alone. Secondly, it assumes the binding energies per atom are
additive. Thus for a given ligand efficiency (the gradient) there is a linear relationship between the free
energy of binding and the number of heavy atoms, where it is assumed a ligand with zero atoms has zero
free energy of binding at standard conditions. The most widely used ligand efficiencies are simply calculated
and are summarised in Boxes 1-3; they can be applied at all stages of drug discovery, to evaluate fragments,
screening hits, leads and candidate drugs. The use of molecular size, such as heavy atom count, in efficiency
measures (see Box 1) has some caveats.29 Specifically, component atoms (C, N, O, S and halogen) are treated
equally when their sizes and binding properties are different, and some atoms in a molecule may not take
part in receptor binding interactions (discussed in Box 2).
Monitoring ligand efficiency metrics during hit and lead optimisation brings into focus the price paid in
physical property changes when modulating binding affinity. Depending on the binding affinity and physical
properties of a lead molecule, ligand efficiencies may increase or decrease during optimisation. This is
exemplified by the changes in affinity that are needed to maintain constant ligand efficiencies when
substituting a lead molecule with various groups (see Box 3 and Figure 1). Applying ligand efficiency analysis
has practical utility in guiding lead discovery, and more importantly lead optimisation, towards drug-like
chemical space. We illustrate this with new analyses, including optimisations from the recent literature and
surveys of ligand efficiencies of both drug targets and recently approved oral drugs.
Binding thermodynamics and ligand efficiency
Hit-to-lead efforts typically start from hits with micro-Molar(μM) affinity or even low milli-Molar (mM)
affinity in the case of fragment hits, and aim to identify sub-μM lead series with promising physicochemical
and ADMET profiles that are suitable for further optimization. Improving potency increases the negative free
energy of binding (G), which in turn is composed of two thermodynamic quantities: binding enthalpy (H)
and binding entropy (TS).
Predicting how structural modifications will affect enthalpy or entropy of binding is extremely difficult,
particularly given the well-known phenomenon of entropy-enthalpy compensation, but there are some
general trends.30,31 Optimisation of specific polar interactions between the target binding site and ligand is
usually associated with a more promising physicochemical profile (lower lipophilicity) and improvements in
binding enthalpy. In contrast, increasing ligand size and lipophilicity to generate non-specific interactions
often leads to entropy-driven improvements in affinity,32 while specific lipophilic interactions can increase or
decrease binding enthalpy. The entropy-driven approach to improving affinity is probably a factor in the
well-documented inflation of physicochemical properties in optimisation.22,23,24,25
Although this picture is qualitative, thermodynamics-based optimizations have been the subject of increasing
recent interest. 33,34 Isothermal titration calorimetry (ITC) allows the determination of H and TS,35 and ITC
data from more than 700 protein-ligand complexes, obtained from a literature survey covering both
medicinal chemistry and natural-product derived ligands, has been analysed.36 In contrast to binding free
energy,27 the binding enthalpy decreases with increasing molecular size at heavy atom count of 25 or
greater. 37
LE decreases with increasing number of heavy atoms (see Box 2 and supplementary Figure S2).38,39 It has
been suggested that a contributing factor to the fall-off typically observed for LE in larger ligands might be
due to less favorable binding entropies for larger, more flexible ligands.40 However, in an analysis of the
number of energetically accessible conformations for several thousand ligands of varying sizes and affinities
no trend could be found for increased conformational entropies as ligand size increased.39 It is clear from
this analysis that many large molecules are much more conformationally constrained than might be expected
from overall size or a simple count of rotatable bonds. It also seems likely that any effect of conformational
entropy upon ligand binding may well be swamped by other contributions to overall TS of binding.40
Thermodynamic data allows individual ligand enthalpic and entropic efficiencies per heavy atom to be
calculated.35 A size independent version of enthalpic efficiency (SIHE)36 can also be used. Analysis of
experimental ITC data33,41 across a wide range of chemotypes shows that the average entropy efficiency is
little changed with size (supplementary Figure S1), but narrows in moving from small to large ligands.42 By
contrast, the enthalpy efficiencies show a much more dramatic trend with increasing size, which is similar to
the trend seen with the overall LE values (ie derived from G). Very favorable enthalpy efficiencies are
common for small ligands, but the average, and most favorable, enthalpy efficiencies for larger ligands are
systematically reduced (see supplementary Figure S1). Hence the overall trend in G related LE is mainly a
consequence of enthalpy (H) efficiency.40,42 These results suggest that the effects of conformational
entropy may not be as significant as is commonly believed. In contrast to size, both lipophilic enthalpy and
lipophilic entropy efficiencies tend to decrease with increasing lipophilicity (see Supplementary Figure S1).
For individual protein targets, lipophilic ligand efficiency (LLE or LipE, Box 1) might be a more useful surrogate
than LE or LELP for the enthalpic component of ligand binding, especially under circumstances where
structurally similar series, such as matched molecular pairs, display similar specific lipophilic binding
interactions.43
Optimisation of enthalpy-driven binding efficiency appears to be an attractive strategy,37 but it is not yet
clear that this will lead to less attrition in drug candidate pipelines. Analysis of four targets from the
literature suggests that as well as enthalpy efficiency, lipophilic ligand efficiency measures can provide
practical guidance in designing ligands with improved molecular properties,44 as discussed in the next
section.
Lipophilic ligand efficiency
The mean lipophilicity of marketed drugs – measured by the partition coefficient (logP) or the distribution
coefficient (logD) - has changed little over several decades.7,12,13,14,15 This important observation implies that
lipophilicity is a fundamental property impacting the progress of drug discovery programs and the
developability of identified candidates. In contrast, it has been observed that the physicochemical properties
of analogues in a chemical series, including molecular weight and lipophilicity, often increase during
optimisation from hit to lead23 and lead to candidate.24,25
The concept of employing ‘minimal hydrophobicity’ in drug design is not new, 45 and is supported by a wealth
of recent evidence46 showing that lipophilicity has an important influence on drug-like properties. In addition
to its connection to solubility,3 lipophilicity impacts most of the ADME parameters and also toxicity
properties such as hERG liability, phospholipidosis, CYP inhibition and receptor promiscuity.46 Due to its
central role in pharmacokinetics and safety most of the empirical ADMET guidelines include lipophilicity, such
as Lipinki’s rule of five on absorption,47 the GSK 4/400 guideline on ADMET properties,6 and the Pfizer 3/75
guideline on toxicological outcomes.8
In addition to influencing ADMET parameters, lipophilicity (LogP or LogD) is also one of the key factors
determining binding affinity to drug target proteins. High target potency combined with high lipophilicity
may therefore also increase the risk of ADMET related attrition.2 As a result, medicinal chemistry
optimization needs to be balanced and multidimensional,37 a difficult task that can be assisted by the use of
efficiency metrics to control lipophilicity. Lipophilic ligand efficiency (LLE7 or LipE,43 Box 1) is a simple but
important index combining in vitro potency and lipophilicity. A molecule with LLE = 0 based on cLogP, where
target affinity = cLogP, can be thought of as having the same ‘affinity’ for its target as it does for 1-octanol,
whereas a drug candidate with LLE = 6 has a one million-fold preference for its target versus 1-octanol.
Negative LLE values are clearly unfavourable. Based on the properties of an average oral drug, with cLogP
~2.5-3.0 and potency in the range ~1–10 nM, an ideal LLE value for an optimised candidate drug is ~5–7 or
greater.7 Fragments or lead-like molecules used as chemical starting points generally cannot possess drug-
like LLE values because they are not potent enough. Hits with LLE ≤2 are commonly found from high
throughput screening (i.e. ≥1 uM affinity with cLogP ~423), and these will have to be improved by ≥~3 LLE
units during optimisation to a candidate. Additional metrics such as LE are useful to deal with molecular size
in fragment-to-hit and hit-to-lead optimisations.
Combining both size and lipophilicity into a single efficiency index is useful at the hit identification and hit-to-
lead stages, and in fragment based drug discovery (FBDD, see the next section). Two such parameters —
lipophilicity corrected ligand efficiency (LELP)23 and LLE 48— have been developed (Box 1). While the full
range of optimal LELP values23 is –10 to +10, a desirable hit or lead against a tractable target in the early
optimization stage, having LE > 0.40-0.45 and cLogP 0-3, will have LELP 0-7.5. LLE was derived from
experience in FBDD, and is scaled to be comparable in magnitude to LE.48 Both LELP and LLE can also be
applied in lead optimisation.
It has been shown44 that increasing lipophilic efficiency, using LLE and LELP values, is associated with
improved ADMET and safety endpoints, probably as a result of both lowered lipophilicity and increased
specificity. In one study, development candidates were successfully discriminated from marketed drugs by
LELP but not by LE and LLE alone.49 In addition, compilations of hits, leads, successful leads (those that
produced marketed drugs50) and drugs are differentiated by their mean LLE and LELP values44 (potency, LE,
LLE and LELP values for these compound sets are given in supplementary Table S1). An analysis presented
below in the section ‘ligand efficiencies of oral drugs’ shows that using LE and LLE together can differentiate
marketed drugs from other molecules acting at the same target.
The recent medicinal chemistry literature contains an increasing number of examples where LLE (or LipE) has
been explicitly employed in the optimisation process; 59 examples, covering 47 different molecular targets,
are summarized in Figure 2 (see supplementary spreadsheet for details). For each example, in vitro activities,
LLE and LE values of the starting points and optimised molecules were collected. The median changes in
pActivity and LLE were +1.22 and +1.96 respectively (p <0.001 from matched pair analysis). Median values of
LELP (-2.74) and LLE (+ 0.066) were similarly significantly reduced and increased, respectively. These
results show that focussing on LLE in lead optimisation facilitates discovery of molecules with increased
binding affinity, without necessarily increasing lipophilicity at the same time. In fact, 48 of the 59 examples
increased LLE in the optimisation process, even though for many of the examples cited, optimising properties
in addition to binding was undertaken.
The importance of lipophilicity control in optimisation is further exemplified in an analysis50 of 60 recently
marketed drugs and their leads, which showed that mean lipophilicity stayed constant during the
optimisation process, while mean potency, and therefore mean LLE, increased by ~2 log units. For these 60
drug examples,50 high drug LLE is linked to lower lead cLogP, the straight line fit being LLE drug = 7.93 - 0.78 x
cLogP lead (n=60, r2 = 0.47, p < 0.0001). In the recent 59 LLE-aware optimisations in Figure 2, the same trend
is present but as expected is much less pronounced: optimised LLE = 6.15 - 0.30 x lead cLogP (n=59, r2 =
0.077, p = 0.033). Achieving high LLE values in optimised molecules is therefore more likely when starting
with low cLogP leads (ideally <3). These observations on newer drugs and on current practices contrast with
earlier literature studies,24,25,51 largely pre-dating the application of ligand efficiency concepts, in which
lipophilicity, on average, increased during optimisation. We conclude that optimisation of lipophilic ligand
efficiencies will guide projects towards potent molecules with lowered lipophilicity, which will in turn
improve the developability of emerging candidate compounds.
It is interesting to note that mean LE did not change in either the lead to drug optimisations50 or those in
Figure 2. The conservation of LE during lead optimisation supports the original premise of LE as a metric to
aid the selection of leads, as well as to compare compounds for further optimisation at the hit selection
stage.20,26 In contrast, median SILE (size-independent ligand efficiency, Box 2) values were significantly
increased by + 0.48 (p <0.001) in the Figure 2 optimisations. SILE is therefore a metric that could be useful
for differentiating molecules in the physical property ranges where lead optimisation commonly takes place.
FBDD and ligand efficiency
An important emerging area for the application of ligand efficiency metrics is in fragment based drug
discovery (FBDD). In the last decade, FBDD has been used to discover several compounds that have
progressed into clinical trials52 and onto the market.53 Fragments are compounds with molecular weights
between 100 and 250 Da and are small relative to conventional compounds screened in HTS. As a
consequence of their small size, fragment hits commonly have low binding affinities, usually in the range 1
mM–10 M. Ligand efficiency (LE) is a useful metric to normalise the affinities of hits to identify the best
starting points for optimisation, i.e. those with the highest LE values, all else being equal.
Despite their low affinities, fragment hits selected for further optimisation often have generally good (>0.4)
to excellent LE values. Growing these fragments into leads is a challenge often requiring the addition of
>~15-20 heavy atoms (~200-250 Da increase in molecular weight) to increase affinity by several orders of
magnitude (mM or M to nM). This presents an opportunity to use the various ligand (Box 1) and group
efficiency (GE, Box 3)54 metrics to carefully control chemical properties. This approach to FBDD, when
practised by specialist teams, can result in optimised molecules with improved drug-like properties.17
An example FBDD programme targeted at the chaperone protein, HSP90, a promising anticancer target55,
illustrates the general principle of only adding atoms to the starting fragment providing the desired increase
in binding affinity (Figure 3a). This example is a showcase, as six heavy atoms are added and the affinity
increases by 6 orders of magnitude (0.79 mM to 0.70 nM). 56,57 Careful attention to the experimentally
determined X-ray crystal structure and overall chemical properties were critical during this fragment-to-lead
optimisation. The metric LLE is useful during this stage because it represents LLE normalised for size (see
Box 1) and helps to ensure that affinity increase is not unduly driven by non-specific lipophilic interactions.
LE metrics are, by definition, useful for in vitro binding affinity but the advantage of starting in vivo
optimisation with high LE is that additional atoms can be added to the lead to optimise in vivo efficacy,
pharmacokinetics and safety and still provide a clinical candidate that is ‘drug-like’ in terms of molecular
weight and lipophilicity.
Group Efficiency (GE, Box 3) is also particularly useful when growing fragments because it focuses on the
efficiency of atoms added to the original molecule. In the HSP90 example, the GEs for each group in the final
molecule are determined by comparing matched pairs of related compounds. The groups with high GE are
those that appear in the X-ray crystal structure to form clear binding interactions. The GE values for the
different parts of the HSP90 inhibitor, AT13387, were determined retrospectively by comparing the binding
affinities of closely related compounds (Figure 3b; see Box 3 for the method used). Several other published
examples of fragment optimisations and the use of LE metrics have been reviewed.58,59
Ligand efficiencies of oral drugs
Target classes (for example GPCRs, kinases, proteases, nuclear hormone receptors) display differing
molecular properties amongst their small molecule ligands.17,20,51,60 Ligand efficiency measures (LE and LLE)
can be used in conjunction with physical properties (cLogP and HA) to assess the relative ‘druggability’ of
human drug targets and target classes, by analysis of their known ligands (see Box 4 and Figure 4). The
variability in ligand efficiencies and physical properties of targets evident in Figure 4 is a consequence of the
inherent differences in the relative ‘druggability’ of targets combined with varying practices in drug
discovery7,17 leading to published active compounds.
Drug molecules are the final result of the exhaustive optimisation of chemical, biological, toxicological,
pharmaceutical and clinical profiles of lead compounds. Can ligand efficiency metrics help distinguish drugs
from non-drugs? We compared LE and LLE values of recently marketed drugs in comparison with other
molecules with reported activity at the same target (see Figure 5). The dataset was compiled from searching
CHEMBL for compounds with published human target affinity in vitro (IC , Ki or EC values), and calculating
LE and LLE values (Box 1). The percentage of all compounds at each target where both LE and LLE values are
superior to the oral drug was determined. This approach weights LE and LLE equally and to achieve a low
percentage score (the y axis of Figure 5) a drug must rank highly on one or both of these efficiency measures.
A group of first-in-class, and currently ‘only-in-class’ drugs acting on single targets, stands out as having
notably better combined LE and LLE values versus other compounds acting on the same primary targets.
These drugs (Figure 5) include aprepitant (NK1 antagonist), aliskiren (renin inhibitor), vorinostat (HDAC1
inhibitor), maraviroc (CCR5 antagonist, see also Figure 6a), lorcaserin (5-HT2c agonist), roflumilast (PDE4A
inhibitor), ruxolitinib (JAK2 kinase inhibitor), tofacitinib (JAK3 kinase inhibitor), vismodegib (SMO/hedgehog
inhibitor), fingolimod (S1P1 inhibitor; the active form is the S-phosphorylated metabolite) and ticagrelor
(P2Y12 antagonist). While these targets occupy varying absolute LE/LLE/physical property space, decreasing
in relative druggability from 5-HT2c and HDAC1 to renin and CCR5, the median percentage molecules of per
target with superior combined LE and LLE values for these ‘only-in-class’ drugs is just 1.5%.
Amongst other targets in Figure 5, two NS3 protease inhibitors, boceprevir and telaprevir, were both
approved by the FDA in May 2011 for treatment of hepatitis C virus. NS3 protease is a challenging target for
good inhibitor physicochemical properties, but boceprevir is clearly highly optimised in the class, with only
1.0% of NS3 inhibitors having better combined LE and LLE values. For telaprevir, which is elaborated with a
bicyclic structural moiety that is absent in boceprevir, 38% of NS3 inhibitors have a better LE and LLE profile.
Both drugs are covalent inhibitors expressing slow dissociation kinetics and requiring high doses (telaprevir
750 mg and boceprevir 800mg, both three times daily). However, the physical properties of telaprevir result
in very low solubility,61 requiring a non-standard formulation, and it also carries a boxed warning on the label
for risk of serious skin reactions.
Many anti-cancer drugs inhibiting kinases show non-optimal LE and LLE values for their targets (Figure 5).
The median percentages of compounds per target that have better LE and LLE values in Figure 5 is 22% for
kinase inhibitors versus 2.7% for the other target classes. An example is VEGF2 kinase, where three drugs are
non-optimal (sunitinib, sorafenib and pazopanib), but the newest drug (axitinib) is highly optimised. A recent
study of clinical VEGFR inhibitors emphasises the value of lipophilic efficiency, showing that LLE correlates
with kinase selectivity as well as clinical efficacy,62 the latter probably driven by relative exposure levels. In
the case of EGFR kinase, all four drugs have non-optimal LE and LLE values. The difference between kinase
inhibitor drugs and other classes may be due to the primary pursuit in the discovery phase of selectivity63
versus other kinases, and the acceptance of higher safety risk: benefit profiles for treatment of cancer. Just
one kinase inhibitor drug, the JAK3 inhibitor tofacitinib,64 is aimed at a non-cancer indication, and it has the
best combined LE and LLE values of all reported JAK3 ligands. Amongst drug families (Figure 5), highly
optimal LE and LLE values are seen for all three Factor Xa inhibitors65 rivaroxaban, apixaban and edoxaban
(respectively 0.2%, 0.9% and 1.1% of reported molecules with better LE and LLE), and the non-prodrug
parent molecules of the thrombin inhibitors melagatran and dabigatran (1.1% and 6.5% better respectively).
For DPP-IV inhibitors, improvements in the most recently approved molecule (saxagliptin) are seen versus
the first in class molecule (sitagliptin); a similar trend is seen for endothelin A antagonists.
Application of efficiency metrics in optimisation
The oral drug analysis in Figure 5 indicates that plotting LE versus LLE will be useful for analysis and tracking
progress of hit to lead and lead optimisation projects, as well as for evaluation of the relative properties of
clinical candidates. In LE versus LLE plots, there is some level of redundancy in that the potency term
appears on both axes. The correlation between LE and LLE will increase when both size and lipophilicity
influence potency similarly. However, potency versus property relationships often have low correlation
coefficients and vary according to target and ligand chemotype (see Figure 4c and d). The purpose of using
LE and LLE together is to illustrate the value to the drug designer of this visualisation, rather than to establish
quantitative correlations. In addition to LE versus LLE, separately examining the independent component
parameters by constructing plots of potency versus both HA (or molecular weight) and lipophilicity (cLogP or
LogD) is essential. An example of LE versus LLE is shown in Figure 6a for the chemokine CCR5 receptor,66
where there has been an intensive effort to find antagonists for treatment of HIV and rheumatoid arthritis.
CCR5 also proved to be a useful target to assess different drug design practices in the pharmaceutical
industry.7 The only molecule to date to be approved, for HIV, is maraviroc, which has improved combined LE
and LLE versus the other CCR5 antagonist HIV clinical candidates (Figure 6a). A major challenge with CCR5
ligands has been reducing unwanted cardiovascular risk because of inhibition of the hERG ion channel. This
can be accomplished by reducing lipophilicity in combination with structure-activity optimisation.67
One of the most challenging targets of all in terms of obtaining drug-like physical properties is the cholesteryl
ester transfer protein (CETP),68 an atherosclerosis target where inhibition raises HDL-c levels.69 CETP has
highly lipophilic cholesteryl ester and triglyceride as co-substrates, and inhibitors of this target, including four
molecules that have reached late stage clinical trials, have low LE and very low LLE values (Figure 6b shows LE
versus LLE and pIC versus cLogP for CETP inhibitors). Nevertheless, high throughput screening has
identified a class of benzoxazoles,70,71,72,73 apparently not yet fully optimised, with markedly improved LE and
LLE values versus the clinical candidates. In addition, further optimisation of the highly lipophilic candidate
torcetrapib (which was discontinued in Phase III) has resulted in analogues with significantly lowered
lipophilicity yet with equal potency,74 increasing LLE by ~4 units with no adverse effect on LE (compare
compounds 7 and 13, Figure 6b). In this example, a stated strategy was to ‘mitigate lipophilicity’74 which was
successfully achieved, although no LogP/D or LLE values were actually cited. Explicit use of quantitative LE
and LLE measures during optimisation, assisted by visualisations of LE versus LLE and potency versus
lipophilicity and size, is the approach we recommend. By contrast, optimisation of a class of
diphenylpyridylethanamine CETP inhibitors,75 conducted without obvious consideration of ligand efficiency
or lipophilicity, resulted in a lead compound with an unfavourable negative LLE value (compound 20 in ref.
75: pIC 7.44, cLogP 8.96, LLE = -1.52).
The cannabinoid CB1 receptor is another target with highly lipophilic endogenous ligands, where it has been
challenging to control physical properties. Specific application of the LLE concept has been successfully used
in optimisation of both CB1 antagonists76 and agonists77 (Figure 7). In these examples, unpromising LLE
values of close to zero in the lead compounds were impressively increased by ~5 units, while retaining
constant LE values.
We can conclude that, even on the least tractable targets that appear to have highly lipophilic small molecule
binding sites, seeking compounds with improved properties is facilitated when the focus is placed on
improving ligand efficiencies. The direction of optimisation in LE versus LLE plots is to the ‘north east’ and in
potency versus lipophilicity (cLogP or LogD) or size plots, optimisation should proceed to the ‘north west.’ In
either case, property-based design should seek to extend the boundaries of these plots to new, unoccupied
territory. In addition to LE versus LLE and potency versus size and lipophilicity, other visualisations useful for
optimisation purposes include: potency versus LE, LLE, LELP, and LLE ; LE versus cLogP or LogD; LLE versus
HA or molecular weight; and the property forecast index3 (PFI= LogP or LogD + aromatic ring count) versus
LLE .65 Lipophilic efficiency parameters for agonists can be adjusted if required to take intrinsic activity into
account.78
Overall, the retrospective analysis of successful drugs indicates that optimising LE and LLE in concert is an
important success factor for hit and lead optimisation in drug discovery projects. Controlling lipophilicity is
at the heart of successful optimisation. Most of the medicinal chemistry designs employed in the examples
shown in Figure 2 leading to LLE increases did not require radical structural changes such as new core
scaffolds. The examples of compound 7 to compound 13 in Figure 6b, and those in Figure 7 are typical.
Tactics (see Figure 7) include i) replacing carbon atoms with oxygen or nitrogen atoms (especially converting
phenyl rings to heteroaromatic rings), ii) adding polar substitution, iii) removing or replacing lipophilic
substituents and templates and iv) controlling growth of heavy atom count. Incorporating polar functional
groups which both lower lipophilicity and increase or retain binding affinity is probably the result of new
polar ligand-receptor contacts79 (for example hydrogen bonds), which will radically alter structure-affinity
relationships, and consequently provide new optimisation opportunities. That said, finding the appropriate
regions of a lead molecule which can be changed in these ways may be the biggest challenge - highly
lipophilic hits or leads resistant to this approach should be quickly dropped. Finally, LLE correlates positively
with the drug efficiency index (DEI).80 DEI is a very useful metric for application in lead optimisation projects,
since it combines the estimated fraction of the dose that is available free in plasma with in vitro potency.
Conclusion
Ligand efficiency measures provide estimates of the physical properties used to gain affinity for a drug target.
The judicious use of efficiency metrics in optimisation instead of potency alone is recommended at all stages
of drug discovery, starting with the selection of a fragment or a screening hit. Oral drugs, especially those
that are first in class in therapy areas with stringent risk/benefit requirements, frequently have highly
optimised ligand efficiency values for their target. A key consideration for drug designers is awareness of the
changes in potency required to keep ligand efficiencies at least constant when altering a lead structure.
When all published molecules with activity at specific targets are considered, high correlations between
affinity and size or lipophilicity are not frequent, therefore it is not always necessary to increase these
physical properties to increase affinity. The tendency to increase lipophilicity during optimisation of
individual series of molecules can be countered by focusing on lipophilic efficiency. This is becoming
recognised as a key strategy in lead optimisation43,81 and has been successfully employed on many different
targets. Application of ligand efficiency principles, combined with synthesis of compounds with acceptable
drug-like physical properties, are indicated as key elements of best practice in drug design. We believe this
approach is applicable to any target containing a bone fide small molecule binding site. Finally, we note that
the hypothesis proposed by Hansch and co-workers a quarter of a century ago embraced the concept of
lipophilic ligand efficiency, and is withstanding the test of time: “without convincing evidence to the contrary,
drugs should be made as hydrophilic as possible without loss of efficacy.” 45
Acknowledgment
We thank Nicola Richmond (GSK) for discussions on derivation of efficiency metrics, Glyn Williams (Astex) for
fruitful discussion on binding thermodynamics, Rob Young (GSK) for discussions on aromaticity and drug
efficiency metrics, and AstraZeneca for provision of the GVK BIO database.