1v3005020/sc:viXra
THE PROSPECTS FOR MATHEMATICAL LOGIC IN THE
TWENTY-FIRST CENTURY
SAMUEL R. BUSS, ALEXANDER S. KECHRIS, ANAND PILLAY, AND RICHARD A.
Abstract. The four authors present their speculations about the future devel-
opments of mathematical logic in the twenty-first century. The areas of recursion
theory,prooftheoryandlogicforcomputerscience,modeltheory,andsettheoryare
discussedindependently.
We can only see a short distance ahead, but we
can see plenty there that needs to be done.
A. Turing, 1950.
§1. Introduction. The annual meeting of the Association for Sym-
bolic Logic held in Urbana-Champaign, June 2000, included a panel dis-
cussion on “The Prospects for Mathematical Logic in the Twenty-First
Century”. The panel discussions included independent presentations by
the four panel members, followed by approximately one hour of lively
discussion with members of the audience.
The main themes of the discussions concerned the directions mathe-
matical logic should or could pursue in the future. Some members of the
audiencestrongly feltthatlogic needstofindmoreapplications tomathe-
matics; however, there was disagreement as to what kinds of applications
were most likely to be possibleand important. Many people also felt that
applications to computer science will be of great importance. On the
other hand, quite a few people, while acknowledging the importance of
applications of logic, felt that the most important progress in logic comes
from internal developments.
It seems safe to presume that the future of mathematical logic will
include a multitude of directions and a blend of these various elements.
Indeed, it speaks well for the strength of the field that there are multiple
compelling directions for future progress. It is to be hoped that logic will
be driven both by internal developments and by external applications,
Supported in part by NSFgrant DMS-9803515.
Supported in part by NSFgrant DMS-9987437.
Supported in part by NSFgrants DMS-9696268 and DMS-0070179.
Supported in part by NSFgrant DMS-9802843.
and that these different directions will complement and strengthen each
other.
The present article consists of reports by the four panel members, at
times expanding on their panel presentations. As in the panel discussion,
the presentations are divided into four subareas of logic. The topics are
ordered as in the panel discussion: R. Shore discusses recursion theory
in section 2; S. Buss discusses proof theory and computer science logic in
section 3; A. Pillay discusses model theory in section 4; and A. Kechris
discusses set theory in section 5.
We, the panel members, wish to thank Carl Jockusch and the rest of
the program committee for conceiving of the panel topics and inviting us
to participate.
§2. Recursion Theory.
By Richard A. Shore.
When I was asked to participate in this panel, the first thing that came
to my mind was the verse from Amos (7:14): I am neither a prophet
nor a prophet’s disciple. Nonetheless, with some trepidation, I agreed to
participate. When I saw that there was to also be a panel on logic in the
Twentieth Century, I thought that one would have been easier – after all
it has already happened. In any case, I decided to start, in some sense,
with the past. Rather than a prophet for mathematics, I have in my own
past been (somewhat like Amos) a tender of problems and a gatherer
of theorems. To change my ways, I will start not so much with specific
questionsandresultsaswithanattempttopointtoattitudes, approaches
and ideas that have made recursion theory what it is and might continue
to prove useful in the future. After all, the true role of the prophet is
not to predict the future but to point out the right path and encourage
people to follow it.
For recursion theory, as for logic as awhole, thereare great theorems in
our past butperhaps a major share of our contribution to mathematics is
intheview thatwetake of the(mathematical) worldandhowitguidesus
to problems, questions, techniques, answers and theorems. When I teach
the basic mathematical logic course, I like to say in my first lecture that
what distinguishes logic is its concern for, and study of, the language of
mathematics. Westudyformallanguages, theirsyntaxandsemanticsand
the connections between them. Our work is motivated by the idea that
notonlyaretheseandrelatedtopicsworthyofstudyintheirownright,as
both mathematics and foundations, but that formalizing and analyzing
the language of mathematical systems sheds light on the mathematics
itself.
Along these lines, the language that recursion theory originally for-
malized and still studies is that of computability: machines, algorithms,
deduction systems, equation calculi, etc. Its first great contribution, of
course,wastheformalization ofthenotionofafunctionbeingcomputable
by an algorithm and the discovery of many remarkable instances in all
branches of mathematics of the dividing line between computability and
noncomputability, decidability and nondecidability. I see these results as
instances of the overarching concern of recursion theory with notions of
complexity at all levels from the space/time and other subrecursive hier-
archies of computer science through Turing computability and arithmetic
to descriptive set theory and analysis and, finally, to higher recursion
theory and set theory. Each way station on this road of exploration has
its appropriate notions of reducibility and degree structure and its own
hierarchies. Our viewpoint is that an analysis of relative complexity in
any of these terms sheds important light on the fundamental notions of
computability and definability and can serve to illuminate, distinguish
and classify mathematical structures in useful ways.
I would like to mention a few issues and areas where I think these ideas
and approaches have been useful and I expect will continue to be so in
the future. Of course, there is no expectation of being exhaustive and I
admit to concentrating on those areas that have caught my own interest.
Classical recursion theory. In general, I view the important issues
in classical recursion theory as analyzing the relations among various no-
tions of complexity and definability and so also investigating the possible
automorphisms of the computability structures of interest. At the gen-
eral level, there are many open problems about the connections between
Turingdegrees, rates ofgrowth of functions,settheoretic structuralprop-
erties, definability in arithmetic and the jump classes. For a whole array
of specific question in a range of areas, I recommend Cholak et al. [6]
the proceedings volume of the 1999 AMS Boulder conference on open
problems in recursion theory.
The most important and pressing current problem in this area is, I
believe, the clarification of the situation with respect to, first, the defin-
ability of the jump operator and the notion of relative recursive enumer-
ability and, second, the existence of automorphisms of the Turing and
r.e. degrees. In the past year, Cooper’s original definition of the jump
in the Turing degrees [9, 10] has been shown to be false – the proposed
propertydoesnotdefinethejump(ShoreandSlaman[53]). Takinganap-
proach quite different from Cooper’s, Shore and Slaman [54] then proved
that the jump is definable. Their approach uses results of Slaman and
Woodin [60] that strongly employ set theoretic and metamathematical
arguments. While this is pleasing in some ways, it is unsatisfactory in
others. In particular, it does not supply what I would call a natural
order theoretic definition of the jump. For example, the definition explic-
itly talks about codings of (models of) arithmetic in the degrees. (See
Shore [51].)
In various versions of Cooper [11], Cooper has since proposedtwo other
candidates for natural definitions of the jump. The first does not define
the jump (Shore and Slaman [53]), and it remains to be seen whether
the second, much more complicated one, does. Cooper has also proposed
a number of ways of using such a definition of the jump to define rel-
ative recursive enumerability. There are fundamental difficulties to be
surmounted in any attempt to define the notion of r.e. by these means
(Slaman [personal communication]), but establishing a natural definition
of the jump still seems to be the most likely route to a definition of re-
cursive enumerability. (See Slaman [59].)
In the area of using classical computability type complexity properties
to classify mathematical structures, I would like to point to the excit-
ing developments in current work by Nabutovsky and Weinberger [47]
discussed by Soare in his lecture at this meeting (see Soare [61]). This
work uses complexity properties not just on the decidable/undecidable
border but far beyond. It uses both rates of convergence and r.e. Tur-
ing degrees to distinguish interesting classes of spaces and Riemannian
metrics by capturing certain types of invariants in terms of computability
properties. We certainly hope for more such interactions in the future.
Descriptive set theory. AlthoughIamfarfromanexpert,Iamagreat
fan of descriptive set theory and I view this subjectas a major success for
what I have called the recursion theoretic point of view. The whole array
of issues connected to hierarchies, complexity classes, reducibilities and
definability arefundamentalto recent work in this area. Itwell illustrates
the ideas of classification and analysis of mathematical structures in such
terms and the belief that such analysis supplies important information
about the structures. At a deeper level, the ideas of effective descriptive
set theory — the direct application of notions of computability for num-
bers and functions from classical recursion theory to analyze sets of reals
via the relativization of light faced results and other methods — perme-
ate many aspects of the area. (See Moschovakis [45] and the forthcoming
book of Louveau.)
Thistopicreally belongstoAlekos Kechrisand§5, butformyself, Ialso
have hopesforinteractions between Borel notions andcomputability ones
in the areas of effective algebra and model theory. The issue here, as I
see it, is to classify the complexity of mathematical, algebraic and model
theoretic properties in the domain of computable mathematics. This is-
sue arises in many disguises some of a descriptive set theoretic nature
and others more concerned with computability and relative computabil-
ity. (Examples here can be found in Friedman and Stanley [23], Camerlo
and Gao [4], Hjorth [28], White [65] and Hirschfeldt, Khoussainov, Shore
and Slinko [29].)
Effective and Reverse Mathematics. Perhaps, with the revival of in-
terest in computational approaches to much of mathematics, we will see
more interest in some of the topics of effective mathematics such as deter-
miningwhatinputinformationaboutstructuresisneededtocomputevar-
ious properties, functions and so on. The technical notions involved here
include versions of intrinsic computability, degree spectra and the like.
(For these specific topics see, for example, Khoussainov and Shore [40] or
Shore [52] and, for the whole range of issues involving effective mathe-
matics, the handbook Ershov et al. [17].)
These issues in effective mathematics are also related to the founda-
tional concerns of reverse mathematics which, on its face, uses another,
proof theoretic, yardstick to measure complexity. The proof theoretic
measures used, however, turn out to be intimately connected to ones
studied in recursion theory from relative computability and the Turing
jump to relative hyperarithmeticity and the hyperjump. The basic refer-
ence here is Simpson [56]. The foundational issues addressed by reverse
mathematics are important ones and we expect the contributions and
approaches of recursion theory in this area to increase and prove impor-
tant as well. A current snapshot of work in the field is provided by the
collection Simpson [57].
Along with the rise of mathematical interest in computational proce-
dures come other views of computability that should be worth investi-
gating. These should be measures that reflect mathematical practice in
particular domains rather thanjustwhatwetraditionally view as compu-
tationinourtraditionaldiscrete,digitalapproach. Oneobviouscandidate
isthenotionofcomputation introducedbyBlum,ShubandSmale[3](see
also Blum et al. [2]). Here the corresponding notions of complexity have
been used (for example, in Chong [7, 8]) to distinguish interesting phe-
nomena about Julia sets and the like in dynamics. I would suggest that
we should look for other applications and other notions of computability
appropriate to various mathematical domains as well.
Set Theory. Next, I would like to mention (general) set theory as an
area for uses of the recursion theoretic world view. I view the early devel-
opment by Jensen of the fine structure of L [34] as another outstanding
exampleoftheapplication ofthethisviewpointtoopenupawholelineof
analysis and investigation. Its extensions continue to grow remarkably on
their own as witnessed by the talks of Steel and Neeman at this meeting
and, for example, Lo¨we and Steel [43]. There is also still room for appli-
cations of definability, complexity and effective analysis in the setting of
classical set theoretic problems as witnessed, for example, by recent work
by Slaman [58] and Groszek and Slaman [26].
Saving the best for last, we come to computer science.
Computer Science. The origins of logic were in foundations and phi-
losophy; most of us on this panel, and in the audience, were trained and
grew up as mathematicians; the primary future growth opportunities of
logic, however, clearly lie in computer science. I would make the analogy
that logic is to computerscience whatmathematics is tophysics, and vice
versa. Logic serves as the language and foundation for computer science
as mathematics does for physics. Conversely, computer science supplies
major problems and new arenas for logical analysis as physics does for
mathematics. This relationship has affected, and will affect, not just re-
cursion theory but all of logic. There are far too many instances to even
mention but I point to a symposium last year at the American Associa-
tion for the Advancement of Science titled “On the unusual effectiveness
of logic in computer science” reported on in Halpern et al. [27] as one
multifaceted indicator of the view from computer science.
Of course, Sam Buss has much more to say about logic and computer
sciencein§3,butfornowI’llputinawordfrommyownsponsor,recursion
theory. The notions of reducibility, complexity measures, and hierarchies
are fundamental to theoretical computer science. Both below and above
the level of polynomial time computability we have analogs of the clas-
sical reducibilities including one-one, many-one, (bounded) truth-table,
weak truth table and Turing that reflect various views of boundedness of
different resources. We also see analogs of notions from higher recursion
theory suchas fixedpoints,inductivedefinabilityandadmissibleordinals.
Interestingly, new notions have been developed at low complexity levels
that present alternate notions of computability involving nondetermin-
ism and probabilistic procedures among others. The relationships among
these various restricted (and extended) notions of computation form the
core questions of complexity theory in computer science. What are the
relationships among the classes P,NP,PP,BPP and so on. We hope
that the methods and insights of recursion theory will play a role in the
solution of these fundamental problems of computability.
These concerns will continue to illuminate the investigations of compu-
tation from both practical and theoretical vantage points. More radical
innovations are needed, however, to better reflect the finiteness of all
types of resources. This is a challenge for computer science, computabil-
ity theory and logic as a whole. Linear logic and finite model theory
represent some attempts at addressingthese issues, butothers are needed
that incorporate finiteness and boundedness of resources in other ways.
Nonetheless, our view from infinity will continue to lend perspective (as
in the role of uniformity) and so play a role in analyzing the finite as well.
In a different direction, we return to the original language of compu-
tation. Here the beginnings of recursion theory have already played an
important role, e.g. the Turing machine model as a basic one for compu-
tation andtheλ-calculusasoneforprogramminglanguages bothabstract
and actual. And so we come back to the beginnings of the study of the
formal languages of computation. Along these lines, I would like to close
with three, certainly not original and probably pie-in-the-sky, problems.
1. “Prove” theChurch-Turingthesisbyfindingintuitively obviousorat
least clearly acceptable properties of computation that suffice to guaran-
tee that any function so computed is recursive. Turing [64] argues for the
thesis that any function that can be calculated by an abstract human be-
ing using various mechanical aids can be computed by a Turing machine
(andsoisrecursive). Gandy[24]arguesthatanyfunctionthatcanbecal-
culated by a machine is also Turingcomputable. Deutsch [14] approaches
this issue from a more quantum mechanical perspective. Martin Davis
has pointed out (personal communication) that one can easily prove that
computations as given by deductions in first order logic relations from a
finite set of sentences about numerals and the function being defined are
necessarily recursive. An analysis based on the view that what is to be
captured is human mechanical computability is given in Sieg [55].
Perhaps the question is whether we can be sufficiently precise about
what we mean by computation without reference to the method of carry-
ing out the computation so as to give a more general or more convincing
argument independent of the physical or logical implementation. For ex-
ample, dowerejectthenonrecursivesolutionstocertain differential equa-
tions as counterexamples on the basis of our understanding of physics or
of computability. Alongtheselines, wealso suggesttworelated questions.
2. What does physics have to say about computability (and provability
or logic)? Do physical restrictions on the one hand, or quantum com-
puting on the other, mean that we should modify our understanding of
computability or at least study other notions? Consider Deutsch’s [14]
Church-Turing principle and arguments that all physically possible com-
putations can be done by a quantum computer analog of the universal
Turing machine. He argues, in addition, that the functions computable
(in a probabilistic sense) by a quantum Turing machine are the same as
the ones computable by an ordinary Turing machine, but that there is,
in principle, an exponential speed-up in the computations. How do these
considerations affect our notions of both computability and provability?
For some of the issues here see Deutsch et al. [15].
3. Find, and argue conclusively for, a formal definition of algorithm
and the appropriate analog of the Church-Turing thesis. Here we want to
capture the intuitive notion that, for example, two particular programs
in perhaps different languages express the same algorithm, while other
ones that compute the same function represent different algorithms for
the function. Thus we want a definition that will up to some precise
equivalence relation capture the notion that two algorithms are the same
as opposed to just computing the same function. Moschovakis [46] is an
interesting approach to this problem from the viewpoint that recursion,
and an appropriate formal language for it, should be taken as basic to
this endeavor.
§3. Proof Theory and Logic for Computer Science.
By Sam Buss.
Idiscussinthissectionprospectsbothforprooftheoryandforcomputer
science logic. I will first present a broad overview of the presently active
areas in proof theory and computer science logic and my opinions on
which areas are likely to be important in the future. I then make some
specificpredictionsaboutfuturedevelopments intheseareas. Thesection
concludes with an exhortation for mathematical logicians to pay more
attention to applications of logic in computer science.
Iamchargedwiththetaskofdiscussingbothprooftheoryandcomputer
science logic in this section. It thus has happened that proof theory is
somewhat shortchanged. The reader who wishes to seek more comments
on proof theory can find opinions by a large group of proof theorists in
the compendium prepared by S. Feferman [18].
Proof theory. I first present a very quick overview of the present goals
ofprooftheory. Table1gives a“three-fold”viewofprooftheory, inwhich
proof theory is split into three broad categories based on the goals of the
work in proof theory.
Thefirstcolumnrepresentsthetraditional,classicapproachestomathe-
maticalprooftheory: inthisareathegoalhasbeentounderstandstronger
and stronger systems, from second-order logic up through higher set the-
ories, and especially to give constructive analyses of the proof-theoretic
strengths of strong systems. This part of proof theory has of course seen
outstanding progress in the past century, but in recent times has had
more limited success. The work on constructive analyses of strong sys-
temshasbecomestymiedbytechnicaldifficulties,andprogresshastended
to be incremental. Further significant progress will require a substantial
breakthrough in applicability, say to all of higher-order logic, as well as
a breakthrough in technical simplicity. Lest the assessment of this area
of proof theory seem too harsh, I hasten to add that the methods and
results of this area are fundamental to the other areas of proof theory.
The second column represents the smallest area of proof theory. The
presence of this category is justified by the fact I am presenting the areas
of proof theory categorized by their goals. The essential goal of this area
is the resolution of the important questions in computational complexity
such as the P versus NP question. This question turns out to be very
Three-fold View of Proof Theory
Stong Systems Weak Systems Applied Proof Theory
Topics: Topics: Topics:
- Central - Expressive but - Very diverse
foundations of proof weak systems, - Theorem proving.
theory. including bounded - Logic
- Ordinal analysis. arithmetic. programming.
- Fragments of type - Complexity (esp., - Language design.
theory and set low-level). - Includes logics
theory. - Proof complexity. which are inherently
- Propositional logic. not first-order.
Goals/directions:
- Constructive Goals/directions:
analysis of Goals/directions:
- Central problem is
second-order logic - Again: very
P vs. NP and related
and stronger diverse.
questions.
theories. - Central problem is
- Methods and tools the “AI” problem of
used extensively in developing “true”
the other areas. artificial intelligence.
Table 1. The areas of proof theory, organized by goals.
closely linked to corresponding questions about provability, about proof
complexity, and about proof search in very weak proof systems, including
systems as weak as propositional logic. It is an amazing fact that very
fundamentalandsimplequestionsaboutpropositionallogic arestillopen!
I will make predictions about the future of these questions below.
The third column represents the broadest branch of proof theory; it is
also the oldest in that it predates the modern mathematical development
of proof theory, with its essential goals stated already by Leibniz. One
goal of this area is to provide logical systems strong enough to encompass
more and more of human reasoning. A second goal is the development of
true AI, or “artificial intelligence”. Of course, this area of proof theory
is extremely diverse, and it includes the aspects of proof theory that deal
with reasoning in restricted domains and aspects of proof theory that are
applicable to programming languages, etc.
I wish to avoid philosophical issues about consciousness, self-awareness
and what it means to have a soul, etc., and instead seek a purely oper-
ational approach to artificial intelligence. Thus, I define artificial intelli-
gence as being constructed systems which can reason and interact both
syntactically and semantically. To stress the last word in the last sen-
tence, I mean that a true artificial intelligence system should be able to
take the meaning of statements into account, or at least act as if it takes
the meaning into account. There is some debate about whether logic is
really a possible foundation for artificial intelligence. The idea that logic
should be the foundation for AI has fallen out of favor; indeed, much of
the work of artificial intelligence today is done with non-discrete systems
such as neural nets, which would not count as part of proof theory. To
the best of my knowledge, there is only one large-scale present-day at-
tempt to build an AI system based on logic, namely the Cyc system, and
this so far has not reported significant success in spite of a massive effort.
Nonetheless, it is my opinion that purely analog systems such as neural
nets will not provide a complete solution of the AI problem; but rather,
that discrete processing, including proof theoretic aspects, will be needed
for constructing AI systems.
Of course, most present day work in applied proof theory is not aimed
directly at the AI problem. There is a large amount of work being done
to extend logic beyond the domain of first-order logic. This includes,
for instance, non-monotonic logics, modal and dynamic logics, database
logics, fuzzylogic, etc. Whattheseratherdisparateareashaveincommon
is that they all wish to extend logic well beyond the boundaries of the
kind of first-order logic that has been successful in the foundations of
mathematics.
I make some specific predictions about the prospects for artificial intel-
ligence in a later section.
Logic for computer science. A skeletal overview of the present state
of affairs for applications of logic to computer science is presented in
Table 2, which is titled the “octopus of logic for computer science.” I
have not attempted to make a definitive summary of the applications of
logic to computer science in Table 2, as they are far too numerous and
varied for me to make such an attempt. The main point of the table is to
illustrate how diverse and extensive the applications of logic for computer
science have become.
Computer science has strong interactions with most of the traditional
areas of logic, with the sole exception of set theory. First, the early devel-
opments of both the theory and practice of computer science were very
closely linked to the development of recursion theory, beginning with the
emergence of the stored program paradigm arising from Turing’s model
for universal computers. In more recent times, recursion theory has been
lesscloselylinkedtocomputerscience; however,developmentsincomplex-
ity theory have often been inspired by constructions in recursion theory.
Proof theory has many connections to computer science; indeed, the bulk
of the work in the third category of ‘applied proof theory’ in Table 1 is
oriented towards applications in computer science. In addition, the sec-
ond category of proof theory has been found to have many connections to
complexity theory. There are likewise many applications of model theory
in computer science as well: in Table 2 these include finite model theory,
databasetheory, andmodel-checking. Moregenerally, wheneveronedeals
with the semantics of a language, one is implicitly doing model theory.
Future directions and some predictions. The above overviews of
proof theory andof logic for computer science indicate the directions that
I feel will be their most important areas for future development. To be
evenmoreexplicitaboutmyexpectationsforthefuture,Iwillnowmakea
seriesofquitespecificpredictionsaboutwhenwemaysolvetheimportant
problems in these areas.
P versus NP and related questions. Although progress in actually solv-
ingtheP versusNP problemhas beenslow, therehasbeen avastamount
of work related to P, NP and other complexity classes. I do not believe
that there should be any inherent reason why a solution to the P versus
NP problem should be difficult, but rather think we just need to find the
right idea. Thus I make the following prediction.
Prediction 1. The P versus NP problem (and many related questions in
complexity theory) will be solved by the following date:1
2010 ±10 years.
I further predict that P is distinct from NP; however, I am agnostic
about the truth of many of thecommonly conjectured cryptographic con-
jectures.
I hope that the solution to the P versus NP problem will be some kind
of extension of the diagonalization method, that is to say, that there will
be some logical reasoning extending ideas of self-reference, which will be
able to resolve the P/NP problem. The alternative to a logical solution
of this type would be a combinatorial proof more in the lines of the so-far
obtained circuit lower bounds of Yao, Hastad, Razborov, Smolensky, and
others. To my mind, a combinatorial proof would be a bit disappointing
and a logical proof would be far preferable. Obviously, a logical proof
would be a tremendous boost to the prestige and importance of logic.
Two promising recent approaches to solving the P versus NP prob-
lem include recent work on diagonalization (by Fortnow and others) and
on natural proofs and Craig interpolation (beginning with the work of
Razborov and Rudich). More broadly, much work in weak first-order the-
ories and on propositional proof complexity is motivated by the desire to
find a logical proof that P 6=NP.
Future problems in proof complexity. Probably the most important
problem in proof complexity is to better understand the structure of
propositional and first-order proofs with cuts.
1These predictions were formulated in June2000.
Real computation
Real closed fields
Geometry Other logics
Weak proof systems
Complexity of Database languages
Resolution
real computation Least fixed points
Logic programming
Hybrid systems Modal logics
Constraint logic
Computer algebra Dynamic logics
programming
systems Theories of knowledge
Theorem provers
Resource-aware logics
Equational logics
Linear logic
Term rewriting
Behavioral logics
Nonmonotonic logics
Complexity theory
Model checking
Reducibility
Feasible complexity
Strong proof systems
Computer P vs. NP
Polymorphism
Science Circuit complexity
Object-oriented
Parallel complexity
Finite model theory
Abstract datatypes
λ-calculi Diagonalization
Natural Proofs
Combinatory logics
Proof complexity
Functional programming
Craig interpolation
Category theory
Learning theory
Realizability
Bounded arithmetic
Language design
Programming languages
Denotational semantics Probabilistic computation
Query languages Randomized
Grammars/parsing computation
Verification
Automata theory Probabilistic proofs
Program correctness
Natural language Interactive proofs
Hardware verification
processing PCP, Holographic proofs
Fault-tolerance
Quantum computing
Proof-carrying code
Liveness/safeness
Table 2. The Octopus of Logic for Computer Science.
Another very important problem is to either find, or prove impossible,
proof search procedures which both (a) are more efficient than human
mathematicians, and (b) yield humanly intelligible proofs. However, I
think this problem is extremely difficult and can be accomplished only
with the solution of the next problem.
Artificial intelligence. As discussed above, true AI will involve seman-
tic reasoning based on machine “understanding.” I do not expect that
artificial intelligence will be an all-or-nothing event of the kind frequently
envisioned in popular literature where we one day suddenly discover that
machines have become intelligent. I also think that some of the currently
expressed fears about the dangers of artificial intelligence are way over-
blown. Rather, I predict that progress in artificial intelligence will be a
long, slow processof incremental gains. Nonetheless, I make thefollowing
prediction.
Prediction 2. There will be limited but significant success in artificial
intelligence by
2050 ±30 years.
As discussed earlier, I predict that success in artificial intelligence will
require logic-based reasoning. By “limited, but significant success”, I
envision that artificial intelligence may be successful in some relatively
broad domain of knowledge which is generally acknowledged as involving
operational understanding of semantic concepts.
One good possibility for a first knowledge domain for the initial arti-
ficial intelligence systems is the area of mathematical reasoning. There
areseveraladvantages tomathematical reasoningasaknowledgedomain.
Firstly, a computer can interact more-or-less on an equal footing with a
human since no physical interaction is required. Secondly, the domain is
precisely describable with fixed rules. Thirdly, reasoning in mathemat-
ics requires both creativity and a significant semantic understanding of
the subject matter, and thus represents a significant challenge for an AI
system.
This leads to the next prediction.
Prediction 3. Computer databases of mathematical knowledge will con-
tain, organize, and retrieve most of the known mathematical literature,
2030 ±10 years.
The first step in fulfilling this prediction is to design a formal language
which can faithfully represent mathematical objects and constructions in
a flexible, extensible way. Perhaps an object-oriented language would be
a good choice forthis; however, present-day object-oriented languages are
not adequate for representing mathematical objects.
One of the original stated goals of mathematical logic was to provide
a foundational understanding of mathematics. Quite possibly, the next
major step forward in the foundations of mathematics will occur in con-
junctionwiththedevelopmentofsystemsfulfillingPrediction3orperhaps
even with AI systems for mathematical reasoning.
The relation of logic and computer science. As illustrated in the
“octopus”, theareaoflogicforcomputerscienceisaveryactive, vitaland
diverse discipline. Indeed, it is likely that there are more people working
on logic within computer science than outside of computer science.
In addition, many of the recent developments in computer science call
into question the fundamental concepts of mathematical logic. For in-
stance, the introduction of probabilistic proofs and interactive proofs and
the possibility of quantum computing, threaten the correctness of two of
the most fundamentalnotions in logic, namely thenotions of “proof”and
“computability”.2
However, theso-called coreareasoflogichavehistoricallyslightedorig-
noreddevelopmentsincomputerscience. Ofcourse,thisisnotuniversally
trueandtherearenumerousexamplesofcross-overresearch; furthermore,
in recent years, the use of logic in computer science has reached a critical
mass and it is no longer really possible for core areas of logic to ignore
applications of logic for computer science. Nonetheless, I think most peo-
ple would agree that there is a significant cultural separation between the
traditional areas of logic and the use of logic for computer science.
This separation started before my time, so it is difficult for me to say
with any certainty why it occurred. But my impression is that the sepa-
ration arose in part because, as the field of theoretical computer science
began, the work lacked focus, seemed somewhat ad hoc and overly con-
crete, and sometimes lacked depth. (Of course, this is not unexpected
in a field which was still in its formative stages.) By comparison, logic
in the 1960’s was embarked on a grand project of building coherent and
deep theories about large-scale concepts, such as large cardinals, higher
notions of computability, stronger constructive theories, etc. The work
in computer science took the opposite direction of looking at low-level
complexity, expressibility and provability in weak languages, etc. After
about fifty years of work, theoretical computer science has reached the
point where on one hand it is a mature field with deep and far-reaching
results, but, on the other hand, still has extremely basic open questions:
questions such as whether P is equal to NP or whether mathematically
secure cryptography is possible.
2In his talk at the Annual ASL Meeting in June 2000, A. Widgerson gave an illu-
minating survey of some of these new notions for proof and computability that have
arisen from the study of the mathematical foundations of cryptography using notions
of probabilistic proof and interactive proofs and based on complexity conjectures.
Stronger ties between mathematical logic and computer science cer-
tainly need to be encouraged. The field of theoretical computer science
hasgrownextremelylarge,butisstillverymuchinaformativestage,with
manykeytheoremsstilltobeprovedandverymanyadvancesstillneeded.
Theoretical computer science offers many new applications of logic, and
challenges or extends many of the fundamental notions of mathematical
logic.
Acknowledgement. I wish to thank Jeff Remmel for comments on an
earlier draft of this section.
§4. Model Theory.
By Anand Pillay.
My aim is to describe some trends and perspectives in model theory.
Thisarticleisanexpandedversionofmytalk inthe“PaneloftheFuture”
at the ASL meeting in Urbana. I will also incorporate some points which
came out during the subsequent discussion, and so this article may have
a somewhat polemical flavour.
Wilfrid Hodges’ book Model Theory [30] is a basic text for the subject
and its comprehensive bibliography can be used as a reference for much
of the work cited in the present article, in particular for everything in the
introduction.
As in Kechris’ article it is useful to distinguish between internal and
external aspects of research in model theory. One could also call these
aspects inward and outward-looking. Of course this distinction is not
clear-cut, and in fact I want to describe a remarkable unification that
has been in process for a few years. In any case, this inward versus
outward dichotomy innoway correspondstologic (orfoundations)versus
mathematics (or applications).
Byinward-lookingImeanthedevelopmentandstudyofconcepts,prob-
lems, etc., proper to model theory itself. Included here are the com-
pactness theorem for first order logic (Go¨del, Malcev, Tarski), the the-
ory of quantifier-elimination and model completeness (Tarski, Robinson),
homogeneous-universalandsaturatedmodels(Morley-Vaught), countable
modelsofcompletetheories(Vaught),omittingtypes,products(Feferman-
Vaught), generalized quantifiers, infinitary logics,... Shelah’s work on
classification theory, following Morley’s work on uncountably categorical
theories, possiblyrepresented thefirstfully-fledged program within model
theory proper. The nature of the problem, as well as various theorems
of Shelah himself, allowed him to restrict his attention to a rather small
class of first order theories, the stable ones, for which a deep theory was
developed.
By outward-looking I mean the use of model-theoretic methods in the
study of specific structures or theories from mathematics and even from
logic itself. Earlysuchworkwas Malcev’s useofthecompactness theorem
toprovelocaltheoremsingrouptheory. Oneshouldincludecompleteness,
model-completeness, and quantifier-elimination results for abelian groups
(Szmielew) and various classes of fields such as real-closed (Tarski), al-
gebraically closed (Robinson, Tarski), p-adically closed (Ax-Kochen, Er-
shov, Macintyre), differentially closed (Robinson) etc., and resulting ap-
plications. One should also include here nonstandard analysis as well as
the use of model-theoretic methods (such as nonstandard models) in set
theory and in the study of Peano arithmetic and its fragments. Among
thepastsuccesses of“outward-looking” modeltheoryaretheAx-Kochen-
Ershov analysis of Henselian valued fields and the resulting asymptotic
solution to a conjecture of E. Artin.
The current situation. The 70’s and 80’s saw something of a separa-
tion between (i) those interested primarily in model theory as a tool for
doing mathematics (or logic) and (ii) those, often working in and around
stability theory, for whom model theory was also an end in itself. This
separation is again only an approximation to the truth: there were peo-
ple on both sides (and also on neither side), and already results of Zilber,
Cherlin, Harrington and Lachlan, and Macintyre, had connected the pure
theory with some basic structures of mathematics. In any case, the “sep-
aration” referred to above gave rise to a necessary and important internal
development of the subject. Even though there were good relations and
mutual admiration between the different “camps”, some people in group
(i) were somewhat suspicious of what they saw as overtly set-theoretic
preoccupations in Shelah’s program and theory.
The last ten or fifteen years have seen a remarkable unification or even
re-unification of these differing trends and emphases. One aspect is that
the machinery and conceptual framework of stability theory has been
brought to bear on the analysis of concrete structures in new ways. Re-
lated to this is that various notions/dichotomies in stability theory turn
out to have meaning, not only for the general theory, but for the (out-
side) mathematical world. (Actually I am heretalking notaboutstability
theory per se but what one might call “generalized stability theory”, the
development of the machinery of “independence”, dimension theory, or-
thogonality, in model-theoretic contexts both broader than and outside
stable theories, such as simple theories and o-minimal theories.) Going
the other way, a kind of sensitivity to the mathematical world, especially
what one may call a “geometric sensibility” (complementing the usual
“set-theoretic sensibility” characteristic of logicians) has influenced the
pure theory.
Asaresultoftheseandearlierdevelopments,modeltheoryhasassumed
arathernewrole, complementingtheclassical “foundationsofmathemat-
ics”. This is reflected in Hrushovski’s description of model theory as “the
geographyoftamemathematics”. Igivenodefinitionof“tamemathemat-
ics” or “tame structures”. The real, p-adic, and complex fields are tame.
The ring of integers (and field of rationals) are very nontame (or wild) as
is any structure which interprets them. Making sense of the tame/wild
borderline becomes a mathematical issue. Generalized stability theory
tends to rule out the interpretability of wild structures.
Let me give a couple of examples of the unification referred to above.
The first is the amazing journey from finite fields to the “Independence
Theorem” for simple theories. James Ax established the decidability of
the theory of finite fields in the 60’s, using among other things the Lang-
Weil estimates for the number of points on varieties over finite fields.
In spite of much work on pseudofinite fields and their generalizations,
pseudo-algebraically closed fields, the connection with abstract model-
theoretic notions remained obscure. Shelah [50] introduced simple the-
ories in the late 70’s as theories without the “tree property” (a certain
combinatorial property of formulas) generalizing stable theories (theories
without the “order property”). His idea was that the machinery of stabil-
ity theory (such as forking)might generalize to simple theories. Although
Shelah made several crucial insights, the situation remained problematic,
and the subject was not developed further until the mid 90’s. In the
early 90’s, Chatzidakis, van den Dries and Macintyre, continuing Ax’s
work, gave a description of definable sets in finite fields (and thus in
the limit, pseudofinite fields), associating to definable sets both dimen-
sions and measures, and asking several questions (such as the status of
“imaginaries” in pseudofinite fields). I remember receiving the preprint
and leafing through it with wonder late one afternoon in Notre Dame.
Hrushovski [31] went further than I did. He answered the questions, in a
moregeneralcontext, theories offiniteS -rank, andprovedthe“Indepen-
dence Theorem” for these theories, a result concerning the amalgamation
of free extensions of types. In the meantime Kim [41] had shown that the
basic theory of forking does indeed go through for Shelah’s simple theo-
ries. Motivated by Hrushovski’s work (as well as Shelah’s earlier work),
this IndependenceTheorem was proved for arbitrary simple theories, and
was moreover observed to be a characteristic property of simple theories
[42].
Another example is o-minimality. The notion of o-minimality was de-
veloped bothas anabstraction of thepropertiesof semialgebraic sets over
the reals, and as an analogue of strong minimality in the presence of a
total ordering (see [16]). In any case, if one allows the notion of a total
ordering as belonging to logic, theclassification of o-minimal structuresis
an issue also of pure logic. A theorem of Peterzil and Starchenko [48] re-
covers (expansionsof)realclosedfieldsfromo-minimality. Thisshouldbe
consideredasafoundationalresultinthenewsense: fromanotionofpure
logic one recovers model-theoretically (expansions of) real algebraic ge-
ometry. HrushovskiandZilberinanearlier paper[33]hadalready proved
a similar result for “Zariski geometries”, recovering algebraic geometry.
Majorresultsofthe90’swereWilkie’sproofofmodel-completeness(and
o-minimality)oftherealfieldequippedwiththeexponentialfunction[66],
and Hrushovski’s proof of the Mordell-Lang conjecture for function fields
in all characteristics [32]. Wilkie’s ingenious proof made use of the gen-
eral theory of o-minimality. There is continuing work on finding richer
o-minimal expansions of the real field. Hrushovski’s work was informed
by almost alltheaccumulated results instability theory, geometric stabil-
ity theory and stability-theoretic algebra (differentially closed fields and
separably closed fields). From this work and ongoing work by Hrushovski
and others (such as Scanlon) one sees that the model-theoretic/stability-
theoretic distinction between linear (ormodular)andnonlinear(nonmod-
ular) behaviour of definable sets has meaning in the world of geometry
and number theory.
The terms “applied model theory” and “applied model-theorists” have
been recently bandied around by various people, to describe in a blanket
fashion much of the current work in model theory and its practitioners.
I hope that the above discussion and examples show that this is just
wrong and moreover completely misses the point. Although individuals
may choose to view themselves as “applied”, what is specific to current
developments is not a shifting of attention to the external mathematical
world, butthe mutual interaction between external and internal points of
view, and the corresponding enrichment of both.
There is now a reasonably coherent sense of what it means to under-
stand a structure: it means understanding the category of definable sets
(including quotients by definable equivalence relations). Generalized sta-
bility theory gives ahost of concepts andtools which informthis analysis:
dimension theory (the assignment of meaningful ordinal-valued dimen-
sions to definable sets, invariant underdefinablebijection), orthogonality,
geometries, definablegroupsand homogeneous spaces. As mentioned ear-
lier, thecontexts inwhichsuchtools areapplicabletend toruleoutGo¨del
undecidability phenomena. Interpretability is a key (even characteristic)
notion, and in a tautological sense the business of “pure” model theory
becomes the classification of first order theories up to bi-interpretability.
It is worth pointing out what some may consider paradoxical in foun-
dations, model theory and the wild/tame distinction. From a classical
foundational point of view the objects of mathematics which can be most
immediately grasped are the “accessible domains” referred to in Sieg’s
talk (such as the set of natural numbers equipped with all its arithmetic
operations). On top of these are built the set-theoretically more compli-
cated objects of mathematics. In fact it is some of these latter objects
(such as locally compact fields), which, once their set-theoretic genesis
is forgotten, we have direct access to, via quantifier-elimination and de-
cidability theorems. The accessible domains, such as number fields and
theirabsoluteGalois groups,althoughamongthecentralobjectsinmath-
ematics, remain mysterious in many ways. It is typical in mathematics
to approach problems about these objects via tame objects (such as via
the Hasse principle and its obstructions).
There are many important current areas of research in and around
model theory which are not directly included in the above discussion.
The model theory of modules has been a particularly active area. The
Ziegler spectrum of a ring, originating from model-theoretic considera-
tions (positive-primitive formulas) is now a key notion and tool in the
representation theory of rings. In this case too, the stability-theoretic
perspective has been important. Work on generalized quantifiers and
infinitary logic continues, especially in the context of “nonstructure theo-
rems”byShelahandhiscollaborators. Thesubject“finitemodeltheory”,
the study of definable classes of finite structures and definability in finite
structures has also been rather active, with connections to computer sci-
ence and complexity. In this context first order definability is often the
wrong notion to consider and either fragments (such as first order logic
withfinitelymanyvariables)orotherlogicsaremoreappropriate. Evenin
the context of first order definability on infinite structures, nonfirst order
considerations naturally arise, for example when one wants to consider
type-definable sets and even their quotients by type-definable equivalence
relations as structures in their own right. Although nonstandard analysis
has long ago become a separate subject, model theory has been enriched
by the development (by Keisler [39], Henson and others) of appropriate
logics and tools for dealing with metric spaces, Banach spaces and the
like.
The future. I will not try to predict developments but will limit myself
to discussing a few “themes” (and problems) which are mostly related to
the current developments discussed above. This is of course both limited
and influenced by my own knowledge and preoccupations.
Foundations of model theory. What is the right language and level of
generality for model theory? The traditional framework of one-sorted
structures and their point-sets has long been recognized as being rather
restrictive. The actual practice of model-theorists is somewhat more in
line with points of view from categorical logic. Moreover a degree of
flexibility is required to deal with various natural elaborations of and
variants of first order definability.
Classification of uncountably categorical and related structures, up to
bi-interpretability. This is a rather strong formulation of Zilber’s pro-
gram. In this form it will probably never be accomplished, but it sub-
sumes an enormous amount of work in model theory: the geometry of
strongly minimal sets, the mathematics around Hrushovski’s amalgama-
tion/fusion techniques, the structure of simple noncommutative groups
of finite Morley rank (Cherlin’s conjecture) and the theory of covers. In-
cluded in “related structures” are the structures of finite SU-rank, say,
where much of the geometric theory has still to be developed.
Interpretedmorelooselywecouldincludehereongoingworkinstability,
its generalizations (such as simple theories), and the classification of first
order theories.
Model theory and analysis/geometry. It is hoped that the second part
of Hilbert’s 16th problem (uniform bounds on the number of limit cycles
of polynomial planar vector fields) can be approached by finding suitably
rich o-minimal expansions of the real field.
The understanding of complex exponentiation is a major challenge, in
particular Zilber’s conjecture that the complex field equipped with the
exponential function is “tame” modulo countable definable sets.
Bimeromorphicgeometryisconcernedwiththeclassificationofcompact
complexmanifoldsuptobimeromorphicequivalence. Thereisahopethat
geometric stability-theoretic methods would yield nontrivial results here,
although maybe it is too early to tell. There are intriguing connections
with “o-minimal complex analysis”.
I also include here further development of model theoretic techniques
and notions appropriate for metric spaces, Banach spaces and function
spaces, as well as applications.
Model theory and number theory. The kind of model-theoretic methods
discussed in this article have not yet penetrated the central problems
concerningrationalpoints(namelyovernumberfields)ofvarieties. Thisis
a major challenge, and any progress would have to incorporatearithmetic
features such as heights into associated model-theoretic structures.
On the other hand, various theorems about rational points (such as
Mordell-Lang over number fields) have equivalent model-theoretic state-
ments(although notasyetmodel-theoreticproofs). Infactwehaveanew
twist on the notion “fragments of arithmetic”: Fix a variety V defined
over Q and let M be the structure (C,+,·,V(Q)) (so we adjoin a pred-
icate for the rational points of V to the complex field). Is it the case that
M is either stableor undecidable? What arethepossibleTuringdegrees
of such structures? Are these questions settled by the Lang conjectures
on varieties of general type?
Model theory and differential equations. I mean here the algebraic the-
oryofdifferentialequationsandthestructureofsolutionsets. Concerning
ordinary differential equations, thefinestructureof definablesets of finite
Morley rank in differentially closed fields is relevant. A challenge is to ex-
tend finiteness theorems for equations of order 1 to the higher order case.
For partial differential equations, infinite-dimensional sets (i.e. definable
sets of infinite Morley rank in the appropriate structures) come into the
picture, and are hardly understood at all model-theoretically.
Another important problem is to identify and axiomatize the univer-
sal domains appropriate for the kind of “asymptotic differential algebra”
embodied in Hardy fields.
Finally, one would hope for model-theoretic methods (especially those
discussed in this article) to be relevant to Grothendiek’s conjecture in the
arithmetic of linear differential equations.
Finite and pseudofinite structures. I am referring here to the (first or-
der) model-theoretic study of infinite limits (in various senses) of finite
structures, and the light this sheds on uniformities in families of finite
structures. (So this is not exactly the same as so-called finite model
theory.) The work on smoothly approximable structures (Lachlan, Cher-
lin, Hrushovski [5], Kantor, Liebeck, Macpherson and others) as well as
work on pseudofinite groups and fields falls under this rubric. The con-
tent and implications of pseudofiniteness (being an ultraproduct of finite
structures) is an important issue.
Hilbert’s 10th problem over Q. Thisis very muchrelated to thenumber
theory discussion above. Theproblem is whether there is an effective way
of deciding, given a finite system of polynomials in several variables with
rationalcoefficients, whetherornotthissystemhasasolutionallofwhose
coordinates are rational numbers. Formulated logically it is the problem
of the decidability of the existential theory of (Q,+,·). (The full theory
is undecidable.) Formulated geometrically it is the problem of deciding
the existence of rational points on varieties defined over Q. A negative
solution would follow from being able to existentially define the ring Z
in the field Q. (A possible obstruction to this is a certain conjecture of
Barry Mazur on the topology of rational points of varieties.) It is rather
interesting that number theorists appear to favour a positive solution to
the main problem. In fact in the case of curves (1-dimensional varieties),
it has been conjectured that one can even compute the set of rational
points.
Vaught’s conjecture. Vaught’s conjecture for first order countable theo-
ries remains open: a first order countable theory has either at most ω or
exactly 2ω countable models. One hopes for a renewal of the “approach
from below” started by Shelah for the ω-stable case and continued by
Buechler and Newelski for the superstable of finite rank case. It would
be nice to see also an approach from above. In the more general context
of L theories, it is a special case of the Topological Vaught conjecture
from descriptive set theory.
Logic andmathematics. Onethemeinthediscussionfollowingthepanel
presentation was: how can logic increase its prestige within mathematics
and how does one go aboutmaking a “splash” which mathematicians will
take notice of? Myfeelingis thatthisisthewrongsortofquestion. Ifone
wants some kind of meaningful interaction with other parts of mathemat-
ics, it is the conviction that this is a worthwhile intellectual enterprise,
rather than the desire to make a “splash”, which is crucial. This convic-
tion amounts essentially to a belief in the unity of mathematics. There
has been much discussion of this “unity of mathematics” in recent times,
often in connection with deep conjectures relating arithmetic, geometry,
analysis, representation theory etc. One feels moreover that logicians,
especially in the light of their foundational concerns, should have some
level of engagement with these issues and conjectures. There is another
sociological aspect. In so far as logicians live and operate within mathe-
matics departments thereis aneed totalk toand interact with thepeople
around them. So the issue is that of a sensitivity to mathematics and ed-
ucating our graduate students accordingly. I believe that with such a
sensitivity, interactions and “splashes” will take care of themselves, and
oursubject, or ratherits variousbranches, may endupbeingtransformed
in the process.
Acknowledgement. Thanks to Lou van den Dries for his comments on
an earlier draft.
§5. Set Theory.
By Alexander Kechris.
A) I will present here some speculations on future directions in set the-
ory. Modern set theory is a vast and very diverse subject, so it is obvious
that in a short time I cannot possibly cover all important aspects of re-
search in this field. I will also concentrate on discussing, in fairly broad
terms,generalprogramsandtrends,asopposedtospecificproblems,with
some obvious exceptions.
B) For the purposes of this presentation, it will be convenient for me
to distinguish two aspects of research in set theory:
Thefirst,whichIwillcallinternalorfoundational, isconcernedwiththe
understanding and clarification of the basic concepts of set theory itself,
and aims at providing a foundation for a comprehensive and satisfactory
theory of sets. Since the time of Cantor, set theory has been continuously
evolving towards that goal and this trend will undoubtedly continue in
the future.
The second aspect, which I will call external or interactive, deals with
the connections of set theory with other areas of mathematics. This
includes the use of set theoretic concepts, methods, and results in estab-
lishing the foundations or helpingthe development of other mathematical
disciplines as well as the application of set theoretic techniques in the
solution of specific problems in such areas.
Of course, these two aspects, internal and external, are often closely
interrelated.
C) Also, following a well-established tradition going back to Cantor, it
will be useful to subdivide the theory of sets into (i) the theory of the
continuum or theory of pointsets, i.e., the study of sets and functions on
the reals, complex numbers, Euclidean spaces or, more generally, Pol-
ish (complete separable metric) spaces, and (ii) the general set theory of
arbitrary sets and cardinals.
An important further distinction in the theory of the continuum was
introduced in the early 20th Century by the French, Russian, and Polish
analysts, who laid the foundations of descriptive set theory or definability
theory of the continuum, which is the study of definable (e.g., Borel, pro-
jective, etc.) sets and functions on Polish spaces. So we can subdivide
the theory of the continuum into descriptive set theory and the theory of
arbitrary pointsets. For example, a question such as the measurability of
theprojectivesetsbelongstothefirstpartbuttheContinuumHypothesis
(CH) or the study of cardinal characteristics of the continuum belongs to
the second.
Again alltheseaspectsofsettheoryareclosely interrelated. Withthese
classifications in mind, I will now discuss some prospects for research in
set theory.
Descriptive set theory.
A) Work in the last 30 years or so has resulted in a resolution of the
foundational(internal)issuesfacingdescriptivesettheory. Thereisnowa
verysatisfactoryandcomprehensivefoundationforthetheoryofdefinable
sets and functions on Polish spaces, based on the principle of Definable
Determinacy (see Kechris [36], Moschovakis [45]). This theory also fits
beautifully within the framework of global set theory as currently devel-
oped through the theory of large cardinals. The determinacy principle is
in fact “equivalent”, in an appropriate sense, to the existence of certain
types of large cardinals (see Martin-Steel [44], Woodin [67]). Moreover
the structure theory of definable sets in Polish spaces, that determinacy
unveils, has a very close and deep relationship with the unfolding inner
model theory of large cardinals, an example of which was so vividly illus-
trated in Itay Neeman’s talk in this conference.
B) Thus the foundational aspects of descriptive set theory are by and
large settled now. Research in this area is now increasingly preoccupied
with external issues. These consist of applying the ideas, methodology,
and results of descriptive set theory, both in its classical and modern
manifestations, to other areas of mathematics, while at the same time
developing new directions in the theory itself which are motivated by
such interactions. Interestingly, this also leads to the use of sophisticated
methods and results from other areas of mathematics in the solution of
purely set theoretic problems in descriptive set theory.
Intriguing such connections have been discovered during the last 15
years or so in areas such as classical real analysis, harmonic analysis,
Banach space theory, and ergodic theory (see, for example, Foreman et
al. [20], Kahane-Salem [35], Kechris-Louveau [38]). More recently, a very
promising new area, that is now very actively investigated, deals with the
development of a theory of complexity of classification problems in math-
ematics, a classification problem being the question of cataloging a class
of mathematical objects up to some notion of equivalence by invariants,
and the closely related theory of descriptive dynamics, i.e., the theory of
definableactionsofPolishgroupsonPolishspaces(seeBecker-Kechris [1],
Hjorth [25], Kechris [37]). This work brings descriptive set theory into
contact with current developments in various areas of mathematics such
asdynamicalsystems,includingergodictheoryandtopological dynamics,
the theory of topological groups and their representations, operator alge-
bras, abelian and combinatorial group theory, etc. Moreover, it provides
new insights in the traditional relationships of descriptive set theory with
other areas of mathematical logic, as, for example, with recursion theory,
concerningtheglobalstructureofTuringdegrees(seeP.Cholaketal.[6]),
orwithmodeltheory, throughtheTopological VaughtConjectureandthe
general study of the isomorphism relation on countable structures.
Moving beyond descriptive set theory, I will concentrate on two other
major aspects: the theory of large cardinals and the theory of small car-
dinals.
The theory of large cardinals.
A) The goal of the theory of large cardinals is to understand the higher
reaches of infinity and their effect on its lower levels. Another important
aspect here is the use of large cardinal principles as a global scale for
calibrating the consistency strength of extensions of classical ZFC set
theory.
Most of the effort in this area today is going towards the internal or
foundational aspects of this theory, where a vigorous and far reaching
program is actively pursued, dealing with the development of canonical
inner models for large cardinals and the detailed analysis of their struc-
ture, as well as their relationship with descriptive set theory (see Lo¨we-
Steel [43], Steel [62]). This program is by no means complete yet, and it
will undoubtedlybeone of the main topics of set theoretic research in the
foreseeable future. It is also closely interrelated to many other important
directions of research in set theory, including infinite combinatorics and
the development of forcing techniques (see the forthcoming Foreman et
al. [19]).
B)Simultaneouslywiththepursuitofthefoundationalgoals,therehave
been several interesting external developments here as well. There is of
course a long tradition of application of set theoretic techniques, involv-
ing for example, forcing, infinite combinatorics as well as large cardinals,
to many areas of abstract algebra, functional analysis, measure theory
and general topology, for instance in obtaining significant independence
and consistency results, as for example in the Whitehead Problem (She-
lah; see Shelah [49]), the Kaplansky Conjecture (Dales, Esterle, Solovay,
Woodin; see Dales-Woodin [12]), or theS-and L-spaceproblems (see, for
example, Todorcevic [63]), and this will of course continue in the future.
More recently, large cardinal theory is finding its way into more concrete
situations. H. Friedman (see, for example, Friedman [22]) applies com-
binatorics of large cardinals to obtain new combinatorial principles for
finite sets. Moreover he shows that these principles require, in an appro-
priate sense, these large cardinal hypotheses. Another interesting direc-
tion relates the structure of elementary embeddings associated with large
cardinals to that of self-distributive algebras and braid groups, through
work of Laver, Dehornoy, and others (see Dehornoy [13]).
The theory of small cardinals.
A) In this context, I include both the study of arbitrary pointsets, in
particular problems such as the CH, as well as the theory of the “small”
alephs ℵ , ℵ ,...
Here the foundational situation is far from clear. The theory of large
cardinals has many important implications here, in particular in terms of
consistencyandindependenceresults(see,forinstance,Foreman-Magidor-
Shelah [21]). However, it is well-known that in its present form, which
is largely immune to forcing constructions, it does not resolve key issues
such as the CH. It is clear that a satisfactory and comprehensive the-
ory of small cardinals needs to be developed, within which we can hope
to achieve the resolution of this basic set theoretic problem and related
questions.
B) A promising new approach along these lines has been recently initi-
atedbyWoodin(seeWoodin[68]),whichaimsatdevelopingatheorythat
leads to a “complete” understanding of the definability structure of the
power set of ω , P(ω ), which will parallel the “complete” understand-
ing of the definability structure of the power set of ω, P(ω), based on
the principleof definabledeterminacy. Towards developing such a theory,
Woodin proposes a new principle, concerning the definability structure of
(an enriched form of) P(ω ), which implies the failure of the CH, in fact
it gives the answer 2 0 = ℵ for the value of the cardinality of the con-
tinuum. It is of course too early yet to know the full effect of this theory,
and whether it will be eventually viewed as the “right” theory for the de-
finability structure of P(ω ), finally leading to a satisfactory resolution of
theCH.Thiswillrequireamuchmoredetailed development ofthetheory
than is presently available, and should be the focus of extensive research
in the future. Even if this turns out to be successful, further questions
concerning the theory of arbitrary pointsets and the structure of small
cardinals would need the development of a theory of P(ω ),P(ω )..., for
which no hints are available at this stage.
Acknowledgment. IamgratefultoYiannisMoschovakis, RichardShore,
John Steel, and Hugh Woodin for their comments on an earlier draft of
this section.