The Partner Units Configuration Problem:
Completing the Picture
Erich Christian Teppan1 and Gerhard Friedrich
Universitaet Klagenfurt, Austria
The partner units problem (PUP) is an acknowledged hard benchmark
problem for the Logic Programming community with various industrial ap-
plication fields like surveillance, electrical engineering, computer networks or
railway safety systems. However, computational complexity remained widely
unclearsofar. Inthispaperweprovideallmissingcomplexityresultsmaking
the PUP better exploitable for benchmark testing. Furthermore, we present
QuickPup, a heuristic search algorithm for PUP instances which outper-
forms all state-of-the-art solving approaches and which is already in use in
real world industrial configuration environments.
Keywords: Partner units problem, heuristic search, automated
configuration, computational complexity analysis
1. Introduction
The partner units problem (PUP, Falkner et al. (2011)) is a classical con-
figuration problem where components have to be connected such that all user
requirements and technical constraints are satisfied (see Mittal and Frayman
(1989)). Solving such real world configuration problems are one of the ma-
jor success stories of Artificial Intelligence which resulted in a commercially
attractive area where many companies are offering configuration tools and
services. Current modern configuration tools apply declarative knowledge
representation and reasoning techniques based on constraint satisfaction,
SAT solving, Answer Set Programming or Description Logics (see Junker
1Corresponding author. contact: erich.teppan@aau.at, +43 463 2700 3756
Preprint submitted to – June 30, 2021
3v6026.8031:viXra
(2006) for an overview). Consequently, there is a strong interest that these
techniques are applicable for typical configuration problems.
GiventheresultsoftheASPcompetition20112 (ONLINE(2011))andthe
evaluation documented in Aschinger et al. (2011a) the PUP is an exception-
ally hard real world problem. Although general problem solving techniques
based on constraint programming, SAT solving or Answer Set Programming
are applicable for small and some mid-sized PUP instances, large real world
cases are clearly out of reach for current solver technologies.
Figure 1 shows the 34 benchmark problems in the model-and-solve track
of the ASP competition 2011 and depicts how often corresponding instances
could be consistently solved or proved to be unsatisfiable within time and
memory limits3. Obviously, the hardest problem was the strategic company
problem (Cadoli et al. (1997), Leone et al. (2006)) which is complete on the
second level of the polynomial hierarchy, i.e. ΣP = NPNP.
As it turns out the second hardest problem, and thus the hardest problem
inNPoutofall2011ASPcompetitionmodel-and-solvebenchmarkproblems,
wasasubclassofthePUPwhichhadalreadybeenproventobeofpolynomial
complexity (Aschinger et al. (2011b)). Also a second PUP benchmark for
which no complexity results were available so far, belonged to the hardest
thirdoftestedbenchmarkproblems. Consequently, thePUPisbothfromthe
practical and theoretical point of view a very important problem for further
investigations.
Originally, the partner units problem was identified in the domain of rail-
way safety systems. One of the problems in this domain is to make sure
that certain rail tracks are not occupied by a train/wagon before another
train enters this track. For deciding if a rail track is occupied, occupancy
indicators and wheel sensors for counting the number of train wheels pass-
ing a wheel sensor are connected to processing units. Because of fail-safety
and realtime requirements the number of sensors and indicators which can
be connected to the same unit is limited (called unit capacity, UCAP). Also
one sensor/indicator can only be directly connected to one unit. Moreover,
a unit can only be connected to a limited number of other units (called in-
ter unit capacity, IUCAP). These units are called the partner units of the
2Summarized results and raw data set available at
Figure1: PercentageofASPcompetitionrunswhereasolutioncouldbefoundbyasolver
or unsatisfiability could be proved
Figure 2: Example of a railway track layout
unit. Elements can only communicate with elements connected to the same
unit and with elements connected to one of the partner units. Given an in-
put graph specifying which sensor data is needed in order to calculate the
correct signal of an occupancy indicator, the problem consists in connect-
ing sensors/indicators with units and units with other units such that all
communication requirements are fulfilled.
Figure2showsasimpleexamplewiththreeconnectedrailwaytrackswith
corresponding occupancy indicators and wheel sensors, the corresponding
PUP input graph and a solution wherby UCAP = 2, i.e. only two sensors
and two indicators can be connected to the same unit, and IUCAP = 2,
i.e. each unit can at most have two partner units. In order to calculate the
correct signal for Indicator 3 only data from Sensor 3 and Sensor 4 is needed.
IfthenumberofoutgoingwheelscountedbySensor4isequaltotheincoming
wheel counts of Sensor 3 then Track 3 is empty. For Track 2 and Track 3
it is somewhat more complex. In order to calculate the correct signal for
Indicator 2 it is not sufficient to only incorporate data from Sensor 2 and
Sensor 5 as it is not clear whether a wheel has headed to or is coming from
Track 3. Therefore, additional data from Sensor 3 and Sensor 4 is needed.
For Indicator 1 data from Sensor 1, Sensor 2, Sensor 5 and Sensor 6 must be
considered.
Furtherimportantapplicationdomainsapartfromrailwaysafetyareelec-
trical engineering, peer-to-peer networking and CCTV surveillance (Teppan
(2012), Aschinger et al. (2011a)).
At tis point, there can be drawn three important conclusions:
1. The PUP is a very hard real world problem which is perfectly suitable
for benchmark testing in the declarative programming community.
2. InordertofurtherandbetterexploitthePUPasabenchmarkproblem,
complexity results for all problem subclasses are needed.
3. Because of the practical relevance of the PUP for many industrial fields
and also as a benchmark problem, it is further desirable to have a
competitive solving strategy in order to:
• provide solutions for large real world cases.
• provide a yardstick for benchmark testing of general problem solv-
ing techniques.
Our main contributions are the following:
1. We deliver complexity results for all PUP sub problems and show that
except all PUP subclasses which were not proved polynomial so far are
NP-complete.
2. We present a novel heuristic backtracking algorithm which performs
better than state-of-the-art approaches by orders of magnitude and
solves real world PUP instances in milliseconds.
The paper is structured as follows. In Section 2 we provide the complex-
ity results for all possible subclasses. QuickPup, our heuristic backtracking
search algorithm, is introduced in Section 3. In Section 4 we provide experi-
mental results which are based on real-world problem instances.
2. Complexity of the PUP
WithregardtotheoriginofthePUPwerefertothetwotypesofelements
to be placed on communication units as indicators and sensors and to the
communication units as units for the rest of the paper. Formally, the PUP
can be defined as follows:
Definition 1. ApartnerunitsprobleminstanceisasixtupleP =< I,S,E,U,
UCAP,IUCAP > where I represents a set of indicators, S represents a set
of sensors, U is a set of units and E ⊆ I × S is the set of edges between
I and S in the corresponding bipartite input graph. Given the two natural
numbers UCAP (unit capacity) and IUCAP (inter unit capacity), the PUP
decision problem consists in deciding whether there exists a solution function
f : I ∪S → U such that:
Figure 3: Current complexity landscape for the PUP
• For every u ∈ U:
• Every u,v ∈ U with u (cid:54)= v are connected, whenever i ∈ I ∧ s ∈
• The connection relation is symmetric, i.e. if u ∈ U is connected to
v ∈ U then v is connected to u
• Every unit u ∈ U is connected to at most IUCAP other units.
Thesolutionfunctioncorrespondstoasolutiongraphshowingwhichindi-
cators and sensors are placed on which units and how the units are connected
to each other (see Figure 2).
Figure3showsanoverviewaboutthecomplexitylandscapeofthepartner
units problem (PUP). In the most general form, that is when IUCAP and
UCAP are part of the input, the PUP is NP-complete. This was shown by
reducing bin-packing to the special case where IUCAP = 0, thus when the
units in fact constitute bins (Aschinger et al. (2011b), Garey and Johnson
(1990)). Also the special case with IUCAP = 1 is basically the same as with
IUCAP = 0. This is due to the fact that cases with IUCAP = 0 can be
transformed to IUCAP = 1.
Corollary 1. The PUP is NP-complete when IUCAP = 1 and UCAP is
part of the input.
Proof 1. Membership in NP is evident. For showing completeness, we can
transform PUP with IUCAP = 0 to PUP with IUCAP = 1 as follows:
1. For each unit in the PUP with IUCAP = 0 there are two units for
IUCAP = 1.
2. For every indicator i in the input graph for we add a dummy indicator
d and for every sensor s in the input graph we add a dummy sensor
d .
3. For connected elements i and s we add also an edge between:
The new input graphs for IUCAP = 1 have exactly double the size as the
original input graphs for IUCAP = 0 but there are also double the number
of units available, which can be connected to pairs of units. Thus, a PUP
instance with IUCAP = 0 is satisfiable if and only if the corresponding PUP
instance with IUCAP = 1 is satisfiable.(cid:3)
For the cases with IUCAP = 2 and fixed UCAP a polynomial-time al-
gorithm could be found due to the fact the solution input graphs for such
cases are always chains or rings of units Aschinger et al. (2011b). For the
cases with fixed IUCAP ≥ 3 complexity remained unclear so far. Also for
the complexity with IUCAP = 2 but not fixed UCAP there has not been
a complexity result. For practical purposes the fixed parameter complexity
when both parameters, i.e. IUCAP and UCAP, are fixed to some natural
number is of special importance. This is because typically the PUP occurs
in application cases where standardized devices (indicators/sensors, commu-
nication, units circuit boards, etc.) are used which provide a fixed number
of connectors and ports.
In the following it will be shown that any PUP with unfixed UCAP or
with fixed IUCAP ≥ 3 is NP-complete. Thus, we will be able to color all
white gaps on the complexity landscape in Figure 3.
Theorem 1. The PUP is NP-complete when IUCAP=2 and UCAP is part
of the input and thus not fixed.
Proof 2. Membership in NP is evident. For NP-completeness we reduce
from bin-packing given by a set of natural numbers N = {n ...n } repre-
senting the item sizes, the bin size binSize and the number of bins k. The
PUP instance is produced as follows:
Figure 4: Principle of bins for PUP with IUCAP = 2 and UCAP not fixed
• Set UCAP = binSize+1 and IUCAP = 2
• For every item of size n ∈ N produce a new indicator i and n bicliques
(i,si )...(i,si ) with si ...si constituting fresh sensors.
• For each bin introduce (2 × UCAP) + 1 fresh indicators and (2 ×
UCAP) + 1 fresh sensors and produce bicliques between all those in-
dicators and sensors. As every indicator and sensor is connected to
(2×UCAP)+1 elements, every unit has exactly 2 partner units. Fur-
thermore, as all elements share the same elements they also share the
same partner units which results in a ring structure consisting of 3 units
(see Figure 4). For every such structure there remain UCAP − 1 =
binSize free slots for placing the item structures. Note that the free
slots may be arbitrarily distributed on the units.
There exists a packing with k or fewer bins iff there exists a solution to
the PUP with 3×k units.(cid:3)
For proving NP-completeness results for PUP instances with IUCAP ≥
3, we use a special form of bin-packing.
Lemma 1. Bin packing is NP-complete when item sizes and bin sizes are
even.
Proof 3. Given a regular bin packing problem given by a set of natural num-
bers N = {n ...n } representing the item sizes, the bin size b and the num-
ber of bins k, we can transform regular bin packing by multiplying item sizes
n ∈ N and the bin size b with two. Every combination of items which summed
up to ≤ b in the regular problem sums up to ≤ 2×k in the transformed prob-
lem. Analogously, every combination of items which summed up to > b in
the regular problem sums up to > 2×k in the transformed problem.(cid:3)
Before we introduce the structures which are necessary for transforming
bin packing to the PUP, we need the notion of induced input graphs. Infor-
mally, an induced input graph is an input graph that is produced based on
a given solution graph (which we call inducing graph) such that there is an
edge between an indicator and a sensor in the induced input graph whenever
they can communicate in the given solution graph (inducing graph).
Definition 2. Given a PUP solution graph G =< I ∪ S,U,V,W > which
we call inducing graph, with the indicators and sensors I ∪S, the units U,
the edges V between I ∪S and U, and the edges W between units in U, the
induced input graph is the bipartite input graph P =< I,S,E > such that
(i,s) ∈ E with i ∈ I and s ∈ S iff
• (i,u) ∈ V ∧(s,u) ∈ V with u ∈ U or
• (i,u1) ∈ V ∧(s,u2) ∈ V and (u1,u2) ∈ W with u1,u2 ∈ U
In order to simulate even sized bins (see Lemma 1) by means of PUP
structures we need the graphs defined in Figure 5 employing UCAP= 1 and
IUCAP= 3. Twographsaretobeusedincombination. TheFigureshowsthe
inducing graphs and the induced input graphs for both. Furthermore, Figure
5 introduces the graph condensing symbols which are to be further used
for ease of presentation. In the subsequent proofs we exploit the following
property of the solution graph given the input graph of Figure 5.
Lemma 2. The PUP input graphs in Figure 5 guarantee that indicator ’a’
is placed on a unit that contains a free sensor slot at this stage and which
contains two free unit connections. Likewise for the other graph, it is guar-
anteed that sensor ’b’ is placed in a unit that contains a free indicator slot
and which contains two free unit connections.
Proof 4. For the ease of understanding the major steps of the proof are
visualized by Figure 6.
1. i1 must communicate to all sensors in {s1,s2,s3,s4} and as a conse-
quence the unit hosting i1 must be connected to three other units and
each of the four units must contain one of the sensors in {s1,s2,s3,s4}.
We call the unit hosting i1 U1.
2. As i2 is also connected to all sensors in {s1,s2,s3,s4} and U1 will also
host one of the sensors in {s1,s2,s3,s4}, i2 must be placed on one of
the three partner units of U1. We call the unit hosting i2 U2. The
other two units have to be connected to U2. We call these units U3 and
U4, depending on which element (i3 or i4 is placed on the unit).
3. i3 respectively i4 must be placed on U3 and U4 because i3 as well as
i4 have to communicate to three sensors in {s1,s2,s3,s4}. As both U1
and U2 do not allow any more unit connections, i3 as well as i4 have
to be on an already connected partner unit, i.e. U3 or U4.
4. s1 as well as s2 must go to U1 or U2 and not to U3 or U4 as s1 and s2
have to communicate to all four indicators in {i1,i2,i3,i4}. Placing
s1 or s2 on U3 or U4 would demand that U3 gets connected to U4,
making it impossible to connect any further elements.
5. Similarly, s3 must be placed on U3 (together with i3) and s4 must go
to U4 (together with s4) and not the other way round. Placing s3 on
U4 and s4 on U3 would again require that U3 and U4 are connected,
making it impossible to connect any further elements.
6. As U3 as well as U4 have only one free unit connection left at this stage,
and because both i3 and i4 have to communicate to s5 and furthermore
because both s3 and s4 have to communicate to i5 the only possibility is
to place i5 and s5 on the same unit (U5) which is connected to U3 and
U4. As a consequence U5 has only one free unit connection left which
is to be used for connecting the ’a’ or ’b’ element.(cid:3)
Building on the graphs in Figure 5, the main principle of simulating any
even-sized bin is shown in Figure 7. The left-over unit slots are positioned in
such a way that there is enough connected space to host additional indicator-
sensor chains of maximal length equal to bin size, hence items are to be rep-
resented by chains of indicators and sensors. Figure 8 gives a small example
with one bin of size = 4 and one item of size = 4.
Theorem 2. The PUP is NP-complete when IUCAP = 3 and UCAP = 1.
Proof 5. Membership in NP is evident. For completeness we reduce from
bin packing given by a set of natural numbers N = {n ...n } representing
the items and corresponding (even) item sizes, the (even) bin size binSize
and the number of bins k. The PUP instance is produced as follows:
Figure 5: Inducing graphs and corresponding input graphs used for simulating bins
Figure 6: Proof of Lemma 2. ’;’ stands for a logical ’or’.
Figure 7: Simulating bins on the basis of the graphs given in Figure 5
Figure 8: An item fitting in a bin
1. For every bin introduce a new structure based on the graphs given in
Figure 5 and Figure 7.
2. For every item size n ∈ N introduce a set of fresh indicators i i
and a set of fresh sensors s ...s and connect them such that they
build a chain, i.e. i is connected to s , s is connected to i , i is
n1 n1 n1 n2 n2
connected to s , ..., i is connected to s .
As there are only bins and items of even size each chain begins with an
indicator and ends with a sensor or vice-versa. This facilitates avoiding gaps
when filling the bins. When binSize = 2, the bin packing instance is solvable
with k bins iff the corresponding PUP is solvable with (6 × 4) × k units.
When binSize ≥ 4, the bin packing instance is solvable with k bins iff the
corresponding PUP is solvable with a set of (6×binSize)×k units.(cid:3)
In order to generalize the proof to UCAP > 1 we only have to show how
bins are represented for such cases, i.e. it suffices to define corresponding
inducing graphs which induce input graphs simulating bins.
Corollary 2. The PUP is NP-complete when UCAP fixed to some m ≥ 2
and IUCAP = 3.
Proof 6. The proof is basically the same as for UCAP = 1 by using the
graphs in Figure 9 and Figure 10 and thus lifting Lemma 2 as well as Theo-
rem 2 to any UCAP ≥ 2. The corresponding proofs can be lifted by following
the structure in Proof 4 and Proof 5 by simultaneously replacing the indica-
tors/sensors by the corresponding sets of indicators/sensors.(cid:3)
For the generalization to any fixed IUCAP > 3 we have to define how
the basic graphs in Figure 5 respectively Figure 9 are evolved in order to
’deactivate’ the additional unit connections which come along with a higher
IUCAP.
Corollary 3. The PUP is NP-complete when UCAP fixed to some m ≥ 2
and IUCAP is fixed to some n ≥ 3.
For the ease of readability we explain the proof with respect to Proof 4,
Proof5andProof6. Basically, thechainsofreasoningforallIUCAPs≥3are
similar. The main difference are the input graphs to be used for simulating
the bins. As the concrete input graphs are becoming to big and confusing we
Figure 9: Bins for the PUP with UCAP = u ≥ 2
Figure 10: Simulating bins for PUP with UCAP = u ≥ 2
only define their inducing graphs. Note, that by definition the corresponding
input graphs are uniquely determined. Figure 11 shows the principle for all
fixed IUCAPs ≥ 3. The nodes are standing for whole units whereby all units
except the ’a-untits’ respectively the ’b-units’ contain UCAP many sensors
andindicators. Thea-unitshaveonefreesensorslotandtheb-unitshaveone
free indicator slot. The principle becomes obvious in Figure 9. The graphs
for IUCAP = 3 are the same as shown in Figure 5 and Figure 7.
Proof 7. Having the graphs for IUCAP = 3 as the base, For IUCAP = 4
and IUCAP = 5 the edges slightly change in order to adapt to the higher
number of available unit connections and to make sure that there are exactly
two left over unit connections for the units containing the a and b elements.
We begin with the fact that the maximum number of elements (i.e. sensors
respectively indicators) some indicator respectively sensor can be connected
to is (IUCAP +1)∗UCAP (Aschinger et al. (2011b)).
As a direct consequence for IUCAP = 4, all elements of U1, U2, U3,
U4 and U5 in the inducing graph must be placed on exactly 5 units in any
solution graph leaving no space for any other elements, as all elements in
U1, U2, U5 are connected to exactly UCAP many elements in each unit
in U1,U2,U3,U4,U5. Let us call these units again U1 − U5 in order to
support the close relation between inducing graphs and solution graphs. Fur-
thermore, the elements of {U1,U2,U5} in the inducing graph are stitched
to {U1,U2,U5} in the solution graph although the elements can be placed
on any unit in {U1,U2,U5}, similar to the elements in U1 and U2 in the
IUCAP = 3 case (compare Proof 4). Placing any of these elements in U3 or
U4 would afford that U3 and U4 are connected, making further connections
impossible. Thus, also the position of the elements of U3 and U4 in the in-
ducing graph are bound to U3 and U4 in the solution graph. Moreover, the
elements of U3 and U4 in the inducing graph cannot be mixed up between
U3 and U4 in the solution graph as this would again afford the connection
of U3 and U4, making further connections impossible. As a consequence all
elements of the a-units respectively the b-units in the inducing graph must be
placed together on the same unit in the solution graph which is connected to
U3 and U4 and thus there are only two unit connections left over. The rest
stays the same as in Proof 5 and Proof 6.
Beginning with IUCAP = 5, it is necessary to consider two graphs (one
for the graph containing the a-unit and one for the graph containing the b-
unit) in combination. That the elements of U1 in the inducing graph have to
be on U1 in the solution graph respectively the elements of U1(cid:48) in the inducing
graph have to be together on U1(cid:48) in the solution graph arises out of the fact
that the corresponding elements are to be connected to the maximum possible
number of other elements (i.e. (IUCAP +1)∗UCAP) which must be placed
on exactly on IUCAP +1 = 6 units. From the perspective of the elements of
U1 in the inducing graph these are U1(cid:48),U1,U2,U3,U4 and U5 in the solution
graph. From the perspective of the elements of U1(cid:48) in the inducing graph these
are U1,U1(cid:48),U2(cid:48),U3(cid:48),U4(cid:48) and U5(cid:48) in the solution graph. Placing only a single
element of U1 respectively U1(cid:48) on a different unit (i.e. not U1 respectively
U1(cid:48)) in the solution graph would afford at least one additional unit connection
which is not possible. Analogous arguments hold for the U2 in combination
with U2(cid:48), U3 in combination with U3(cid:48) and U4 in combination with U4(cid:48). As
U1,U1(cid:48),U2,U2(cid:48),U3,U3(cid:48),U4 and U4(cid:48) in the solution graph contain all elements
from U1,U1(cid:48),U2,U2(cid:48),U3,U3(cid:48),U4 and U4(cid:48) in the inducing graph there is no free
space left on these units. Consequently the elements of U5 respectively U5(cid:48)
in the inducing graph have to be together on the same unit in the solution
graph (i.e. U5 respectively U5(cid:48)). As U3, U4, and U5 in the solution graph
each have only exactly one free unit connection left for connecting to further
elements, all of these elements, i.e. all elements of the a-unit respectively the
b-unit in the inducing graph, must be placed together on a single unit in the
solution graph, which is connected to U3, U4, and U5. Again, the rest stays
the same as in Proof 5 and Proof 6.
Starting from IUCAP = 5 the arguments can be adapted to IUCAP = 6
by introducing two additional units (see Figure 11), one for the (sub)graph
including the a-unit and one for the (sub)graph including the b-unit, filled
with fresh elements which are connected to all possible elements (sensors to
indicators and vice versa) in the IUCAP +1 = 6 units of the (sub)graph. As
a consequence the new elements are pinned to the new units in the solution
graph. By this trick, the arguments which hold for IUCAP = 5 also hold for
IUCAP = 6. Again, the rest stays the same as in Proof 5 and Proof 6.
What remains to be shown is that the proof for some IUCAP = x ≥ 6 can
be done on behalf of the proof for IUCAP = x−1. Hereby it suffices to show
that any increase of the IUCAP by one can be compensated by the addition
of two new units. Hence, it is to show that, given a graph for some IUCAP
= k, the number of additional unit connections when setting k := k + 1 is
exactly 2 ∗ (k + 1), i.e. the number of connections of two fresh units. This
can be done easily by induction.
As a base case we can use the graph for IUCAP = k = 5. When setting
Figure 11: Inducing graphs for any IUCAP ≥ 3
k := (k + 1) = 6 there are exactly 2 ∗ 6 additional unit connections. For
the inductive step we use the hypothesis that, given a consistent graph for
IUCAP = k, the number of units in this graph is 2∗(k +1). As every unit
gets an additional connection when increasing IUCAP = k by one there are
also exactly 2∗(k+1) additional connections which is exactly the number of
connections of two fresh units with IUCAP = k +1.(cid:3)
The following consequence follows directly from the presented fixed pa-
rameter complexity results.
Corollary 4. The PUP is NP-complete when
• UCAP is not fixed or
• IUCAP is not fixed.
The new complexity landscape for the PUP is shown in Figure 12. Hence,
complexity of the PUP has been completely clarified.
Figure 12: New complexity landscape for the PUP
3. QuickPup: A Heuristic Backtracking Search Algorithm
The hardness results of the last section explain why common AI tech-
niques like Constraint Programming, Answer Set Programming, or Integer
Programming are often not applicable on real world problem instances with
hundreds or thousands of indicators and sensors. Interestingly, human ex-
perts in real world PUP domains are often able to produce solutions easily
even for big PUP instances where common AI techniques fail. Obviously,
human experts use highly efficient heuristics to master this challenge. Out of
this, efforts have been made for developing some heuristic algorithm in order
to tackle real world sized problems.
One result of these efforts is QuickPup (QP), a novel heuristic algorithm
for tackling the PUP4. QP basically follows a backtracking search approach
but combines it with a static heuristic ordering of the indicators and sensors
(elements). Based on this fixed ordering, QP tries to assign each element to
a unit and backtracks in case of unsatisfiability.
Algorithm 1 depicts the main procedure of QP. The input consists of a
set of indicators, a set of sensors, the edges of the corresponding bipartite
input graph, the unit and inter unit capacities and a maximal time limit
(maxTime) for solution calculation, and a maximal number of units to be
used (maxunits). The first important extension to simple backtracking is to
restartthebacktrackingprocessfromadifferententrypointifnosolutioncan
be found within a certain time slice. If unsatisfiability is proven, no further
enrtry points are investigated. In QP each indicator constitutes a possible
entrypoint(startIndicator). Foreachentrypointthereisamaximaltimeslice
4QuickPup has been first introduced in Teppan et al. (2012).
Algorithm 1 QuickPup: Main
INPUT: indicators, sensors, edges, ucap, iucap, maxTime, maxUnits
timeslice ← maxTime DIV numberOf(indicators)
for all startIndicator IN indicators do
elements ← GetBreadthFirstOrder(startIndicator, indicators, sensors, edges)
index ← firstIndexOf(elements)
model ← {} %%model is a global variable
stopTime ← SystemTime + timeslice
status ← Assign(elements, edges, ucap, iucap, model, index, stopTime, max-
if status = TRUE then
Minimize(model)
return model
else if status = FALSE then
return FALSE
else if status = TIMEOUT then
return TIMEOUT
Figure 13: Reordered input graph and corresponding ordering for startIndicator ’A’ for
example given in Figures 2
of maxTime DIV number of indicators. Furthermore, the algorithm produces
a different breadth-first ordering of the indicators and sensors (elements) for
each entry point. Note that if a concrete implementation of QP is multi-
threaded, maxTime and the time slices are not needed, as the algorithm may
start from each entry point concurrently.
For ordering the elements, QP uses a breadth-first strategy (see Figure
13). Starting from a certain indicator (startIndicator) the next elements
to be considered are all connected sensors based on the given input graph.
Then, all indicators connected to these sensors are considered, and so forth,
until there are no more elements. This way of traversing a graph (i.e. the
input graph) is known as breadth-first or also as topological order, as the
graph is traversed from level to level. Algorithm 2 shows how this is realized.
The ⊕ operation stands for inserting an element into a vector of elements
at the last position.
Algorithm 2 QuickPup: GetBreadthFirstOrder
INPUT: startIndicator, indicators, sensors, edges
elements ← {startIndicator}
while sizeOf(elements) < sizeOf(indicators) + sizeOf(sensors) do
connectedElems ← getConnectedElems(elements, indicators, sensors, edges)
for all elem IN connectedElems do
if elem NOT IN elements then
elements ← elements ⊕ elem
return elements
Once an element ordering is fixed, QP creates an empty model and calls a
recursive sub-procedure (Assign, see Algorithm 3) creating and connecting
the units and trying to assign the elements. Thus, the model (also called
the solution graph or simply solution) consists of the units, their partner
unit connections, and the element assignments to the units. If Assign runs
into a timeout (SystemTime > stopTime), QP continues with the next entry
point (i.e. startIndicator is reassigned). If all iterations produced timeouts
the maxTime is reached and QP stops with no decision. If Assign can prove
the unsatisfiability of the given input graph QP returns FALSE. Please note
that the combination of multiple start indicators and breadth-first ordering
focuses on the early detection of unsatisfiable instances. The idea is that if
an instance is unsatisfiable then there is also at least one indicator which
is part of the conflict. Iterating through all indicators guarantees that the
subsequent backtracking procedure encounters the conflict in the beginning
at least once.
If Assign is successful, i.e. a consistent assignment for all elements has
been found, such that all edges in the input graph are supported, QP mini-
mizes the model and returns it. Minimizing the model in this context means
merging units when possible. This step is important for reducing the number
of units in the model. Algorithm 5 depicts the idea. For pairs of units in the
(consistent) model, merging is executed if possible. The ⊕ operator stands
for unit merging. If merging is successful, the obsolete unit will be removed
from the model.
Actual model checking by backtracking is done by Assign. Algorithm
Algorithm 3 QuickPup: Assign
INPUT: elements[], edges, ucap, iucap, model, index, stopTime, maxUnits
if index > lastIndexOf(elements) then
return TRUE
else if SystemTime > stopTime then
return TIMEOUT
currElem ← elements[index]
if numUnits(model) < maxUnits then
unit ← createNewUnit(model, ucap, iucap)
if AssignAndConnect(currElem, unit, model, edges) = TRUE then
consistent ← Assign(elements, model, index + 1, stopTime)
if consistent = TRUE then
return TRUE
else if consistent = FALSE then
UndoAssignAndConnect(currElem, unit, model, edges)
remove(unit,model)
else if consistent = TIMEOUT then
return TIMEOUT
for all oldUnit IN model do
if AssignAndConnect(currElem, oldUnit, model, edges) = TRUE then
consistent← Assign(elements, model, index + 1, stopTime)
if consistent = TRUE then
return TRUE
else if consistent = FALSE then
UndoAssignAndConnect(currElem, oldUnit, model, edges)
else if consistent = TIMEOUT then
return TIMEOUT
return FALSE
3 shows the procedure. The input consists of the (ordered) elements, the
edges of input graph, the intermediate model, an index pointing to the next
element to be assigned, and a time limit (stopTime). First, Assign checks
whether the index is greater than the last possible index. In this case all
elements have already been assigned successfully and Assign returns TRUE.
If this is not the case, Assign checks whether there is still some time left for
further calculations, otherwise Assign returns TIMEOUT.
If there is at least one element and some time left Assign proceeds with
the assignment of the next element (currElem). To this end QP first creates
a new unit of the model and checks whether the assignment to the new
unit leads to a consistent intermediate model, i.e. all relevant partner unit
connections can be established. Please note that a unit is limited in its
maximal number of indicators/sensors (UCAP) and its maximal number of
partner unit connections (IUCAP).
Consistency checking, the establishment of new partner unit connections
andelementassignmentarecarriedoutinAssignAndConnect,seeAlgorithm
4. Basically, AssignAndConnect checks two preconditions before an element
is assigned to a unit. First, there must be at least one free place left on the
unit for picking up a further indicator or sensor, respectively. In the case of
a new unit, this precondition is always given. Second, AssignAndConnect
verifies that all additional partner unit connections can be established, this
being limited by means of IUCAP5.
Algorithm 4 QuickPup: AssignAndConnect
INPUT: currElem, unit, model, edges
if hasFreePlace(unit, currElem) = FALSE then
return FALSE
else if relevantUnitsCanBeConnected(currElem, unit, model, edges) = FALSE
return FALSE
add(currElem, unit)
establishConnections(currElem, unit, model)
return TRUE
5Note,thatthepartnerunitconnectionsareuniquelydetermined,i.e.nosearchneeded.
If the assignment is successful, Assign calls itself recursively with the
updated intermediate model and incremented index pointing to the next
element. In case the subsequent Assign returns TRUE, all remaining ele-
ments have been assigned consistently, and the current instance of Assign
also returns TRUE. If a timeout has been triggered, and hence the return
value of the called Assign instance is TIMEOUT, the current Assign back-
propagates TIMEOUT.
If the called Assign instance returns FALSE, this means that no assign-
ment for the remaining elements could be found which is consistent with
assignment of the current element (currElem) to the newly created unit. In
this case, all changes which have been done by AssignAndConnect are re-
voked and the new unit is removed from the model.
In a second step, QP tries to assign currElem to one of the old units
already existing in the model. The procedure for any old unit is similar to
the case where new units are exploited, except that it is well possible that
the unit could be ’full’, i.e. there is no free place for the current element on
that unit. If no consistent assignment could be found for both, the old units
and a newly generated unit, Assign returns FALSE (i.e. backtracks).
Algorithm 5 QuickPup: Minimize
INPUT: model
for all unitA IN model AND unitB IN model AND unitA (cid:54)= unitB do
if NOT tooManyIndicators(unitA ⊕ unitB) then
if NOT tooManySensors(unitA ⊕ unitB) then
if NOT tooManyPartners(unitA ⊕ unitB) then
unitA ← unitA ⊕ unitB
remove(unitB, model)
It is obvious, that preferring the creation of new units typically results
in non-minimal models, regarding the number of units. For optimizing the
model QP uses the greedy procedure depicted in Algorithm 5. If the problem
is only to decide whether for a given input graph a configuration exists, the
optimization step can be skipped.
4. Experimental Results
In order to test the performance of QP we refer to the results and the
benchmark instances presented in Aschinger et al. (2011a). Thereby, the first
priority was to come up with a consistent solution respecting UCAP and IU-
CAP and only as a second priority to come up with a solution minimizing the
number of used units. All experiments in Aschinger et al. (2011a) were car-
ried out on a 3 GHz dual-core system with 4 GByte of RAM, running Fedora
Linux. The results for QP (with model minimizing) were produced by an In-
tel Core i7 quad-core notebook with 2.8 GHz and 8 GByte of RAM, running
Windows 7. QP was implemented in Java 1.6. Thereby, a multi-threaded
version of the algorithms was produced. The main idea was to concurrently
start one thread per start node (indicator), thus making time slices obsolete.
As soon as one of the threads encounters satisfiability or unsatisfiability the
procedure stops. Moreover, the maximal number of units was not set such
that optimization was purely done by the Minimize procedure.
In Aschinger et al. (2011a) five different implementations were tested6:
• DecidePup
(DP, polynomial time algorithm only for IUCAP = 2 Aschinger et al.
• Constraint Programming
(CP, implementation with Eclipse-Prolog (www.eclipseclp.org))
• SAT Solving
(SAT, MiniSat (www.minisat.se))
• Integer Programming
(IP,twodifferentsystemsweretested: CBCfromtheCOIN-ORproject
(www.coin-or.org) and IBM’s Cplex (www.ibm.com))
• Answer Set Programming
(ASP, Clingo from the Potsdam Answer Set Solving Collection
(potassco.sourceforge.net))
6Detailed information about the implementations can be found in Aschinger et al.
Figure 14: Real problem instance of Siemens Austria in the railway station domain and
benchmark instance grid8 Teppan et al. (2012)
The benchmark7 consists of two parts. In part one the corresponding
instances are to be solved with a unit capacity of 2 (UCAP=2) and an inter
unit capacity of 2 (IUCAP=2). The instances of part two are to be solved
with the same UCAP but with an IUCAP = 4. There are four different
types of instances: double (dbl) double-variant (dblv), triple (tri), and grid8.
The instances differ in their number of zones and sensors and the number
of sensors per zone. Furthermore, the instances have different structural
characteristics, as they are patterned on real problem instances. Figure 14
shows an example of a real world input graph and the grid8-instance of the
benchmark9.
Table 1 and Table 2 summarize the experimental runtimes (seconds) on
klu.ac.at/pupsolver/
8Instancesgrid-90, ..., grid-99 wereremovedfromthebenchmarkasthecorresponding
input graphs were not connected such that those instances can be seen as a collection of
trivial non-relevant instances.
9More details about the instance structure can be found in Aschinger et al. (2011a).
the described benchmark instances10. The units column lists the minimal
number of units required for a consistent solution. A minimal number of
’0’ means that no solution exists (instances tri-34 and tri-64 for IUCAP
= 2). In these cases, the results refer to the time needed in order to prove
unsatisfiability. A ’/’ means that the corresponding approach could not solve
an instance within a certain time frame. For the experiments in Aschinger
et al. (2011a) the time frame was limited to 600 seconds. Except for QP, all
approaches produced only minimal solutions by construction. The number
of additional units needed by QP is listed in the +units column.
Instancemin #Units DP SAT CP ASP IP QP +Units
dbl-20 14 0.01 0.48 0.02 0.16 1.53 <0.01 0
dbl-40 29 0.05 2.36 0.28 3.93 13.58 <0.01 0
dbl-60 44 0.08 29.74 0.42 / 213.58<0.01 0
dbl-80 59 0.16 / 1.14 / 522.5 <0.01 0
dbl-100 74 0.41 / 1.89 / / 0.01 0
dbl-120 89 0.39 / 3.21 / / <0.01 0
dbl-140 104 0.59 / 5.01 / / <0.01 0
dbl-160 119 0.71 / 13.94 / / <0.01 0
dbl-180 134 0.87 / 20.07 / / <0.01 0
dbl-200 149 1.08 / 14.40 / / <0.01 0
dblv-30 15 65.49 0.42 0.09 0.26 2.93 <0.01 0
dblv-60 30 / 3.15 0.26 1.94 / <0.01 0
dblv-90 45 / 12.54 0.82 27.35 / <0.01 0
dblv-120 60 / 41.65 1.85 13.92 / <0.01 0
dblv-150 75 / 20.97 3.48 29.54 / <0.01 0
dblv-180 90 / 44.28 6.20 54.50 / <0.01 0
tri-30 20 0.50 0.79 1.07 0.41 45.17 <0.01 0
tri-32 20 / 0.74 0.64 0.26 4.66 <0.01 0
tri-34 0 / 22.77 21.10 0.89 5.06 <0.01 0
tri-60 40 114.08315.42158.49 4.40 108.01<0.01 0
tri-64 0 / 379.36 / 43.88 76.26 <0.01 0
Table 1: Results IUCAP=2, time is given in secs
Only QP was able to solve all instances. Even DP, which is a polynomial
10For IP the better result produced by the two different approaches is listed.
time algorithm capable of only solving problem instances with IUCAP = 2,
was not able to solve all instances (with IUCAP = 2). In the cases where
the other approaches were able to calculate a solution, QP was always much
faster. In fact, the time needed for the calculation of all solutions was sig-
nificantly below one second. The overhead of additional units used by QP
is very small in most cases. As a matter of fact, for almost all instances
QP produced minimal solutions, i.e. +units = 0. Compared to the optimal
solution, only for tri−90 an additional unit was needed. This makes up a
practicallynegligibleincrease of5%. InDrescher(2012) someconceptsof QP
were transferred to CP technology and also partially extended. Although,
this significantly boosted solution calculation, original QP remained the best
approach.
Instancemin #Units SAT CP ASP IP QP +Units
tri-30 20 2.40 0.12 0.40 24.79<0.01 0
tri-32 20 1.91 0.14 0.66 20.84<0.01 0
tri-34 20 1.98 / 0.60 / <0.01 1
tri-60 40 / 0.52 11.07 / <0.01 0
tri-64 40 / / 7.61 / <0.01 0
tri-90 59 401.441.50332.34 / <0.01 0
tri-120 79 / 3.37 / / <0.01 0
grid1 50 78.19 / 31.45 / <0.01 0
grid2 50 90.89 / 18.91 / <0.01 0
grid3 50 88.87 / 25.72 / <0.01 0
grid4 50 95.12 / 24.66 / <0.01 0
grid5 50 454.42 / 48.88 / <0.01 0
grid6 50 204.85 / 9.15 / <0.01 0
grid7 50 112.36 / 12.89 / <0.01 0
grid8 50 / / 11.89 / <0.01 0
grid9 50 91.62 / 19.71 / <0.01 0
grid10 50 545.16 / 13.54 / <0.01 0
Table 2: Results IUCAP=4, time is given in secs
5. Conclusions
The partner units problem (PUP) is an important problem in the do-
main of knowledge-based configuration and furthermore acknowledged as
hard benchmark problem for Logic Programming, Answer Set Programming
and Constraint Programming. There are various application domains for the
PUP such as railway safety, CCTV surveillance or electrical engineering.
Although there has been remarkable effort in investigating the problem,
the complexity remained widely unclear. This article closes the gap by sum-
marizing already existing complexity results and providing NP-completeness
results for all problem subclasses of which the exact complexity class was
unknown so far.
Furthermore, we present the QuickPup algorithm which is a heuristic
backtracking search algorithm for the PUP. The comparison of new runtime
results with results presented in (Aschinger et al. (2011a)) on benchmark
instances patterned on real life problem instances shows the clear superiority
of QuickPup. Since QuickPup is currently the best known algorithm for the
PUP, this problem solving strategy was integrated in the Siemens’ Configu-
ration Problem Solving Engine (Falkner et al. (2007)) and has already been
successfullyappliedforrealworldconfigurationandreconfigurationproblems
(Teppan (2012)).