Theory and Applications of Compressed Sensing
Gitta Kutyniok
October 15, 2018
Compressedsensingisanovelresearcharea,whichwasintroducedin2006,andsince
then has already become a key concept in various areas of applied mathematics, com-
puter science, and electrical engineering. It surprisingly predicts that high-dimensional
signals, which allow a sparse representation by a suitable basis or, more generally, a
frame, can be recovered from what was previously considered highly incomplete linear
measurements by using efficient algorithms. This article shall serve as an introduction
to and a survey about compressed sensing.
Key Words. Dimension reduction. Frames. Greedy algorithms. Ill-posed inverse
problems. (cid:96) minimization. Random matrices. Sparse approximation. Sparse recovery.
Acknowledgements. The author is grateful to the reviewers for many helpful sugges-
tionswhichimprovedthepresentationofthepaper. ShewouldalsoliketothankEmmanuel
Cand`es, David Donoho, Michael Elad, and Yonina Eldar for various discussions on related
topics, and Sadegh Jokar for producing Figure 3. The author acknowledges support by the
Einstein Foundation Berlin, by Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) Grants SPP-1324
KU 1446/13 and KU 1446/14, and by the DFG Research Center Matheon “Mathematics
for key technologies” in Berlin.
1 Introduction
Theareaofcompressedsensingwasinitiatedin2006bytwogroundbreakingpapers,namely
[18] by Donoho and [11] by Cand`es, Romberg, and Tao. Nowadays, after only 6 years, an
abundance of theoretical aspects of compressed sensing are explored in more than 1000
articles. Moreover, this methodology is to date extensively utilized by applied mathemati-
cians, computer scientists, and engineers for a variety of applications in astronomy, biology,
medicine, radar, and seismology, to name a few.
The key idea of compressed sensing is to recover a sparse signal from very few non-
adaptive, linear measurements by convex optimization. Taking a different viewpoint, it
concerns the exact recovery of a high-dimensional sparse vector after a dimension reduction
step. From a yet another standpoint, we can regard the problem as computing a sparse
coefficient vector for a signal with respect to an overcomplete system. The theoretical foun-
dation of compressed sensing has links with and also explores methodologies from various
2v5183.3021:viXra
other fields such as, for example, applied harmonic analysis, frame theory, geometric func-
tional analysis, numerical linear algebra, optimization theory, and random matrix theory.
Itisinterestingtonoticethatthisdevelopment–theproblemofsparserecovery–canin
factbetracedbacktoearlierpapersfromthe90ssuchas[24]andlatertheprominentpapers
by Donoho and Huo [21] and Donoho and Elad [19]. When the previously mentioned two
fundamental papers introducing compressed sensing were published, the term ‘compressed
sensing’ was initially utilized for random sensing matrices, since those allow for a minimal
number of non-adaptive, linear measurements. Nowadays, the terminology ‘compressed
sensing’ is more and more often used interchangeably with ‘sparse recovery’ in general,
which is a viewpoint we will also take in this survey paper.
1.1 The Compressed Sensing Problem
To state the problem mathematically precisely, let now x = (x )n ∈ Rn be our signal of
interest. As prior information, we either assume that x itself is sparse, i.e., it has very few
non-zero coefficients in the sense that
(cid:107)x(cid:107) := #{i : x (cid:54)= 0}
is small, or that there exists an orthonormal basis or a frame1 Φ such that x = Φc with c
being sparse. For this, we let Φ be the matrix with the elements of the orthonormal basis
or the frame as column vectors. In fact, a frame typically provides more flexibility than an
orthonormalbasisduetoitsredundancyandhenceleadstoimprovedsparsifyingproperties,
hence in this setting customarily frames are more often employed than orthonormal bases.
Sometimes the notion of sparsity is weakened, which we for now – before we will make this
precise in Section 2 – will refer to as approximately sparse. Further, let A be an m × n
matrix, which is typically called sensing matrix or measurement matrix. Throughout we
will always assume that m < n and that A does not possess any zero columns, even if not
explicitly mentioned.
Then the Compressed Sensing Problem can be formulated as follows: Recover x from
knowledge of
or recover c from knowledge of
y = AΦc.
In both cases, we face an underdetermined linear system of equations with sparsity as prior
information about the vector to be recovered – we do not however know the support, since
then the solution could be trivially obtained.
This leads us to the following questions:
• What are suitable signal and sparsity models?
• How, when, and with how much accuracy can the signal be algorithmically recovered?
• What are suitable sensing matrices?
1Recall that a frame for a Hilbert space H is a system (ϕ ) in H, for which there exist frame bounds
0<A≤B <∞ such that A(cid:107)x(cid:107)2 ≤ (cid:80) |(cid:104)x,ϕ (cid:105)|2 ≤B(cid:107)x(cid:107)2 for all x∈H. A tight frame allows A=B. If
A=B =1 can be chosen, (ϕ ) forms a Parseval frame. For further information, we refer to [12].
Inthissection,wewilldiscussthesequestionsbrieflytobuildupintuitionforthesubsequent
sections.
1.2 Sparsity: A Reasonable Assumption?
Asafirstconsideration, onemightquestionwhethersparsityisindeedareasonableassump-
tion. Due to the complexity of real data certainly only a heuristic answer is possible.
If a natural image is taken, it is well known that wavelets typically provide sparse
approximations. This is illustrated in Figure 1, which shows a wavelet decomposition [50]
of an exemplary image. It can clearly be seen that most coefficients are small in absolute
value, indicated by a darker color.
Figure 1: (a) Mathematics building of TU Berlin (Photo by TU-Pressestelle); (b) Wavelet
decomposition
Depending on the signal, a variety of representation systems which can be used to
provide sparse approximations is available and is constantly expanded. In fact, it was
recently shown that wavelet systems do not provide optimally sparse approximations in
a regularity setting which appears to be suitable for most natural images, but the novel
system of shearlets does [47, 46]. Hence, assuming some prior knowledge of the signal to be
sensed or compressed, typically suitable, well-analyzed representation systems are already
at hand. If this is not the case, more data sensitive methods such as dictionary learning
algorithms (see, for instance, [2]), in which a suitable representation system is computed
for a given set of test signals, are available.
Depending on the application at hand, often x is already sparse itself. Think, for
instance, of digital communication, when a cell phone network with n antennas and m
users needs to be modelled. Or consider genomics, when in a test study m genes shall be
analyzed with n patients taking part in the study. In the first scenario, very few of the
users have an ongoing call at a specific time; in the second scenario, very few of the genes
are actually active. Thus, x being sparse itself is also a very natural assumption.
In the compressed sensing literature, most results indeed assume that x itself is sparse,
andtheproblemy = Axisconsidered. Veryfewarticlesstudytheproblemofincorporating
a sparsifying orthonormal basis or frame; we mention specifically [61, 9]. In this paper, we
will also assume throughout that x is already a sparse vector. It should be emphasized that
‘exact’ sparsity is often too restricting or unnatural, and weakened sparsity notions need
to be taken into account. On the other hand, sometimes – such as with the tree structure
of wavelet coefficients – some structural information on the non-zero coefficients is known,
which leads to diverse structured sparsity models. Section 2 provides an overview of such
models.
1.3 Recovery Algorithms: Optimization Theory and More
Let x now be a sparse vector. It is quite intuitive to recover x from knowledge of y by
(P ) min(cid:107)x(cid:107) subject to y = Ax.
Due to the unavoidable combinatorial search, this algorithm is however NP-hard [53]. The
main idea of Chen, Donoho, and Saunders in the fundamental paper [14] was to substitute
the (cid:96) ‘norm’ by the closest convex norm, which is the (cid:96) norm. This leads to the following
minimization problem, which they coined Basis Pursuit:
(P ) min(cid:107)x(cid:107) subject to y = Ax.
Duetotheshapeofthe(cid:96) ball,(cid:96) minimizationindeedpromotessparsity. Foranillustration
of this fact, we refer the reader to Figure 2, in which (cid:96) minimization is compared to (cid:96)
minimization. We would also like to draw the reader’s attention to the small numerical
example in Figure 3, in which a partial Fourier matrix is chosen as measurement matrix.
min(cid:107)x(cid:107) s.t. y=Ax
min(cid:107)x(cid:107) s.t. y=Ax
Figure 2: (cid:96) minimization versus (cid:96) minimization
The general question of when ‘(cid:96) = (cid:96) ’ holds is key to compressed sensing. Both nec-
essary and sufficient conditions have been provided, which not only depend on the sparsity
of the original vector x, but also on the incoherence of the sensing matrix A, which will be
made precise in Section 3.
Since for very large data sets (cid:96) minimization is often not feasible even when the solvers
are adapted to the particular structure of compressed sensing problems, various other types
of recovery algorithms were suggested. These can be roughly separated into convex opti-
mization, greedy, and combinatorial algorithms (cf. Section 5), each one having its own
advantages and disadvantages.
Figure 3: (a) Original signal f with random sample points (indicated by circles); (b) The
Fourier transform fˆ; (c) Perfect recovery of fˆby (cid:96) minimization; (d) Recovery of fˆby (cid:96)
minimization
1.4 Sensing Matrices: How Much Freedom is Allowed?
Asalreadymentioned,sensingmatricesarerequiredtosatisfycertainincoherenceconditions
such as, for instance, a small so-called mutual coherence. If we are allowed to choose the
sensing matrix freely, the best choice are random matrices such as Gaussian iid matrices,
uniform random ortho-projectors, or Bernoulli matrices, see for instance [11].
Itisstillanopenquestion(cf. Section4formoredetails)whetherdeterministicmatrices
can be carefully constructed to have similar properties with respect to compressed sensing
problems. At the moment, different approaches towards this problem are being taken such
asstructuredrandommatricesby, forinstance, Rauhutetal.in[58]or[60]. Moreover, most
applications do not allow for a free choice of the sensing matrix and enforce a particularly
structured matrix. Exemplary situations are the application of data separation, in which
the sensing matrix has to consist of two or more orthonormal bases or frames [32, Chapter
11], or high resolution radar, for which the sensing matrix has to bear a particular time-
frequency structure [38].
1.5 Compressed Sensing: Quo Vadis?
At present, a comprehensive core theory seems established except for some few deep ques-
tionssuchastheconstructionofdeterministicsensingmatricesexhibitingpropertiessimilar
to random matrices.
One current main direction of research which can be identified with already various
existing results is the incorporation of additional sparsity properties typically coined struc-
tured sparsity, see Section 2 for references. Another main direction is the extension or
transfer of the Compressed Sensing Problem to other settings such as matrix completion,
seeforinstance[10]. Moreover,wearecurrentlywitnessingthediffusionofcompressedsens-
ing ideas to various application areas such as radar analysis, medical imaging, distributed
signal processing, and data quantization, to name a few; see [32] for an overview. These
applicationsposeintriguingchallengestotheareaduetotheconstraintstheyrequire,which
in turn initiates novel theoretical problems. Finally, we observe that due to the need of, in
particular, fast sparse recovery algorithms, there is a trend to more closely cooperate with
mathematicians from other research areas, for example from optimization theory, numerical
linear algebra, or random matrix theory.
As three examples of recently initiated research directions, we would like to mention
the following. First, while the theory of compressed sensing focusses on digital data, it is
desirable to develop a similar theory for the continuum setting. Two promising approaches
were so far suggested by Eldar et al. (cf. [52]) and Adcock et al. (cf. [1]). Second, in
contrast to Basis Pursuit, which minimizes the (cid:96) norm of the synthesis coefficients, several
approachessuchasrecoveryofmissingdataminimizethe(cid:96) normoftheanalysiscoefficients
– as opposed to minimizing the (cid:96) norm of the synthesis coefficients –, see Subsections 6.1.2
and 6.2.2. The relation between these two minimization problems is far from being clear,
andtherecentlyintroducednotionofco-sparsity[54]isaninterestingapproachtoshedlight
onto this problem. Third, the utilization of frames as a sparsifying system in the context
of compressed sensing has become a topic of increased interest, and we refer to the initial
paper [9].
The reader might also want to consult the extensive webpage dsp.rice.edu/cs con-
taining most published papers in the area of compressed sensing subdivided into different
topics. We would also like to draw the reader’s attention to the recent books [29] and [32]
as well as the survey article [7].
1.6 Outline
In Section 2, we start by discussing different sparsity models including structured sparsity
and sparsifying dictionaries. The next section, Section 3, is concerned with presenting both
necessary and sufficient conditions for exact recovery using (cid:96) minimization as a recovery
strategy. The delicateness of designing sensing matrices is the focus of Section 4. In Section
5, other algorithmic approaches to sparse recovery are presented. Finally, applications such
as data separation are discussed in Section 6.
2 Signal Models
Sparsity is the prior information assumed of the vector we intend to efficiently sense or
whose dimension we intend to reduce, depending on which viewpoint we take. We will start
by recalling some classical notions of sparsity. Since applications typically impose a certain
structure on the significant coefficients, various structured sparsity models were introduced
which we will subsequently present. Finally, we will discuss how to ensure sparsity through
an appropriate orthonormal basis or frame.
2.1 Sparsity
The most basic notion of sparsity states that a vector has at most k non-zero coefficients.
This is measured by the (cid:96) ‘norm’, which for simplicity we will throughout refer to as a
norm although it is well-known that (cid:107)·(cid:107) does not constitute a mathematical norm.
Definition 2.1 A vector x = (x )n ∈ Rn is called k-sparse, if
(cid:107)x(cid:107) = #{i : x (cid:54)= 0} ≤ k.
The set of all k-sparse vectors is denoted by Σ .
We wish to emphasize that Σ is a highly non-linear set. Letting x ∈ Rn be a k-sparse
signal, it belongs to the linear subspace consisting of all vectors with the same support set.
Hence the set Σ is the union of all subspaces of vectors with support Λ satisfying |Λ| ≤ k.
From an application point of view, the situation of k-sparse vectors is however unrealis-
tic, wherefore various weaker versions were suggested. In the following definition we present
one possibility but do by no means claim this to be the most appropriate one. It might
though be very natural, since it analyzes the decay rate of the (cid:96) error of the best k-term
approximation of a vector.
Definition 2.2 Let 1 ≤ p < ∞ and r > 0. A vector x = (x )n ∈ Rn is called p-
compressible with constant C and rate r, if
σ (x) := min (cid:107)x−x˜(cid:107) ≤ C ·k−r for any k ∈ {1,...,n}.
2.2 Structured Sparsity
Typically, the non-zero or significant coefficients do not arise in arbitrary patterns but are
rather highly structured. Think of the coefficients of a wavelet decomposition which exhibit
a tree structure, see also Figure 1. To take these considerations into account, structured
sparsity models were introduced. A first idea might be to identify the clustered set of
significant coefficients [22]. An application of this notion will be discussed in Section 6.
In the following definition as well as in the sequel, for some vector x = (x )n ∈ Rn and
some subset Λ ⊂ {1,...,n}, the expression 1 x will denote the vector in Rn defined by
x : i ∈ Λ,
(1 x) = i i = 1,...,n.
Λ i 0 : i (cid:54)∈ Λ,
Moreover, Λc will denote the complement of the set Λ in {1,...,n}.
Definition 2.3 Let Λ ⊂ {1,...,n} and δ > 0. A vector x = (x )n ∈ Rn is then called
δ-relatively sparse with respect to Λ, if
(cid:107)1 x(cid:107) ≤ δ.
The notion of k-sparsity can also be regarded from a more general viewpoint, which
simultaneously imposes additional structure. Let x ∈ Rn be a k-sparse signal. Then it
belongs to the union of linear one-dimensional subspaces consisting of all vectors with
exactly one non-zero entry; this entry belonging to the support set of x. The number of
suchsubspacesequalsk. Thus,anaturalextensionofthisconceptisthefollowingdefinition,
initially introduced in [49].
Definition 2.4 Let (W )N be a family of subspaces in Rn. Then a vector x ∈ Rn is
k-sparse in the union of subspaces
W , if there exists Λ ⊂ {1,...,N}, |Λ| ≤ k, such
x ∈ W .
At about the same time, the notion of fusion frame sparsity was introduced in [6].
Fusion frames are a set of subspaces having frame-like properties, thereby allowing for
stability considerations. A family of subspaces (W )N in Rn is a fusion frame with bounds
A and B, if
A(cid:107)x(cid:107)2 ≤ (cid:107)P (x)(cid:107)2 ≤ B(cid:107)x(cid:107)2 for all x ∈ Rn,
where P denotes the orthogonal projection onto the subspace W , see also [13] and [12,
Chapter 13]. Fusion frame theory extends classical frame theory by allowing the anal-
ysis of signals through projections onto arbitrary dimensional subspaces as opposed to
one-dimensional subspaces in frame theory, hence serving also as a model for distributed
processing, cf. [62]. Fusion frame sparsity can then be defined in a similar way as for a
union of subspaces.
Applications such as manifold learning assume that the signal under consideration lives
on a general manifold, thereby forcing us to leave the world of linear subspaces. In such
cases, the signal class is often modeled as a non-linear k-dimensional manifold M in Rn,
with Θ being a k-dimensional parameter space. Such signals are then considered k-sparse
in the manifold model, see [65]. For a survey chapter about this topic, the interested reader
is referred to [32, Chapter 7].
We wish to finally mention that applications such as matrix completion require gener-
alizations of vector sparsity by considering, for instance, low-rank matrix models. This is
however beyond the scope of this survey paper, and we refer to [32] for more details.
2.3 Sparsifying Dictionaries and Dictionary Learning
If the vector itself does not exhibit sparsity, we are required to sparsify it by choosing an
appropriate representation system – in this field typically coined dictionary. This problem
can be attacked in two ways, either non-adaptively or adaptively.
If certain characteristics of the signal are known, a dictionary can be chosen from the
vast class of already very well explored representation systems such as the Fourier basis,
wavelets, or shearlets, to name a few. The achieved sparsity might not be optimal, but
various mathematical properties of these systems are known and fast associated transforms
are available.
Improved sparsity can be achieved by choosing the dictionary adaptive to the signals
at hand. For this, a test set of signals is required, based on which a dictionary is learnt.
This process is customarily termed dictionary learning. The most well-known and widely
used algorithm is the K-SVD algorithm introduced by Aharon, Elad, and Bruckstein in
[2]. However, from a mathematician’s point of view, this approach bears two problems
which will hopefully be both solved in the near future. First, almost no convergence results
for such algorithms are known. And, second, the learnt dictionaries do not exhibit any
mathematically exploitable structure, which makes not only an analysis very hard but also
prevents the design of fast associated transforms.
3 Conditions for Sparse Recovery
After having introduced various sparsity notions, in this sense signal models, we next con-
sider which conditions we need to impose on the sparsity of the original vector and on the
sensing matrix for exact recovery. For the sparse recovery method, we will focus on (cid:96) min-
imization similar to most published results and refer to Section 5 for further algorithmic
approaches. In the sequel of the present section, several incoherence conditions for sensing
matrices will be introduced. Section 4 then discusses examples of matrices fulfilling those.
Finally, we mention that most results can be slightly modified to incorporate measurements
affected by additive noise, i.e., if y = Ax+ν with (cid:107)ν(cid:107) ≤ ε.
3.1 Uniqueness Conditions for Minimization Problems
We start by presenting conditions for uniqueness of the solutions to the minimization prob-
lems (P ) and (P ) which we introduced in Subsection 1.3.
3.1.1 Uniqueness of (P )
Thecorrectconditiononthesensingmatrixisphrasedintermsoftheso-calledspark,whose
definition we first recall. This notion was introduced in [19] and verbally fuses the notions
of ‘sparse’ and ‘rank’.
Definition 3.1 Let A be an m×n matrix. Then the spark of A denoted by spark(A) is
the minimal number of linearly dependent columns of A.
It is useful to reformulate this notion in terms of the null space of A, which we will
throughout denote by N(A), and state its range. The proof is obvious. For the definition
of Σ , we refer to Definition 2.1.
Lemma 3.1 Let A be an m×n matrix. Then
and spark(A) ∈ [2,m+1].
This notion enables us to derive an equivalent condition on unique solvability of (P ).
Since the proof is short, we state it for clarity purposes.
Theorem 3.1 ([19]) Let A be an m×n matrix, and let k ∈ N. Then the following condi-
tions are equivalent.
(i) If a solution x of (P ) satisfies (cid:107)x(cid:107) ≤ k, then this is the unique solution.
(ii) k < spark(A)/2.
Proof. (i) ⇒ (ii). We argue by contradiction. If (ii) does not hold, by Lemma 3.1, there
exists some h ∈ N(A), h (cid:54)= 0 such that (cid:107)h(cid:107) ≤ 2k. Thus, there exist x and x˜ satisfying
h = x−x˜ and (cid:107)x(cid:107) ,(cid:107)x˜(cid:107) ≤ k, but Ax = Ax˜, a contradiction to (i).
(ii) ⇒ (i). Let x and x˜ satisfy y = Ax = Ax˜ and (cid:107)x(cid:107) ,(cid:107)x˜(cid:107) ≤ k. Thus x−x˜ ∈ N(A)
and (cid:107)x−x˜(cid:107) ≤ 2k < spark(A). By Lemma 3.1, it follows that x−x˜ = 0, which implies (i).
3.1.2 Uniqueness of (P )
Due to the underdeterminedness of A and hence the ill-posedness of the recovery problem,
in the analysis of uniqueness of the minimization problem (P ), the null space of A also
plays a particular role. The related so-called null space property, first introduced in [15], is
defined as follows.
Definition 3.2 Let A be an m×n matrix. Then A has the null space property (NSP) of
order k, if, for all h ∈ N(A)\{0} and for all index sets |Λ| ≤ k,
(cid:107)1 h(cid:107) < 1(cid:107)h(cid:107) .
An equivalent condition for the existence of a unique sparse solution of (P ) can now be
stated in terms of the null space property. For the proof, we refer to [15].
Theorem 3.2 ([15]) Let A be an m×n matrix, and let k ∈ N. Then the following condi-
tions are equivalent.
(i) If a solution x of (P ) satisfies (cid:107)x(cid:107) ≤ k, then this is the unique solution.
(ii) A satisfies the null space property of order k.
It should be emphasized that [15] studies the Compressed Sensing Problem in a much
more general way by analyzing quite general encoding-decoding strategies.
3.2 Sufficient Conditions
The core of compressed sensing is to determine when ‘(cid:96) = (cid:96) ’, i.e., when the solutions of
(P ) and (P ) coincide. The most well-known sufficient conditions for this to hold true are
phrased in terms of mutual coherence and of the restricted isometry property.
3.2.1 Mutual Coherence
The mutual coherence of a matrix, initially introduced in [21], measures the smallest angle
between each pair of its columns.
Definition 3.3 Let A = (a )n be an m×n matrix. Then its mutual coherence µ(A) is
defined as
|(cid:104)a ,a (cid:105)|
i(cid:54)=j (cid:107)a i (cid:107) 2 (cid:107)a j (cid:107) 2
The maximal mutual coherence of a matrix certainly equals 1 in the case when two
columns are linearly dependent. The lower bound presented in the next result, also known
as the Welch bound, is more interesting. It can be shown that it is attained by so-called
optimal Grassmannian frames [63], see also Section 4.
Lemma 3.2 Let A be an m×n matrix. Then we have
(cid:104) n−m (cid:105)
Let us mention that different variants of mutual coherence exist, in particular, the Babel
function [19], the cumulative coherence function [64], the structured p-Babel function [4],
the fusion coherence [6], and cluster coherence [22]. The notion of cluster coherence will in
fact be later discussed in Section 6 for a particular application.
Imposing a bound on the sparsity of the original vector by the mutual coherence of the
sensing matrix, the following result can be shown; its proof can be found in [19].
Theorem 3.3 ([30, 19]) Let A be an m×n matrix, and let x ∈ Rn\{0} be a solution of
(P ) satisfying
Then x is the unique solution of (P ) and (P ).
3.2.2 Restricted Isometry Property
We next discuss the restricted isometry property, initially introduced in [11]. It measures
the degree to which each submatrix consisting of k column vectors of A is close to being an
isometry. Notice that this notion automatically ensures stability, as will become evident in
the next theorem.
Definition 3.4 Let A be an m×n matrix. Then A has the Restricted Isometry Property
(RIP) of order k, if there exists a δ ∈ (0,1) such that
(1−δ )(cid:107)x(cid:107)2 ≤ (cid:107)Ax(cid:107)2 ≤ (1+δ )(cid:107)x(cid:107)2 for all x ∈ Σ .
k 2 2 k 2 k
Severalvariationsofthisnotionwereintroducedduringthelastyears,ofwhichexamples
are the fusion RIP [6] and the D-RIP [9].
Although also for mutual coherence, error estimates for recovery from noisy data are
known, in the setting of the RIP those are very natural. In fact, the error can be phrased
in terms of the best k-term approximation (cf. Definition 2.2) as follows.
Theorem 3.4 ([8, 15]) Let A be an m×n matrix which satisfies the RIP of order 2k with
δ < 2−1. Let x ∈ Rn, and let xˆ be a solution of the associated (P ) problem. Then
(cid:107)x−xˆ(cid:107) ≤ C ·
for some constant C dependent on δ .
The best known RIP condition for sparse recovery by (P ) states that (P ) recovers all
k-sparse vectors provided the measurement matrix A satisfies δ < 0.473, see [34].
3.3 Necessary Conditions
Meaningful necessary conditions for ‘(cid:96) = (cid:96) ’ in the sense of (P ) = (P ) are significantly
harder to achieve. An interesting string of research was initiated by Donoho and Tanner
with the two papers [25, 26]. The main idea is to derive equivalent conditions utilizing the
theory of convex polytopes. For this, let Cn be defined by
Cn = {x ∈ Rn : (cid:107)x(cid:107) ≤ 1}. (1)
A condition equivalent to ‘(cid:96) = (cid:96) ’ can then be formulated in terms of properties of a
particular related polytope. For the relevant notions from polytope theory, we refer to [37].
Theorem 3.5 ([25, 26]) Let Cn be defined as in (1), let A be an m×n matrix, and let
the polytope P be defined by P = ACn ⊆ Rm. Then the following conditions are equivalent.
(i) The number of k-faces of P equals the number of k-faces of Cn.
The geometric intuition behind this result is the fact that the number of k-faces of P
equalsthenumberofindexingsetsΛ ⊆ {1,...,n}with|Λ| = ksuchthatvectorsxsatisfying
suppx = Λ can be recovered via (P ).
Extending these techniques, Donoho and Tanner were also able to provide highly ac-
curate analytical descriptions of the occurring phase transition when considering the area
of exact recovery dependent on the ratio of the number of equations to the number of un-
knowns n/m versus the ratio of the number of nonzeros to the number of equations k/n.
The interested reader is referred to [27] for further details.
4 Sensing Matrices
Ideally, we aim for a matrix which has high spark, low mutual coherence, and a small
RIP constant. As our discussion in this section will show, these properties are often quite
difficult to achieve, and even computing, for instance, the RIP constant is computationally
intractable in general (see [59]).
In the sequel, after presenting some general relations between the introduced notions of
spark, NSP, mutual coherence, and RIP, we will discuss some explicit constructions for, in
particular, mutual coherence and RIP.
4.1 Relations between Spark, NSP, Mutual Coherence, and RIP
Beforediscussingdifferentapproachestoconstructasensingmatrix, wefirstpresentseveral
known relations between the introduced notions spark, NSP, mutual coherence, and RIP.
This allows to easily compute or at least estimate other measures, if a sensing matrix is
designed for a particular measure. For the proofs of the different statements, we refer to
[32, Chapter 1].
Lemma 4.1 Let A be an m×n matrix with normalized columns.
(i) We have
spark(A) ≥ 1+ .
(ii) A satisfies the RIP of order k with δ = kµ(A) for all k < µ(A)−1.
(iii) Suppose A satisfies the RIP of order 2k with δ < 2−1. If
then A satisfies the NSP of order 2k.
4.2 Spark and Mutual Coherence
Let us now provide some exemplary classes of sensing matrices with advantageous spark
and mutual coherence properties.
The first observation one can make (see also [15]) is that an m×n Vandermonde matrix
A satisfies
spark(A) = m+1.
One serious drawback though is the fact that these matrices become badly conditioned as
n → ∞.
Turning to the weaker notion of mutual coherence, of particular interest – compare
Subsection 6.1 – are sensing matrices composed of two orthonormal bases or frames for Rm.
If the two orthonormal bases Φ and Φ , say, are chosen to be mutually unbiased such as
the Fourier and the Dirac basis (the standard basis), then
which is the optimal bound on mutual coherence for such types of m×2m sensing matrix.
Other constructions are known for m×m2 matrices A generated from the Alltop sequence
[38] or by using Grassmannian frames [63], in which cases the optimal lower bound is
attained:
µ(A) = √ .
The number of measurements required for recovery of a k-sparse signal can then be deter-
mined to be m = O(k2logn).
We begin by discussing some deterministic constructions of matrices satisfying the RIP.
The first noteworthy construction was presented by DeVore and requires m (cid:38) k2, see [17].
A very recent, highly sophisticated approach [5] by Bourgain et al. still requires m (cid:38) k2−α
with some small constant α. Hence up to now deterministic constructions require a large
m, which is typically not feasible for applications, since it scales quadratically in k.
TheconstructionofrandomsensingmatricessatisfyingRIPisapossibilitytocircumvent
this problem. Such constructions are closely linked to the famous Johnson-Lindenstrauss
Lemma, which is extensively utilized in numerical linear algebra, machine learning, and
other areas requiring dimension reduction.
Theorem 4.1 (Johnson-Lindenstrauss Lemma [41]) Let ε ∈ (0,1), let x ,...,x ∈
Rn, and let m = O(ε−2logp) be a positive integer. Then there exists a Lipschitz map
f : Rn → Rm such that
(1−ε)(cid:107)x −x (cid:107)2 ≤ (cid:107)f(x )−f(x )(cid:107)2 ≤ (1+ε)(cid:107)x −x (cid:107)2 for all i,j ∈ {1,...,p}.
i j 2 i j 2 i j 2
The key requirement for a matrix to satisfy the Johnson-Lindenstrauss Lemma with
high probability is the following concentration inequality for an arbitrarily fixed x ∈ Rn:
(cid:16) (cid:17)
P (1−ε)(cid:107)x(cid:107)2 ≤ (cid:107)Ax(cid:107)2 ≤ (1+ε)(cid:107)x(cid:107)2 ≤ 1−2e−c0ε2m, (2)
with the entries of A being generated by a certain probability distribution. The relation of
RIP to the Johnson-Lindenstrauss Lemma is established in the following result. We also
mention that recently even a converse of the following theorem was proved in [43].
Theorem 4.2 ([3]) Let δ ∈ (0,1). If the probability distribution generating the m × n
matrices A satisfies the concentration inequality (2) with ε = δ, then there exist constants
such that, with probability ≤ 1−2e−c2δ2m, A satisfies the RIP of order k with δ for
all k ≤ c δ2m/log(n/k).
This observation was then used in [3] to prove that Gaussian and Bernoulli random
matrices satisfy the RIP of order k with δ provided that m (cid:38) δ−2klog(n/k). Up to a
constant, lower bounds for Gelfand widths of (cid:96) -balls [35] show that this dependence on k
and n is indeed optimal.
5 Recovery Algorithms
In this section, we will provide a brief overview of the different types of algorithms typically
used for sparse recovery. Convex optimization algorithms require very few measurements
butarecomputationallymorecomplex. Ontheotherextremearecombinatorialalgorithms,
which are very fast – often sublinear – but require many measurements that are sometimes
difficult to obtain. Greedy algorithms are in some sense a good compromise between those
extremes concerning computational complexity and the required number of measurements.
5.1 Convex Optimization
In Subsection 1.3, we already stated the convex optimization problem
min(cid:107)x(cid:107) subject to y = Ax
most commonly used. If the measurements are affected by noise, a conic constraint is
required; i.e., the minimization problem needs to be changed to
min(cid:107)x(cid:107) subject to (cid:107)Ax−y(cid:107)2 ≤ ε,
for a carefully chosen ε > 0. For a particular regularization parameter λ > 0, this problem
is equivalent to the unconstrained version given by
min 1(cid:107)Ax−y(cid:107)2+λ(cid:107)x(cid:107) .
Developed convex optimization algorithms specifically adapted to the compressed sens-
ing setting include interior-point methods [11], projected gradient methods [33], and it-
erative thresholding [16]. The reader might also be interested to check the webpages
www-stat.stanford.edu/~candes/l1magic and sparselab.stanford.edu for available
code. It is worth pointing out that the intense research performed in this area has slightly
diminished the computational disadvantage of convex optimization algorithms for com-
pressed sensing as compared to greedy type algorithms.
5.2 Greedy Algorithms
Greedy algorithms iteratively approximate the coefficients and the support of the original
signal. They have the advantage of being very fast and easy to implement. Often the
theoreticalperformanceguaranteesareverysimilarto, forinstance,(cid:96) minimizationresults.
The most well-known greedy approach is Orthogonal Matching Pursuit, which is de-
scribed in Figure 4. OMP was introduced in [57] as an improved successor of Matching
Pursuit [51].
Interestingly, a theorem similar to Theorem 3.3 can be proven for OMP.
Theorem 5.1 ([64, 20]) Let A be an m×n matrix, and let x ∈ Rn\{0} be a solution of
(P ) satisfying
Then OMP with error threshold ε = 0 recovers x.
Other prominent examples of greedy algorithms are Stagewise OMP (StOMP) [28],
Regularized OMP (ROMP) [56], and Compressive Sampling MP (CoSaMP) [55]. For a
survey of these methods, we wish to refer to [32, Chapter 8].
An intriguing, very recently developed class of algorithms is Orthogonal Matching
Pursuit with Replacement (OMPR) [40], which not only includes most iterative (hard)-
thresholding algorithms as special cases, but this approach also permits the tightest known
analysis in terms of RIP conditions. By extending OMPR using locality sensitive hashing
(OMPR-Hash), this also leads to the first provably sub-linear algorithm for sparse recovery,
see [40]. Another recent development is message passing algorithms for compressed sensing
pioneered in [23]; a survey on those can be found in [32, Chapter 9].
Input:
• Matrix A = (a )n ∈ Rm×n and vector x ∈ Rn.
• Error threshold ε.
Algorithm:
1) Set k = 0.
2) Set the initial solution x0 = 0.
3) Set the initial residual r0 = y−Ax0 = y.
4) Set the initial support S0 = suppx0 = ∅.
6) Set k = k+1.
7) Choose i such that min (cid:107)ca −rk−1(cid:107) ≤ min (cid:107)ca −rk−1(cid:107)
0 c i0 2 c i 2
for all i.
8) Set Sk = Sk−1∪{i }.
9) Compute xk = argmin (cid:107)Ax−y(cid:107) subject to suppx = Sk.
10) Compute rk = y−Axk.
11) until (cid:107)rk(cid:107) < ε.
Output:
• Approximate solution xk.
Figure 4: Orthogonal Matching Pursuit (OMP): Approximation of the solution of (P )
5.3 Combinatorial Algorithms
These methods apply group testing to highly structured samples of the original signal,
but are far less used in compressed sensing as opposed to convex optimization and greedy
algorithms. From the various types of algorithms, we mention the HHS pursuit [36] and a
sub-linear Fourier transform [39].
6 Applications
We now turn to some applications of compressed sensing. Two of those we will discuss in
more detail, namely data separation and recovery of missing data.
6.1 Data Separation
The data separation problem can be stated in the following way. Let x = x +x ∈ Rn.
Assuming we are just given x, how can we extract x and x from it? At first glance, this
seems to be impossible, since there are two unknowns for one datum.
6.1.1 An Orthonormal Basis Approach
The first approach to apply compressed sensing techniques consists in choosing appropriate
orthonormal bases Φ and Φ for Rn such that the coefficient vectors ΦTx (i = 1,2) are
sparse. This leads to the following underdetermined linear system of equations:
(cid:20) (cid:21)
Compressed sensing now suggests to solve
(cid:13)(cid:20) (cid:21)(cid:13) (cid:20) (cid:21)
m c1, i c n 2 (cid:13) (cid:13) (cid:13) c c 1 2 (cid:13) (cid:13) (cid:13) 1 subject to x = [Φ 1 |Φ 2 ] c c 1 2 . (3)
If the sparse vector [ΦTx ,ΦTx ]T can be recovered, the data separation problem can be
solved by computing
1 1 1 1 2 2 2 2
Obviously, separation can only be achieved provided that the components x and x are
in some sense morphologically distinct. Notice that this property is indeed encoded in the
problem if one requires incoherence of the matrix [Φ |Φ ].
Infact,thistypeofproblemcanberegardedasthebirthofcompressedsensing,sincethe
fundamental paper [21] by Donoho and Huo analyzed a particular data separation problem,
namely the separation of sinusoids and spikes. In this setting, x consists of n samples of a
continuum domain signal which is a superposition of sinusoids:
(cid:32) n−1 (cid:33)
1 (cid:88)
Letting Φ be the Fourier basis, the coefficient vector
(cid:16) (cid:17)
e2πiωt/n ,
is sparse. The vector x consists of n samples of a continuum domain signal which is a
superposition of spikes, i.e., has few non-zero coefficients. Thus, letting Φ denote the
Dirac basis (standard basis), the coefficient vector
ΦTx = x = c
is also sparse. Since the mutual coherence of the matrix [Φ |Φ ] can be computed to be
√1 , Theorem 3.3 implies the following result.
Theorem 6.1 ([21, 30]) Let x ,x and Φ ,Φ be defined as in the previous paragraph,
and assume that (cid:107)ΦTx (cid:107) +(cid:107)ΦTx (cid:107) < 1(1+ n). Then
1 1 0 2 2 0 2
(cid:20) Φ Φ T 1 T 2 x x 1 2 (cid:21) = argmin c1,c2 (cid:13) (cid:13) (cid:13) (cid:13) (cid:20) c c 1 2 (cid:21)(cid:13) (cid:13) (cid:13) (cid:13) 1 subject to x = [Φ 1 |Φ 2 ] (cid:20) c c 1 2 (cid:21) .
6.1.2 A Frame Approach
Now assume that we cannot find sparsifying orthonormal bases but Parseval frames2 Φ
and Φ – notice that this situation is much more likely due to the advantageous redundancy
of a frame. In this case, the minimization problem we stated in (3) faces the following
problem: We are merely interested in the separation x = x +x . However, for each such
separation, duetotheredundancyoftheframestheminimizationproblemsearchesthrough
infinitely many coefficients [c ,c ]T satisfying x = Φ c , i = 1,2. Thus it computes not only
much more than necessary – in fact, it even computes the sparsest coefficient sequence of x
with respect to the dictionary [Φ |Φ ] – but this also causes numerical instabilities if the
redundancy of the frames is too high.
To avoid this problem, we place the (cid:96) norm on the analysis, rather than the synthesis
side as already mentioned in Subsection 1.5. Utilizing the fact that Φ and Φ are Parseval
frames, i.e., that Φ ΦT = I (i = 1,2), we can write
1 2 1 1 1 2 2 2
This particular choice of coefficients – which are in frame theory language termed analysis
coefficients – leads to the minimization problem
min(cid:107)ΦTx˜ (cid:107) +(cid:107)ΦTx˜ (cid:107) subject to x = x˜ +x˜ . (4)
1 1 1 2 2 1 1 2
Interestingly, the associated recovery results employ structured sparsity, wherefore we will
alsobrieflypresentthose. First,thenotionofrelativesparsity(cf. Definition2.3)isadapted
to this situation.
Definition 6.1 Let Φ and Φ be Parseval frames for Rn with indexing sets {1,...,N }
and {1,...,N }, respectively, let Λ ⊂ {1,...,N }, i = 1,2, and let δ > 0. Then the vectors
x and x are called δ-relatively sparse in Φ and Φ with respect to Λ and Λ , if
1 2 1 2 1 2
(cid:107)1 ΛcΦT
≤ δ.
Second, the notion of mutual coherence is adapted to structured sparsity as already
discussed in Subsection 3.2.1. This leads to the following definition of cluster coherence.
Definition 6.2 Let Φ = (ϕ )N1 and Φ = (ϕ )N2 be Parseval frames for Rn, respec-
1 1i i=1 2 2j j=1
tively, and let Λ ⊂ {1,...,N }. Then the cluster coherence µ (Λ ,Φ ;Φ ) of Φ and Φ
1 1 c 1 1 2 1 2
with respect to Λ is defined by
c 1 1 2 1i 2j
j=1,...,N2
The performance of the minimization problem (4) can then be analyzed as follows. It
should be emphasized that the clusters of significant coefficients Λ and Λ are a mere
analysis tool; the algorithm does not take those into account. Further, notice that the
choice of those sets is highly delicate in its impact on the separation estimate. For the proof
of the result, we refer to [22].
2Recall that Φ is a Parseval frame, if ΦΦT =I.
Theorem 6.2 ([22]) Let x = x +x ∈ Rn, let Φ and Φ be Parseval frames for Rn with
indexing sets {1,...,N } and {1,...,N }, respectively, and let Λ ⊂ {1,...,N }, i = 1,2.
Further, suppose that x and x are δ-relatively sparse in Φ and Φ with respect to Λ and
Λ , and let [x(cid:63),x(cid:63)]T be a solution of the minimization problem (4). Then
(cid:107)x(cid:63)−x (cid:107) +(cid:107)x(cid:63)−x (cid:107) ≤ ,
1 1 2 2 2 2 1−2µ
c c 1 1 2 c 2 2 1
Let us finally mention that data separation via compressed sensing has been applied, for
instance, in imaging sciences for the separation of point- and curvelike objects, a problem
appearing in several areas such as in astronomical imaging when separating stars from
filaments and in neurobiological imaging when separating spines from dendrites. Figure 5
illustratesanumericalresultfrom[48]usingwavelets(see[50])andshearlets(see[47,46])as
sparsifyingframes. Atheoreticalfoundationforseparationofpoint-andcurvelikeobjectsby
(cid:96) minimization is developed in [22]. When considering thresholding as separation method
for such features, even stronger theoretical results could be proven in [45]. Moreover, a first
analysis of separation of cartoon and texture – very commonly present in natural images –
was performed in [44].
Figure 5: Separation of a neurobiological image using wavelets and shearlets [48]
For more details on data separation using compressed sensing techniques, we refer to
[32, Chapter 11].
6.2 Recovery of Missing Data
The problem of recovery of missing data can be formulated as follows. Let x = x +x ∈
W ⊕W⊥, where W is a subspace of Rn. We assume only x is known to us, and we aim
to recover x. Again, this seems unfeasible unless we have additional information.
6.2.1 An Orthonormal Basis Approach
We now assume that – although x is not known to us – we at least know that it is sparsified
by an orthonormal basis Φ, say. Letting P and P denote the orthogonal projections
onto W and W⊥, respectively, we are led to solve the underdetermined problem
P Φc = P x
for the sparse solution c. As in the case of data separation, from a compressed sensing
viewpoint it is suggestive to solve
min(cid:107)c(cid:107) subject to P Φc = P x. (5)
The original vector x can then be recovered via x = Φc. The solution of the inpainting
problem – a terminology used for recovery of missing data in imaging science – was first
considered in [31].
Application of Theorem 3.3 provides a sufficient condition for missing data recovery to
succeed.
Theorem 6.3 ([19]) Let x ∈ Rn, let W be a subspace of Rn, and let Φ be an orthonormal
basis for Rn. If (cid:107)ΦTx(cid:107) < 1(1+µ(P Φ)−1), then
ΦTx = argmin (cid:107)c(cid:107) subject to P Φc = P x.
6.2.2 A Frame Approach
As before, we now assume that the sparsifying system Φ is a redundant Parseval frame.
The adapted version to (5), which places the (cid:96) norm on the analysis side, reads
min(cid:107)ΦTx˜(cid:107) subject to P x˜ = P x. (6)
Employing relative sparsity and cluster coherence, an error analysis can be derived in a
similar way as before. For the proof, the reader might want to consult [42].
Theorem 6.4 ([42]) Let x ∈ Rn, let Φ be a Parseval frame for Rn with indexing set
{1,...,N}, and let Λ ⊂ {1,...,N}. Further, suppose that x is δ-relatively sparse in Φ with
respect to Λ, and let x(cid:63) be a solution of the minimization problem (6). Then
(cid:107)x(cid:63)−x(cid:107) ≤ ,
6.3 Further Applications
Other applications of compressed sensing include coding and information theory, machine
learning, hyperspectral imaging, geophysical data analysis, computational biology, remote
sensing, radar analysis, robotics and control, A/D conversion, and many more. Since an
elaborate discussion of all those topics would go beyond the scope of this survey paper, we
refer the interested reader to dsp.rice.edu/cs.