]nyd-ulf.scisyhp[
1v6293.0101:viXra
BOOK REVIEW
Thermal convection: patterns, evolution and stability, by Marcello Lappa,
John Willey & Sons Ltd., 2010, XIII+670 pp., £150, $215, e172.50, hardback
(ISBN-13: 978-0-470-69994-2), online (ISBN-13: 978-0-470-74998-2), ebook
(ISBN-13: 978-0-470-74999-9).
PublishedinGeophysical& AstrophysicalFluidDynamics,
Citeas: Simitev,RadostinD.(2010)’Thermalconvection: patterns,evolutionand
stability,byM.Lappa’, Geophysical&AstrophysicalFluidDynamics,Firstpub-
lishedon: 16August2010(iFirst)
At the turn of the last century Henry Be´nard produced his famous picture of the
hexagonal flow pattern observed in a thin layer of spermaceti heated from be-
low. Ever since thermal convection, in its various forms, has been a subject of
continuously expanding research. This interest is well-justified as thermal con-
vection is, possibly, the most common type of fluid flow in nature. In addition to
their numerous small scale manifestations, convective motions mix stellar interi-
orsandplanetaryatmospheresandoceans,theydrivetectonicplatesandgenerate
planetary magnetic fields. In industrial applications, thermal convection enters
wherever heat transfer is involved. In nuclear reactors and ovens, in crystalisa-
tion processes and casting, convection plays a crucial role. Thermal convection
is important on a more fundamental level as well. It is one of the simplest and
most easily controlled non-equilibrium systems, and as such it is a testbed where
many theoretical and experimental methods for the study of pattern formation in
spatially extended systems and for the transition to turbulence have been devel-
oped. The present monograph has as its main aim to give a comprehensive but,
at the same time, coherent account of thermal convection, starting with two of
its basic types — convection due to temperature dependence of density of fluids
placed in a gravitational field and convection due to temperature dependence of
surface tension — and proceeding to include a large number of settings in which
these two basic cases may be combined. In my view, the author Marcello Lappa,
of the Microgravity Advanced Research and Support Center, Italy, succeeds well
in presenting a comprehensive account of the phenomenology, while his attempt
toprovideacoherent theoreticalframework issomewhatlessconvincing.
InthePrefacetheauthormakeshisapproachforachievingtheaimofthebook
explicit: heis really concerned withcreating a“critical, focused and comparative
studyofall thesedifferent typesof thermalconvection”(p. xvi),but heprefers to
keep the mathematical language “to the minimum”(p. xvii). He is, though, well-
awareoftheimportanceofmathematicalconcepts,andinchapter1thegoverning
equations of Fluid Dynamics and energy transport are derived from first princi-
ples. Several related methods of theoretical analysis are also briefly introduced
here,namelylinearandenergystabilityconceptsandnumericalapproachestothe
Navier–Stokes equations. The chapter also includes a discussion of some con-
cepts of nonlinear dynamical systems, pattern formation and chaotic behaviour,
aswellasofMaxwell’sequations. Inchapter2variousaspectsofgravityandsur-
face tension, the forces responsible for the two main types of thermal convection
consideredinthebook,arediscussed. Inconnectionwithgravity,theBoussinesq–
Oberbeck approximation is introduced while in connection with surface tension
experiments on platforms orbiting in space are described. The chapter proceeds
with a list of several well-known exact solutions of the Navier–Stokes equations
forthermalproblems,includingHadleyand Marangoniflowsinhorizontallayers
of infinite extent, and concludes with remarks on the effects of boundary layers.
Chapter 3 provides several examples of thermal convection in nature and in in-
dustrial applications reflecting the biases of the author. With this concludes a
rather extensive coverage of the basics, and there is then a sequence of chapters,
eachdevotedtothediscussionofaratherbroadtopic: theRayleigh–Be´nardprob-
lem (Ch. 4), dynamics of thermal plumes (Ch. 5), systems heated from the side
(Ch. 6), convection in inclined layers (Ch. 7), thermovibrational convection (Ch.
8), Marangoni–Be´nard convection (Ch. 9), thermocapillary convection (Ch. 10),
mixedbuoyancy–Marangoniconvection (Ch. 11), hybridregimes with vibrations
(Ch. 12), and flow control by magnetic fields (Ch. 13). In each of these chap-
ters, the author draws on the literature and describes in minutedetail the relevant
model and experimental configurations and discusses the effects that have been
discoveredas geometry,dimensions,boundary conditions,parametervalues,sec-
ondary effects, etc., are varied. In line with the declared aims of the book, much
effort has been expended to organize this empirical knowledge into a coherent
body by discussing the physical nature of the related forces, by progressing from
simpleridealizedconfigurationstomorerealisticexperimentalsetups,andbydis-
cussingsequencesofbifurcationsintheparameterspace. Thisisdoneinthehope
to gain insight by finding analogies and common physical mechanisms acting in
seemingly different situations. At the same time, only elementary details of the
corresponding mathematical theory are given. While such comparative attempts
to builda physical theory often help theintuition,they also have well-knownand
widely recognized conceptual limitations, and the book would have benefitted if
more details of theoretical nature had been included. However, in defence of the
author, it must be acknowledged that most of the interesting types of motion can
even now only be qualitatively described rather than be analysed in mathemati-
cal terms. Having in mind thisphenomenologicalapproach to thetopic, the most
likely audience for this monograph are scientists and engineers working on in-
dustrial applications. However, the synthesis of such a large amount of detail in
the text is also likely to attract the interest of theoreticians and experimentalists
lookingfornew questionstoattack.
A number of original results are included. Especially interesting are the nu-
merous figures created from the author’s own numerical simulations and specif-
ically designed to illustrate various flow features presented in the main text. A
minorirritationisthestyleofwriting. WhiletheuseofEnglishisgenerallygood,
one can find instances where words are not fitting very well. The book is rather
voluminous. Thisispartlyjustified,inviewofthewiderangeofphenomenathatit
covers, but some discussions run longer than really necessary, and some remarks
are even redundant as numerous cross-references to other parts of the book are
made. The conscious choice to avoid mathematical language certainly does not
helpto constrainthelengthofthetext.
Since the authorhas been involvedin problems of thermal convectionin con-
nectionwiththesubjectofcrystalgrowth,andinmicrogravityenvironmentsthese
topicshavereceivedadetailedcoverage. However,thereadersofGeophysicaland
AstrophysicalFluidDynamicsmaybedisappointedthatthetopicofconvectionin
rotatingflowsisnotincludedinthemonograph. Thisalsoisaminorinconsistency
in the book, as many of the examples of thermally convecting flows mentioned
in chapter 2 are chosen from the realm of geophysics, convection in the Earth’s
core and the geodynamo problem, atmosphericand oceanic convection and other
planetary applications, in all of which the Coriolis force plays a crucial, even a
dominantrole.
One of the most attractive features of the monograph are its detailed index of
termsanditsextensivelistofreferences. Nearly1300articlesandbooksarecited
which allow the reader to enter the literature in a very detailed way. However, in
severalinstances theauthorhas missedtheopportunityto reflect a different point
of view by citing other relevant monographs. For instance, the book by Getling
[1] provides a more theoretical perspective to the topic discussed in chapter 4.
Similarly the books Gershuni and Liubimov [2], and P. Colinet et al. [3], should
be cited in relation to chapters 8 and 9, respectively. Also, the large list of refer-
encescouldbecomeevenmoreusefulifthepagewouldbeindicatedonwhichthe
reference is cited.
In summary, while the book falls short of presenting a coherent theoretical
framework of thermal convection, it is a treasure-trove of phenomenological de-
tails ordered in a systematic way. It represents the most comprehensive single-
volumemonograph on convection phenomenaavailable at the present time. I am
gladtohavethebookonmyshelfandIwillrecommendittoanyonewithinterest
inconvectionas an inspiringguidethroughitsmyriadmanifestations.
RadostinD. Simitev
UniversityofGlasgow