1v8302030/sc:viXra
Underconsideration for publication in Theory and Practice of Logic Programming 1
Tight Logic Programs
Esra Erdem
Department of Computer Science
Universityof Toronto
6 King’sCollege Road
Toronto, ON M5S 3H5, Canada
(e-mail: esra@cs.toronto.edu)
Vladimir Lifschitz
Department of Computer Sciences
University of Texasat Austin
Austin, TX 78712, USA
(e-mail: vl@cs.utexas.edu)
Thisnoteisabouttherelationshipbetweentwotheoriesofnegationasfailure—onebased
on program completion, theotherbased on stable models, or answer sets. Franc¸ois Fages
showed that if a logic program satisfies a certain syntactic condition, which is now called
“tightness,”thenitsstablemodelscanbecharacterizedasthemodelsofitscompletion.We
extendthedefinitionoftightnessandFages’theoremtoprogramswithnestedexpressions
in the bodies of rules, and study tight logic programs containing the definition of the
transitive closure of a predicate.
1 Introduction
Thisnoteisabouttherelationshipbetweentwotheoriesofnegationasfailure—one
based on program completion (Clark 1978), the other based on stable models, or
answer sets (Gelfond and Lifschitz 1988). Franc¸ois Fages (1994) showed that if a
logic program satisfies a certain syntactic condition, which is now called “tight-
ness,”1 thenitsstable modelscanbe characterizedasthe modelsofits completion.
Lifschitz(1996)observedthatFages’theoremcanbeextendedtoprogramswithin-
finitelymanyrulesandtoprogramswithclassicalnegation(Gelfond and Lifschitz 1991)
if the concept of completion in the statement of the theorem is replaced by its se-
mantic counterpart—the concept of a supported model (Apt et al. 1988). Fages’
theorem was further generalized in (Babovich et al. 2000).
In this paper we show how to extend Fages’ theorem to programs with nested
expressions in the bodies of rules. A generalization of the completion semantics
to such programs was proposed in (Lloyd and Topor 1984), and a similar gener-
alization of the answer set semantics is given in (Lifschitz et al. 1999). Here is an
1 ThetermusedbyFagesis“positive-order-consistent.”
2 Esra Erdem and Vladimir Lifschitz
example. Program
p←not not p
contains nested occurrences of negation as failure in the body of the first rule.2 It
belongs to the syntactic class for which our theorem guarantees the equivalence of
theanswersetsemanticstothecompletionsemantics.Thisprogramhastwoanswer
sets ∅, {p}; they are identical to the models of the completion
of this program.
A preliminary report on the tightness of programs with nested expressions is
published in (Erdem and Lifschitz 2001a).
The second question studied here is the tightness of logic programs containing
the definition of the transitive closure of a predicate:
Such rules are found in many useful programs. Unfortunately, the definition of
tightness may be difficult to verify directly for a program containing these rules.
We give here a sufficient condition that can make this easier. A preliminary report
on this part of the work was presented at the 2001 AAAI Spring Symposium on
Answer Set Programming (Erdem and Lifschitz 2001b).
The concept of a tight program and generalizations of Fages’ theorem may be
interesting for two reasons.
First, the completion semantics and the stable model semantics are among the
most widely used definitions of the meaning of negation as failure, and it is useful
to know under what conditions they are equivalent to each other.
Second,theclassoftightprogramsisimportantfromtheperspectiveofanswerset
programming.Whenever the two semanticsare equivalent,answersets for the pro-
gramcanbecomputedbysolvingthesatisfiabilityproblemforitscompletion.This
canbedoneusingasatisfiabilitysolversuchassato3ormchaff4(Babovich et al. 2000).
The idea of computing answer sets for a program using a satisfiability solver led
to the creation of the system cmodels5 which, in some cases, finds answer sets
faster than “general-purpose”answer set solvers such as smodels6 and dlv7. Our
generalizationofFages’theoremallowsustoapplythisideatoprogramscontaining
weightconstraintrules (Simons et al. 2002), because such programscanbe viewed
2 Thedoublenegationinthefirstruleof(1)isredundantfromthepointofviewofthecompletion
semantics, but itdoes affect the program’sanswer sets. On the other hand, the second ruleis
redundant from the point of view of the answer set semantics. But, generally, dropping a rule
likethiscanchangeaprogram’scompletioninanessential way.
Tight Logic Programs 3
asaspecialcaseofprogramswith nestedexpressions(Ferraris and Lifschitz 2003).
For instance, rule {p} can be treated as shorthand for
p←not not p.
cmodelsusesthisfacttohandleprogramswithweightconstraints,andourgener-
alization of Fages’ theorem allows cmodels to decide whether the answer sets for
such a program are identical to the models of its completion.
We begin by reviewing the definitions ofanswersets, closure,supportedness and
completion for programs with nested expressions (Sections 2, 3). After discussing
theconceptoftightnessforsuchprogramsinSections4and5,westateourgeneral-
izationofFages’theorem(Section6).Asanexample,weshowhowthisgeneralized
formappliestoaformalizationofthen-queensproblem(Section7).Thenwestudy
the tightness of programs containing the definition of the transitive closure of a
relation (Section 8). A logic programming description of the blocks world is used
as an example in Section 9. Proofs of theorems are given in Section 10.
2 Programs and Answer Sets
This section is a review of the answer set semantics for nondisjunctive programs
with nested expressions.
The wordsatomandliteralareunderstoodhere asinpropositionallogic;we call
the sign ¬ in a negative literal ¬A classical negation, to distinguish it from the
symbol for negation as failure (not). Elementary formulas are literals and the 0-
place connectives ⊥ and ⊤. Formulas are built fromelementary formulas using the
unaryconnectivenot andthebinaryconnectives,(conjunction)and;(disjunction).
A (nondisjunctive) rule is an expression of the form
Head ←Body (3)
where Head is a literal or ⊥, and Body is a formula.8 If Body = ⊤, we will drop
both the body and the arrow separating it from the head; rules with the body ⊤
are called facts. If Head = ⊥, we will drop the head; rules with the head ⊥ are
called constraints.
A (nondisjunctive logic) program is a set of rules.
We define when a consistent set X of literals satisfies a formula F (symbolically,
X |=F) recursively, as follows:
• for elementary F, X |=F if F ∈X or F =⊤,
• X |=not F if X 6|=F,
• X |=(F,G) if X |=F and X |=G,
• X |=(F;G) if X |=F or X |=G.
A consistent set X of literals is closed under a program Π if, for every rule (3) in
Π, Head ∈X whenever X |=Body.
8 In (Lifschitzetal.1999), the syntax of rules is more general: the head may be an arbitrary
formula,inparticularadisjunction.
4 Esra Erdem and Vladimir Lifschitz
Let Π be a programwithout negationas failure. We say that X is an answerset
forΠifX isminimalamongtheconsistentsetsofliteralsclosedunderΠ.Itiseasy
to see that there can be at most one such set. For instance, the answer set for the
is {p}.
The reduct ΠX of a programΠ relative to a set X of literals is obtained from Π
by replacing every maximal occurrence of a formula of the form not F in Π (that
is, every occurrence of not F that is not in the scope of another not) with ⊥ if
X |= F, and with ⊤ otherwise.9 A consistent set X of literals is an answer set for
Π if it is the answer set for the reduct ΠX. For instance, {p} is an answer set for
program(1) since it is the answer set for the reduct (4) of (1) relative to {p}.
We say that a formula (or a program) is normal if it does not contain classical
negation. We will sometimes identify a normal formula F with the propositional
formulaobtainedfromF byreplacingeverycommawith∧,everysemicolonwith∨,
andeveryoccurrenceofnot with¬.Itiseasytoseethat,foranynormalformulaF
andanysetX ofatoms,X |=F iffX satisfiesF inthe senseofpropositionallogic.
3 Supported Sets and Completion
This section is a review of supported sets and completion for the class of logic
programs introduced above.
We say that a set X of literals is supported by a program Π if for every literal
L ∈ X there exists a rule (3) in Π such that Head = L and X |=Body.10 For
instance, each of the sets {p}, {¬q} is supported by the program
but their union is not. The set {p} is supported by program (1); {q} is not.
We are interested in the relationship between the concept of an answer set on
the one hand, and the conjunction of the closure and supportedness conditions on
the other. According to the following proposition, every answer set is both closed
under the program and supported by it.
Proposition 1
Forany programΠ and anyconsistentset X of literals,ifX is ananswersetfor Π
then X is closed under and supported by Π.
For instance, the answer sets for program (5) are {p} and {¬q}; each of them is
9 This definition is equivalent to the recursive definition of the reduct given
in(Lifschitzetal.1999).
10 In (BaralandGelfond1994) and (Inoue andSakama1998) the definition of supportedness
from(Aptetal.1988)isgeneralizedinadifferentdirection—itisextended todisjunctivepro-
grams.
Tight Logic Programs 5
closedunder and supportedby (5).The answersets forprogram(1) are∅ and {p};
each of them is closed under and supported by (1).
The converse,in general,is not true. The easiest counterexample is the program
consistingofonerulep←p.Theset{p}isclosedunderthisprogramandsupported
by it, although it is not an answer set. Tightness, defined in Section 4 below, is a
syntactic condition that eliminates programs like this.
Let Π be a finite normal program. The “completion” of Π is the set of proposi-
tionalformulasdefinedasfollows.IfAisanatomorthesymbol⊥,byComp(Π,A)
we denote the propositional formula
where the disjunction extends over all rules
A←Body (7)
in Π with the head A. The completion of Π is the set of formulas Comp(Π,A) for
For instance, the bodies of rules (1), written as propositional formulas, are ¬¬p
and p ∧ q; for this program Π, formulas (2) are Comp(Π,p) and Comp(Π,q).
In addition to these two formulas, the completion of this program includes also
Comp(Π,⊥), which is the tautology ⊥≡⊥.
Inapplicationtofinitenormalprograms,theconjunctionofclosureandsupport-
edness exactly corresponds to the program’s completion:
Proposition 2
For any finite normal program Π, a set of atoms satisfies the completion of Π iff it
is closed under and supported by Π.
From Propositions 1 and 2, we conclude:
Corollary 1
For any finite normalprogramΠ and any set X of atoms,if X is ananswer set for
Π then X satisfies the completion of Π.
4 Tight Programs
To define the concept of a tight program, we need a few auxiliary definitions.
RecallthatanoccurrenceofaformulaF inaformulaGissingularifthe symbol
beforethisoccurrenceis¬;otherwise,theoccurrenceisregular(Lifschitz et al. 1999).
It is clear that the occurrence of F can be singular only if F is an atom. For any
formula G, by lit(G) we denote the set of all literals having regular occurrences in
G.Forinstance,lit(p;not ¬r)={p,¬r}.ForanyformulaG,byposlit(G)wedenote
the set of all literals having a regular occurrence in G that is not in the scope of
negation as failure. For instance, poslit(p,not q,(not not r;¬s))={p,¬s}.
11 This is essentially the definition from (LloydandTopor1984) restricted to the propositional
case.Itisrestrictedtofiniteprogramstoavoidtheneedtouseaninfinitedisjunctionin(6).
6 Esra Erdem and Vladimir Lifschitz
For any program Π and any set X of literals, we say about literals L,L ∈ X
that L is a parent of L relative to Π and X if there is a rule (3) in Π such that
• X |=Body,
• L∈poslit(Body), and
• L =Head.
For instance, the parents of p relative to the program
q ←not p (8)
andthe set{p,q,r}arep andr; onthe other hand, phas no parentsrelativeto (8)
and the set {p,q}.
Now we are ready to give the main definition of this paper:
AprogramΠistightonasetX ofliteralsifthereisnoinfinitesequenceL1,L2,...
of elements of X such that for every i, L i+1 is a parent of L i relative to Π and X.
In other words, Π is tight on a set X iff the parent relation relative to Π and X
is well-founded.12
If X is finite then the tightness condition can be reformulated as follows: there
is no finite sequence L1,...,L
of elements of X (n > 1) such that for every i
(1≤i<n), L i+1 is a parent of L i relative to Π and X, and L n =L1.
For instance, program(1) is tight on {p}: p does not haveparents relative to (1)
and {p}, so that the parent relation relative to (1) and {p} is well-founded. But
that program is not tight on {p,q}. Indeed, p and q are the parents of p relative
to (1) and {p,q}, so that in the sequence p,p,... every element is followed by its
parent.
The proposition below gives an equivalent characterizationof tightness:
Proposition 3
A program Π is tight on a set X of literals iff there exists a function λ from X to
ordinals satisfying the following condition:
(*) for every rule (3) in Π such that Head ∈ X and X |= Body, and for every L
For instance, to show that program(1) is tight on{p},we can take λ(p)=0. To
show that program
p←q;not r (9)
IfX isfinitethenthevaluesofλinthestatementofProposition3canbeassumed
to be finite.
Proposition 3 is a special case of the following general fact:
12 AbinaryrelationRiswell-foundedifthereisnoinfinitesequence x1,x2,...of elements of its
domainsuchthat, foralli,xi+1Rxi.
Tight Logic Programs 7
Lemma from Set Theory
A binary relation R is well-founded iff there exists a function λ from the domain
of R to ordinals such that, for all x and y, xRy implies λ(x)<λ(y).
To compare the definition of tightness above with the definition given earlier
in (Babovich et al. 2000), assume that the rules of Π have the form
Head ←L1,...,L
,not L m+1,...,not L
where each L is a literal. In this case,condition (*) says: for every rule (10) in Π,
Head ∈X, (11)
L m+1,...,L
then,forallL∈X∩{L1,...,L
},λ(L)<λ(Head).Inviewof(12),theintersection
X∩{L1,...,L
}herecanbereplacedby{L1,...,L
}.Theonlydifferencebetween
thisformofcondition(*)andthecorrespondingconditionin(Babovich et al. 2000)
isthepresenceofrestriction(13).Theadditionalgeneralitygainedbyincluding(13)
can be illustrated by the program
—itistighton{p,q}inthesenseofthispaper,butnotinthesenseof(Babovich et al. 2000).
5 Absolutely Tight Programs
The following modification of the tightness condition is often useful. A programΠ
is absolutely tight if there is no infinite sequence L1,L2,... of literals such that for
every i there is a rule (3) in Π for which L i+1 ∈poslit(Body) and L i =Head. It is
clear that an absolutely tight programis tight on any set of literals.
Toprovethata programΠ is absolutelytight,it is sufficientto find afunction λ
from literals to ordinals such that for every rule (3) in Π with Head 6= ⊥ and for
every literal L∈poslit(Body), λ(L)<λ(Body).
Fora programcontainingfinitely many atoms,absolute tightness canbe charac-
terized as follows. The positive dependency graph of a program Π is the directed
graph G such that
• the vertices of G are the literals that have regular occurrences in Π, and
• GhasanedgefromLtoL ifthereisarule(3)inΠforwhichL∈poslit(Body)
and L =Head.
Aprogramcontainingfinitely manyatomsis absolutely tightiffits positivedepen-
dency graph has no cycles.
Inapplicationtoprogramswhoseruleshavetheform(10)andcontainneither⊥
8 Esra Erdem and Vladimir Lifschitz
nor classical negation, the definition of absolute tightness above turns into (the
propositional case of) Fages’ original definition of tightness (Fages 1994).
6 Generalization of Fages’ Theorem
For any programΠ and any consistent set X of literals such that Π is tight on X,
X is an answer set for Π iff X is closed under and supported by Π.
Forinstance,program(5)istightonthesets{p}and{¬q}thatareclosedunder
andsupported by (5). By Proposition1 and the theoremabove,it follows that {p}
and {¬q} are the answer sets for (5).
By Proposition 2, we conclude:
Corollary 2
ForanyfinitenormalprogramΠandanysetX ofatomssuchthatΠistightonX,
X is an answer set for Π iff X satisfies the completion of Π.
For instance, program (1) is tight on the models ∅, {p} of its completion (2). In
accordance with Proposition 1 and Corollary 2, these two models are the answer
sets for (1).
By pos(Π) we denote the set of literals L such that Π contains a rule (3) with
Head 6= ⊥ and L ∈ poslit(Body). For instance, if Π is (1) then pos(Π) = {p,q}. If
a set X of literals is disjoint from pos(Π) then no literal in X has a parent relative
to Π and X, and consequently Π is tight on X. We conclude:
Corollary 3
For any program Π and any consistent set X of literals disjoint from pos(Π), X is
an answer set for Π iff X is closed under and supported by Π.
By Proposition 2, it follows then:
Corollary 4
For any finite normal program Π and any set X of atoms disjoint from pos(Π), X
is an answer set for Π iff X satisfies the completion of Π.
Since an absolutely tight program is tight on every set of literals, we conclude
from Theorem 1 and Corollary 2:
Corollary 5
For any absolutely tight program Π and any consistent set X of literals, X is an
answer set for Π iff X is closed under and supported by Π.
Corollary 6
For any finite normalabsolutely tight programΠ and any set X of atoms, X is an
answer set for Π iff X satisfies the completion of Π.
Tight Logic Programs 9
number(1..n).
1{queen(R,C) : number(R)}1 :- number(C).
:- queen(R,C), queen(R,C1), number(R;C;C1), C < C1.
:- queen(R,C), queen(R1,C1), number(R;C;R1;C1),
C < C1, abs(R-R1) == abs(C-C1).
Fig. 1. An smodels representation of the n-queens problem.
7 Example: The N-Queens Problem
Inthe n-queensproblem,thegoalisto findaconfigurationofnqueensonann×n
chessboard such that no queen can be taken by any other queen. In other words,
(a) no two queens may be on the same column, (b) no two queens may be on the
same row, and (c) no two queens may be on the same diagonal.
Asolutiontothen-queensproblemcanbedescribedbyasetofatomsoftheform
queen(R,C) (1≤R,C ≤n) satisfying conditions (a)–(c); including queen(R,C) in
the set indicates that there is a queen in position (R,C).
The n-queens problem can be described by a programwhose answer sets are so-
lutions,asfollows.The selections satisfyingcondition(a)correspondtothe answer
sets for the program consisting of the rules
queen(R,C)←not not queen(R,C) (14)
for all R,C in {1,...,n},
←not queen(1,C),...,not queen(n,C) (15)
for all C in {1,...,n}, and
←queen(R,C),queen(R1,C) (16)
for all R,R1,C in {1,...,n} such that R < R1. Conditions (b) and (c) are repre-
sented by the constraints
←queen(R,C),queen(R,C1) (17)
for all R,C,C1 in {1,...,n} such that C <C1 and
←queen(R,C),queen(R1,C1) (18)
for all R,R1,C,C1 in {1,...,n} such that C <C1 and |R−R1|=|C−C1|.
Theanswersetsforprogram(14)–(18)areina1–1correspondencewiththepossi-
blearrangementsofnqueens.Accordingto(Ferraris and Lifschitz 2003),rules(14)–
(16) can be rewritten as weight constraints
1{queen(1,C),...,queen(n,C)}1 (19)
for all C in {1,...,n} Then the program can be presented to smodels as shown
in Figure 1.
Program (14)–(18) is a finite normal absolutely tight program. By Corollary 6,
10 Esra Erdem and Vladimir Lifschitz
itsanswersetsareidenticaltothemodelsofitscompletion.(Notetheuseofnested
negations in rule (14); this is the reason why the new generalization of Fages’
theorem is needed here.) This fact can be used to find solutions to the n-queens
problem using cmodels, that is to say, by running a satisfiability solver on the
program’scompletion.cmodels transformsthe inputshowninFigure1into(14)–
(18), computes the completion, clausifies it, andcalls mchaff to find a model. For
n=20cmodelsfinds asolutionin2 seconds(forcomparison,smodels,giventhe
same input file, finds one in 55 seconds).13 For n = 25, cmodels finds a solution
in 3 seconds, whereas smodels requires more than 2 hours.
This example confirms the conjecture underlying the design of cmodels: using
satisfiability solvers to compute answer sets for tight programs may be computa-
tionally advantageous. Systematic experimental evaluation of this form of answer
set programming is a topic for future research.
8 Transitive Closure
In logic programming, the transitive closure tc of a binary predicate p is usually
defined by the rules
IfwecombinethisdefinitionDef withanysetΠoffactsdefiningp,andconsiderthe
minimal model of the resulting program, the extent of tc in this model will be the
transitive closure of the extent of p. In this sense, Def is a correctcharacterization
of the concept of transitive closure. We know, on the other hand, that the sets of
atoms closed under and supported by Π∪Def may be different from the minimal
model.Inthese “spurious”setsofatoms,tc is weakerthanthe transitiveclosureof
p. The absence of such “spurious” sets can be assured by requiring that facts in Π
define relation p to be acyclic.
In this section we study the more general situation when Π is a logic program,
notnecessarilyasetoffacts.This programmaydefineseveralpredicatesbesides p.
Even tc is allowed to occur in Π, except that all occurrences of this predicate are
supposed to be in the bodies of rules, so that all rules defining tc in Π∪Def will
belongto Def.TherulesofΠmayinclude negationasfailure,and,accordingly,we
talk about answer sets instead of the minimal model. Program Π∪Def may have
many answer sets. According to Proposition 4 below, the extent of tc in each of
these sets is the transitive closure of the extent of p in the same set.
Recall that programs in the sense of Section 2 are propositional objects; there
are no variables in them. Expressions containing variables, such as Def, can be
treated as schematic: we select a non-empty set C of symbols (“object constants”)
and view an expression with variables as shorthand for the set of all its ground
instances obtained by substituting these symbols for variables. It is convenient,
13 Wehaveusedlparse1.0.11,smodels2.27,cmodels1.03,andmchaffspelt3.AllCPUtimes
hereareforaSunBlade1000,withtwo600MHzUltraSPARC-IIIprocessorsand5GBRAM.
Tight Logic Programs 11
however, to be a little more general. We assume p and tc to be functions from
C ×C to the set of atoms such that all atoms p(x,y) and tc(x,y) are pairwise
distinct.
Proposition 4
Let Π be a program that does not contain atoms of the form tc(x,y) in the heads
of rules. If X is an answer set for Π∪Def then
is the transitive closure of
If atoms of the form tc(x,y) do not occur in Π at all then the answer sets for
Π∪Def are actually in a 1-1 correspondence with the answer sets for Π.14 The
answersetfor Π∪Def correspondingto ananswerset X for Πis obtainedfromX
by adding a set of atoms of the form tc(x,y).
Under what conditions can we assert that the consistent sets of literals closed
underandsupportedbyaprogramcontainingDef arenot“spurious”?Asweknow
fromTheorem1,suchaconditionisprovidedbythe tightnessofthe program.The
verificationofthetightnessofprogramscontainingDef isfacilitatedbythetheorem
below,whichtellsusthatinsomecasesthetightnessofaprogramispreservedafter
adding Def to it.
ForanyprogramΠandanysetX ofliterals,wesayaboutliteralsL,L ∈X that
L isanancestorofLrelativeto ΠandX ifthereexistsafinite sequenceofliterals
∈ X (n > 1) such that L = L1, L = L
and for every i (1 ≤ i < n),
L i+1 is a parentof L i relative to Π and X. In other words,the ancestor relation is
the transitive closure of the parent relation.
Let Π be a program that does not contain atoms of the form tc(x,y) in the heads
of rules. For any set X of literals, if
(i) Π is tight on X,
(ii) {hx,yi: p(y,x)∈X} is well-founded, and
(iii) noatomoftheformtc(x,y)isanancestorofanatomoftheformp(x,y)
relative to Π and X,
then Π∪Def is tight on X.
By Theorem 1 and Proposition 4, we conclude:
Corollary 7
Let Π be a program that does not contain atoms of the form tc(x,y) in the heads
ofrules,andletX beasetofliteralssatisfyingconditions(i)–(iii)fromTheorem2.
If, in addition,
14 ThisobservationisduetoHudsonTurner(personalcommunication, October 3,2000).
12 Esra Erdem and Vladimir Lifschitz
(iv) X is a consistent set closed under and supported by Π∪Def
then X is an answer set for Π∪Def, and
{hx,yi:tc(x,y)∈X}
is the transitive closure of
{hx,yi:p(x,y)∈X}.
Proposition2showsthatifX isasetofatomsandΠisafinite programwithout
classical negation then condition (iv) can be reformulated as follows:
(iv) X is a model of the completion of Π∪Def.
Condition(ii)inthe statementofTheorem2is similartothe acyclicityproperty
mentioned at the beginning of this section. In fact, if the underlying set C of
constants is finite then (ii) is obviously equivalent to the following condition: there
is no finite sequence x1,...,x
∈C (n>1) such that
p(x1,x2),...,p(x n−1,x
= x1. For an infinite C, well-foundedness implies acyclicity, but not the
other way around.
Here is a useful syntactic sufficient condition for (ii):
Proposition 5
If Π contains constraint
and C is finite then, for every set X of literals closed under Π∪Def, set {hx,yi :
p(y,x)∈X} is well-founded.
Withoutcondition(ii),theassertionofthetheoremwouldbeincorrect.Program
Π that consists of one fact p(1,1), with C ={1,2} and
provides a counterexample.
Condition (iii) is essential as well. Indeed, take Π to be
With C = {1,2}, set X = {p(2,1),tc(2,1)} is closed under and supported by Π∪
Def, but is is not an answer set for Π∪Def: the only answer set for this program
is empty.
9 Example: The Blocks World
AsanexampleoftheuseofTheorem2,considera“historyprogram”fortheblocks
world—a program whose answer sets represent possible “histories”of the blocks
world over a fixed time interval. A history of the blocks world is characterized by
thetruthvaluesofatomsoftwokinds:on(b,l,t)(“blockbisonlocationlattimet”)
and move(b,l,t)(“block b is moved to location l between times t and t+1”). Here
Tight Logic Programs 13
• b ranges over a finite set of “block constants,”
• l rangesoverthe setoflocationconstantsthatconsistsofthe blockconstants
and the constant table,
• t rangesoverthe symbolsrepresentinganinitialsegmentofintegers0,...,T,
except that in move(b,l,t) we require t < T. One other kind of atoms used in the
program is above(b,l,t): “block b is above location l at time t”. These atoms are
used to express constraint (32) that requires every block to be “supported by the
table” and thus eliminates stacks of blocks flying in space.
The program consists of the following rules:15
on(b,l,0)←not ¬on(b,l,0)
¬on(b,l,0)←not on(b,l,0)
move(b,l,t)←not ¬move(b,l,t)
¬move(b,l,t)←not move(b,l,t)
on(b,l,t+1)←move(b,l,t)
on(b,l,t+1)←on(b,l,t),not ¬on(b,l,t+1)
←on(b,b ,t),on(b,b ,t) (b6=b) (27)
←move(b,l,t),on(b,b,t) (28)
←move(b,l,t),move(b,l,t) (b6=b or l6=l) (29)
above(b,l,t)←on(b,l,t)
above(b,l,t)←on(b,b,t),above(b,l,t)
←above(b,b,t) (31)
←not above(b,table,t) (32)
To illustrate the use of Theorem2, in Section 10 we use it to provethe following
proposition:
Proposition 6
Program(24)–(32) is tight on every set of literals that is closed under it.
This proposition, in combination with Proposition 1 and Theorem 1, tells us
that the answer sets for (24)–(32) can be characterized as the sets that are closed
under this program and supported by it. These answer sets can be computed by
eliminating classical negation in favor of new atoms and generating models of the
completion of the resulting program.
15 This program is similar to the history program for the blocks world from (Lifschitz1999).
Instead of rules(24),the programinthatpaper contains apairofdisjunctive rules;according
to Theorem 1 from (ErdemandLifschitz1999), this difference does not affect the program’s
answersets.Theintuitivemeaningofrules(25)–(28)isdiscussedin(Lifschitz1999),Section6.
Rule (29) prohibits concurrent actions. Rules (30) and (31) were suggested to us by Norman
McCain and Hudson Turner on June 11, 1999; similar rules are discussed in (Lifschitz1999),
Section8.
14 Esra Erdem and Vladimir Lifschitz
The idea of the proofis to check firstthat program(24)–(29), (31), (32) is tight,
and then use Theorem 2 to conclude that tightness is preserved when we add the
definition (30) of above. There are two complications, however, that need to be
taken into account.
First, on and above are ternary predicates, not binary. To relate them to the
concept of transitive closure, we can say that any binary “slice” of above obtained
by fixing its last argument is the transitive closure of the corresponding “slice” of
on.Accordingly,Theorem2willneedtobe appliedT+1times,onceforeachslice.
Second,thefirsttwoargumentsofon donotcomefromthesamesetC ofobject
constants, as required in the framework of Theorem 2: the set of block constants
is a proper part of the set of location constants. In the proof, we will introduce
a program similar to (24)–(32) in which, syntactically, table is allowed as the first
argument of both on and above.
Given a formula F without negation as failure and two sets Z,Z of literals such
that Z ⊆Z, if Z |=F then Z |=F.
Immediate by structural induction.
The following lemma is the special case of Proposition 1 in which Π is assumed
to be a program without negation as failure.
ForanyprogramΠwithoutnegationasfailureandanyconsistentsetX ofliterals,
if X is an answer set for Π then X is closed under and supported by Π.
Let Π be a program without negation as failure and X be an answer set for Π.
By the definition of an answer set for programs without negation as failure, X is
closedunderΠ.Toprovesupportedness,takeanyliteralLinX.SinceX isminimal
among the sets closed under Π, X\{L} is not closed under Π. This means that Π
contains a rule (3) such that X \{L}|= Body but Head 6∈X \{L}. By Lemma 1,
X |=Body.SinceX isclosedunderΠ,itfollowsthatHead ∈X,sothatHead =L.
The definition of the reduct FX of a formula F is similar to the definition of the
reduct of a programgiven in Section 2.
For any formula F, any programΠ, and any consistent set X of literals,
(i) X |=F iff X |=FX;
(ii) X is closed under Π iff X is closed under ΠX;
(iii) X is supported by Π iff X is supported by ΠX.
Tight Logic Programs 15
Part (i) is immediate by structural induction; parts (ii) and (iii) follow from (i).
Proof of Proposition 1 (Section 3)
Consider a program Π and an answer set X for Π. By the definition of an answer
set,X isananswersetforΠX.Then,byLemma2,X isclosedunderandsupported
by ΠX. By Lemma 3(ii,iii), it follows that X is closed under and supported by Π.
Proof of Proposition 2 (Section 3)
Let Π be a finite normal program. Recall that the completion of Π consists of the
equivalences (6) where A is an atom or the symbol ⊥. It is clear that a set X of
atoms satisfies the completion of Π iff, for each A,
(a) for every rule (7) in Π with the head A, if X |=Body then A∈X, and
(b) if A∈X then X |=Body for some rule (7) in Π with the head A.
Condition(a) expressesthat X is closedunder Π, and condition(b) expressesthat
X is supported by Π.
Proof of Lemma from Set Theory (Section 4)
The “if” part follows from the well-foundedness of < on sets of ordinals. To prove
the “only if” part, consider the following transfinite sequence of subsets of the
domain of R:
S =S S if α is a limit ordinal.
For any x ∈ S S , define λ(x) to be the smallest α such that x ∈ S . From the
well-foundedness of R we can conclude that S S is the whole domain of R.
For any formula F and any set X of literals, X |=F iff X ∩lit(F)|=F.
Immediate by structural induction.
The following lemma is the special case of one half of Theorem 1 in which Π is
assumed to be a program without negation as failure.
LetΠbeaprogramwithoutnegationasfailure.ForanyconsistentsetX ofliterals
such that Π is tight on X, if X is closed under and supported by Π then X is an
answer set for Π.
16 Esra Erdem and Vladimir Lifschitz
LetΠbeaprogramwithoutnegationasfailureandX beaconsistentsetofliterals
suchthatΠis tightonX.Suppose thatX isclosedunderandsupportedby Π.By
the definition of an answer set for programs without negation as failure, we need
to show that no proper subset of X is closed under Π. Let Y be a proper subset
of X. Note first that there exists a literal L in X \Y that does not have a parent
in X\Y relative to Π and X. Indeed, assume that there is no such literal, so that
everyliteralinX\Y has aparentrelativeto ΠandX inthis set;thenthere exists
an infinite sequence L1,L2,... of elements of X \Y such that L i+1 is a parent of
L , which contradicts the assumption that Π is tight on X.
Take such a literal L. Since X is supported by Π, there is a rule
in Π such that
X |=Body. (33)
Bythedefinitionoftheparentrelation,theelementsofX∩poslit(Body)areparents
of L relative to Π and X. By the choice of L, no parent of L relative to Π and X
belongs to X \Y, so that X ∩poslit(Body) is disjoint from X \Y. Consequently,
X ∩poslit(Body) ⊆ Y. Since Π does not contain negation as failure, lit(Body) =
poslit(Body), so that
X ∩lit(Body)⊆Y. (34)
By Lemma 4, we can conclude from (33) that
X∩lit(Body)|=Body.
Inview of(34),itfollowsby Lemma 1that Y |=Body.Since L∈/ Y,itfollowsthat
Y is not closed under Π.
For any programΠ and any consistent set X of literals, if Π is tight on X then so
is ΠX.
Let Π be a program and X be a consistent set of literals. Suppose that ΠX is not
tightonX;wewanttoshowthatΠisnottightonX.Itisclearfromthedefinition
of reduct of a program that every rule of ΠX has the form
Head ←BodyX (35)
forsomerule(3)inΠ.Thenthereisaninfinite sequenceL1,L2,...inX suchthat,
for every i, there is a rule (35) in ΠX with L i = Head, L i+1 ∈ poslit(BodyX)∩X
and X |=BodyX.
By Lemma 3(i), X |= BodyX iff X |=Body. From the definition of the reduct,
poslit(BodyX)⊆poslit(Body). Therefore, there is an infinite sequence L1,L2,...
in X such that, for every i, there is a rule (3) in Π with L i = Head, L i+1 ∈
poslit(Body)∩X and X |= Body. This contradicts the assumption that Π is tight
on X.
Tight Logic Programs 17
Proof of Theorem 1 (Section 6)
Consider a programΠ and a consistent set X of literals such that Π is tight on X.
Assume that X is closed under and supported by Π. Then, by Lemma 3(ii,iii), X
is closed under and supported by ΠX. By Lemma 6, ΠX is tight on X. Hence, by
Lemma5, X is ananswersetfor ΠX, andconsequentlyananswerset forΠ. Inthe
other direction, the assertion of the theorem follows from Proposition 1.
Proof of Proposition 4 (Section 8)
We will first provethe specialcase when Π doesn’t containnegationas failure.Let
X be ananswerset for Π∪Def; denote set (21) by R, and its transitive closure by
R . We need to prove that for all x and y, tc(x,y)∈X iff hx,yi∈R .
Left-to right. Since there is no negation as failure in Π, X can be characterized
as the union S
of the sequence of sets of literals defined as follows: X0 = ∅;
X i+1 is the set of all literals L such that Π∪Def contains a rule L ← Body with
Body satisfied by X . We will show by induction on i that tc(x,y) ∈ X implies
hx,yi ∈ R . If i = 0, the assertion is trivial because X0 is empty. Assume that
for all x and y, tc(x,y) ∈ X implies hx,yi ∈ R , and take an atom tc(x,y) from
X i+1.Takearuletc(x,y)←Body inΠ∪Def suchthatX
|=Body.SinceΠdoesn’t
contain atoms of the form tc(x,y) in the heads of rules, this rule belongs to Def.
Case 1: Body = p(x,y). Then p(x,y)∈ X ⊆ X, so that hx,yi ∈R ⊆ R . Case 2:
Body = p(x,v),tc(v,y). Then p(x,v) ∈ X ⊆ X, so that hx,vi ∈ R ⊆ R ; also,
tc(v,y)∈X ,sothat,bythe inductionhypothesis,hv,yi∈R .Bythetransitivity
of R , it follows that hx,yi∈R .
Right-to-left.SinceR ∞ =S Rj,itissufficienttoprovethatforallj >0,hx,yi∈
Rj implies tc(x,y)∈X.The proofisby inductiononj.Whenj =1, hx,yi∈R,so
thatp(x,y)∈X;since X is closedunder Def,it follows that tc(x,y)∈X.Assume
that for all x and y, hx,yi ∈ Rj implies tc(x,y) ∈ X, and take a pair hx,yi from
Rj+1. Take v such that hx,vi∈R and hv,yi ∈ Rj. Then p(x,v) ∈ X and, by the
induction hypothesis, tc(v,y) ∈ X. Since X is closed under Def, it follows that
tc(x,y)∈X.
We have provedthe assertionof Proposition4 for programswithout negation as
failure.Nowlet Πbe anyprogramthatdoes notcontainatomsofthe formtc(x,y)
in heads of rules, and let X be an answer set for Π∪Def. Clearly, the reduct ΠX
is a program without negation as failure that does not contain atoms of the form
tc(x,y) in the heads of rules, and X is an answer set for ΠX ∪Def. By the special
case of the theorem proved above, applied to ΠX, (20) is the transitive closure of
(21).
Proof of Theorem 2 (Section 8)
Assume (i)–(iii), and assume that Π∪Def is not tight on X. Then there exists an
infinite sequence L1,L2,... of elements of X suchthat for everyi, L i+1 is a parent
of L relative to Π∪Def and X. Consider two cases.
Case 1: Sequence L1,L2,... contains only a finite number of terms of the form
18 Esra Erdem and Vladimir Lifschitz
tc(x,y). Let L n be the last of them. Then for every i > n, L i+1 is a parent of
relative to Π and X. Sequence L n+1,L n+2,... shows that Π is not tight on X,
contrary to (i).
Case2: Sequence L1,L2,... containsinfinitely many terms ofthe formtc(x,y). By
(iii),itfollowsthatthissequencehasnotermsoftheformp(x,y).Theexamination
ofrulesDef showsthateverytc(x,y) inthis sequence isimmediately followedbya
term of the form tc(v,y) such that p(x,v)∈X. Consequently, sequence L1,L2,...
consists of some initial segment followed by an infinite sequence of literals of the
tc(v0,y),tc(v1,y),...
such that, for every i, p(v
,v i+1)∈X. This is impossible by (ii).
Proof of Proposition 5 (Section 8)
Let Π be a program containing constraint (23), with finite C, and let X be a set
of literals closed under Π∪Def. Assume that {hx,yi : p(y,x) ∈ X} is not well-
founded. Take x1,...,x
∈ C that satisfy (22) and x
= x1. Since X is closed
under Def, tc(x1,x1)∈X. But this is impossible because X is closed under (23).
Proof of Proposition 6 (Section 9)
Let Π be the program that differs from (24)–(32) in that
• its underlying set of atoms includes, additionally, expressions of the forms
on(table,l,t) and above(table,l,t), and
• rules (30) and (31) are replaced by
above(l,l,t)←on(l,l,t)
above(l,l,t)←on(l,l ,t),above(l ,l,t)
←above(l,l,t). (37)
Let X be a set of literals that does not contain any of the newly introduced atoms
ortheirnegationsandisclosedundertheoriginalprogram(24)–(32).Wewillprove
that Π is tight on X. It will follow then that the originalprogramis tight on X as
well, because that program is a subset of Π.
For every k = 0,...,T + 1, let Π be the subset of the rules of Π in which
rules (36) are restricted to t<k. Since Π T+1 =Π, it is sufficient to prove that, for
all k, Π is tight on X. The proof is by induction on k. Basis: k = 0. The rules of
Π0 are (24)–(29), (32) and (37). To see that this program is tight, define
Inductionstep:AssumethatΠ istightonX.LetC bethesetoflocationconstants,
Tight Logic Programs 19
and let functions p and tc be defined by
p(l,l)=on(l,l,k),
tc(l,l)=above(l,l,k).
ThenΠ k+1 =Π k ∪Def.LetuscheckthatallconditionsofTheorem2aresatisfied.
Condition(i)holdsbytheinductionhypothesis.SinceX isclosedundertheoriginal
program (24)–(32) and does not contain any of the newly introduced literals, it is
closed under Π k+1 as well; in view of the fact that Π k+1 contains constraint (37),
condition(ii)followsbyProposition5.Byinspection,(iii)holdsalso.ByTheorem2,
it follows that Π k+1 is tight on X.
11 Conclusion
For absolutely tight logic programs, the answer set semantics is equivalent to the
completionsemantics.Answersetsforafinitenormalabsolutelytightprogramcan
be found by running a satisfiability solver on the program’s completion. Defining
tightnessrelativetoasetofliteralsextendstheapplicabilityofthismethodtosome
programs that are not absolutely tight. This method of computing answer sets is
applicable to rules with nested expressions and with weight constraints.
Althoughthismethodisnotdirectlyapplicabletodisjunctiveprograms,disjunc-
tionintheheadofarulecanbesometimeseliminatedinfavorofnestedexpressions
initsbody(Lifschitz et al. 1999),(Lifschitz 2002).Forinstance,thedisjunctiverule
p;not q ←r
in any program can be replaced by
p←r,not not q
without changing the program’s answer sets.
Acknowledgments
We are gratefulto Yuliya Babovich,Selim Erdo˘gan,PaoloFerraris, Joohyung Lee,
Victor Marek, Norman McCain and Emilio Remolina for comments and discus-
sions related to the subject of this paper. Special thanks to Hudson Turner for
many useful suggestions, including the use of poslit in the definition of tightness
instead of the more complicated condition from (Erdem and Lifschitz 2001a), and
the possibility of restriction (13) from Section 4.
This work was partially supported by National Science Foundation under grant
IIS-9732744 and by the Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board under grant
003658-0322-2001.The firstauthorwasalsosupportedby a NATO Science Fellow-
ship.