Tight Bounds for Influence in Diffusion Networks
and Application to Bond Percolation and
Epidemiology
R´emi Lemonnier1,2 Kevin Scaman1 Nicolas Vayatis1
1 CMLA – ENS Cachan, CNRS, France
2 1000Mercis, Paris, France
remi.lemonnier@ens-cachan.fr
{scaman, vayatis}@cmla.ens-cachan.fr
October 1, 2021
In this paper, we derive theoretical bounds for the long-term influ-
enceofa nodein anIndependentCascadeModel (ICM). Werelatethese
bounds to the spectral radius of a particular matrix and show that the
behavior is sub-critical when this spectral radius is lower than 1. More
specifically,wepointoutthat,ingeneralnetworks,thesub-criticalregime
behavesinO( n)wherenisthesizeofthenetwork,andthatthisupper
bound is met for star-shaped networks. We apply our results to epidemi-
ology and percolation on arbitrary networks, and derive a bound for the
critical value beyond which a giant connected component arises. Finally,
we show empirically the tightness of our bounds for a large family of
networks.
1 Introduction
The emergence of social graphs of the World Wide Web has had a considerable
effect on propagation of ideas or information. For advertisers, these new dif-
fusion networks have become a favored vector for viral marketing operations,
thatconsistofadvertisementsthatpeoplearelikelytosharebythemselveswith
their social circle, thus creating a propagation dynamics somewhat similar to
thespreadingofavirusinepidemiology([1]). Ofparticularinterestistheprob-
lemofinfluence maximization,whichconsistsofselectingthetop-knodesofthe
network to infect at time t = 0 in order to maximize in expectation the final
number of infected nodes at the end of the epidemic. This problem was first
formulated by Domingues and Richardson in [2] and later expressed in [3] as
anNP-harddiscreteoptimizationproblemundertheIndependentCascade(IC)
framework, a widely-used probabilistic model for information propagation.
1v4474.7041:viXra
From an algorithmic point of view, influence maximization has been fairly
well studied. Assuming the transmission probability of all edges are known,
Kempe,KleinbergandTardos([3])derivedagreedyalgorithmbasedonMonte-
Carlo simulations that was shown to approximate the optimal solution up to
a factor 1− 1, building on classical results of optimization theory. Since then,
varioustechniqueswereproposedinordertosignificantlyimprovethescalability
ofthisalgorithm([4,5,6,7]),andalsotoprovideanestimateofthetransmission
probabilities from real data ([8, 9]). Recently, a series of papers ([10, 11, 12])
introducedcontinuous-time diffusionnetworksinwhichinfectionspreadsduring
a time period T at varying rates across the different edges. While these models
provide a more accurate representation of real-world networks for finite T, they
are equivalent to the IC model when T →∞. In this paper, will focus on such
long-term behavior of the contagion.
From a theoretical point of view, little is known about the influence maxi-
mization problem under the IC model framework. The most celebrated result
established by Newman ([13]) proves the equivalence between bond percolation
and the Susceptible-Infected-Removed (SIR) model in epidemiology ([14]) that
can be identified to a special case of IC model where transmission probability
are equal amongst all infectious edges.
In this paper, we propose new bounds on the influence of any set of nodes.
Moreover, we prove the existence of an epidemic threshold for a key quantity
defined by the spectral radius of a given hazard matrix. Under this threshold,
the influence of any given set of nodes in a network of size n will be O( n),
while the influence of a randomly chosen set of nodes will be O(1). We provide
empirical evidence that these bounds are sharp for a family of graphs and sets
of initial influencers and can therefore be used as what is to our knowledge
the first closed-form formulas for influence estimation. We show that these
results generalize bounds obtained on the SIR model by Draief, Ganesh and
Massouli´e([15])andarecloselyrelatedtorecentresultsonpercolationonfinite
inhomogeneous random graphs ([16]).
Therestofthepaperisorganizedasfollows. InSec.2,werecallthedefinition
of Information Cascades Model and introduce useful notations. In Sec.3, we
derive theoretical bounds for the influence. In Sec.4, we show that our results
also apply to the fields of percolation and epidemiology and generalize existing
results in these fields. In Sec.5, we illustrate our results by applying them
on simple networks and retrieving well-known results. In Sec.6, we perform
experiments in order to show that our bounds are sharp for a family of graphs
and sets of initial nodes.
2 Information Cascades Model
2.1 Influence in random networks and infection dynamics
Let G = (V,E) be a directed network of n nodes and A ⊂ V be a set of n
nodesthatareinitiallycontagious (e.g.awareofapieceofinformation,infected
by a disease or adopting a product). In the sequel, we will refer to A as the
influencers. Thebehaviorofthecascadeismodeledusingaprobabilisticframe-
work. Theinfluencernodesspreadthecontagionthroughthenetworkbymeans
oftransmissionthroughtheedgesofthenetwork. Morespecifically,eachconta-
gious node can infect its neighbors with a certain probability. The influence of
A, denoted as σ(A), is the expected number of nodes reached by the contagion
originating from A, i.e.
σ(A)= P(v is infected by the contagion |A). (1)
We consider three infection dynamics that we will show in the next section
to be equivalent regarding the total number of infected nodes at the end of the
epidemic.
Discrete-Time Information Cascades [DTIC(P)] Attimet=0,onlythe
influencers are infected. Given a matrix P = (p ) ∈ [0,1]n×n, each node i
that receives the contagion at time t may transmit it at time t+1 along its
outgoing edge (i,j)∈E with probability p . Node i cannot make any attempt
to infect its neighbors in subsequent rounds. The process terminates when no
more infections are possible.
Continuous-Time Information Cascades [CTIC(F,T)] At time t = 0,
only the influencers are infected. Given a matrix F = (f ) of non-negative
integrable functions, each node i that receives the contagion at time t may
transmit it at time s>t along its outgoing edge (i,j)∈E with stochastic rate
of occurrence f (s−t). The process terminates at a given deterministic time
T >0. This model is much richer than Discrete-time IC, but we will focus here
on its behavior when T =∞.
Random Networks [RN(P)] Given a matrix P = (p ) ∈ [0,1]n×n, each
edge (i,j)∈E is removed independently of the others with probability 1−p .
A node i ∈ V is said to be infected if i is linked to at least one element of A
in the spanning subgraph G(cid:48) = (V,E(cid:48)) where E(cid:48) ⊂ E is the set of non-removed
edges.
For any v ∈ V, we will designate by influence of v the influence of the
set containing only v, i.e. σ({v}). We will show in Section 4.2 that, if P is
symmetric and G undirected, these three infection processes are equivalent to
bond percolation and the influence of a node v is also equal to the expected size
oftheconnected component containingv inG(cid:48). Thiswillmakeourresultsappli-
cable to percolation in arbitrary networks. Following the percolation literature,
we will denote as sub-critical a cascade whose influence is not proportional to
the size of the network n.
2.2 The hazard matrix
In order to linearize the influence problem and derive upper bounds, we intro-
duce the concept of hazard matrix, which describes the behavior of the infor-
mation cascade. As we will see in the following, in the case of Continuous-time
Information Cascades, this matrix gives, for each edge of the network, the inte-
gral of the instantaneous rate of transmission (known as hazard function). The
spectralradiusofthismatrixwillplayakeyroleintheinfluenceofthecascade.
Definition. For a given graph G =(V,E) and edge transmission probabilities
p , let H be the n×n matrix, denoted as the hazard matrix, whose coefficients
H = ij . (2)
ij 0 otherwise
Next lemma shows the equivalence between the three definitions of previous
section.
Lemma1. ForagivengraphG =(V,E),setofinfluencersA,andtransmission
probabilitiesmatrixP, theprobabilityofeachnodeitobeinfectedisequalunder
the infection dynamics DTIC(P),CTIC(F,∞) and RN(P), provided that for
any (i,j)∈E, f (t)dt=H .
Definition. For a given set of influencers A⊂V, we will denote as H(A) the
hazard matrix except for zeros along the columns whose indices are in A:
We recall that for any square matrix M, its spectral radius ρ(M) is defined
byρ(M)=max (|λ |)whereλ ,...,λ arethe(possiblyrepeated)eigenvaluesof
matrix M. We will also use that, when M is a real square matrix with positive
(cid:18) M +M(cid:62)(cid:19) X(cid:62)MX
2 X(cid:62)X
Remark. When the p are small, the hazard matrix is very close to the
transmissionmatrixP. Thisimpliesthat,forlowp values,thespectralradius
ofHwillbeveryclosetothatofP. Morespecifically,asimplecalculationholds
−ln(1−(cid:107)P(cid:107) )
(cid:107)P(cid:107)
where (cid:107)P(cid:107) = max p . The relatively slow increase of −ln(1−x) for x →
∞ i,j ij x
1− implies that the behavior of ρ(P) and ρ(H) will be of the same order of
magnitude even for high (but lower than 1) values of (cid:107)P(cid:107) .
3 Upper bounds for the influence of a set of
Given A ⊂ V the set of influencer nodes and |A| = n < n, we derive here two
upper bounds for the influence of A. The first bound (Proposition 1) applies to
any set of influencers A such that |A| = n . Intuitively, this result correspond
to a best-case scenario (or a worst-case scenario, depending on the viewpoint),
since we can target any set of nodes so as to maximize the resulting contagion.
Proposition 1. Define ρ (A) =
). Then, for any A such that
|A| = n < n, denoting by σ(A) the expected number of nodes reached by the
cascade starting from A:
where γ is the smallest solution in [0,1] of the following equation:
(cid:18) (cid:19)
1 c 1 γ (n−n )
Corollary 1. Under the same assumptions:
c 0 1−ρ (A) 0 0
(cid:32) (cid:33)
c 0 c (cid:112)
In particular, when ρ (A)<1, σ(A)=O( n) and the regime is sub-critical.
Thesecondresult(Proposition2)appliesinthecasewhereAisdrawnfrom
a uniform distribution over the ensemble of sets of n nodes chosen amongst n
(denoted as P (V)). This result corresponds to the average-case scenario in
a setting where the initial influencer nodes are not known and drawn indepen-
dently of the transmissions over each edge.
Proposition 2. Define ρ = ρ(H+H(cid:62)). Assume the set of influencers A is
drawn from a uniform distribution over P (V). Then, denoting by σ
n0 uniform
the expected number of nodes reached by the cascade starting from A:
uniform 0 2 0
where γ is the unique solution in [0,1] of the following equation:
(cid:18) (cid:19)
Corollary 2. Under the same assumptions:
c uniform 1−ρ
(cid:18) (cid:19)
c uniform 0 1− n0
In particular, when ρ <1, σ(A)=O(1) and the regime is sub-critical.
Note that, in the case of undirected networks and when p = p, ρ =
−ln(1−p)ρ(A) where A is the adjacency matrix of the network.
4 Application to epidemiology and percolation
Building on the celebrated equivalences between the fields of percolation, epi-
demiology and influence maximization, we show that our results generalize ex-
isting results in these fields.
4.1 Susceptible-Infected-Removed(SIR)modelinepidemi-
We show here that Proposition 1 further improves results on the SIR model in
epidemiology. This widely used model was introduced by Kermac and McK-
endrick ([14]) in order to model the propagation of a disease in a given popu-
lation. In this setting, nodes represent individuals, that can be in one of three
possible states, susceptible (S), infected (I) or removed (R). At t = 0, a subset
A of n nodes is infected and the epidemic spreads according to the following
evolution. Each infected node transmits the infection along its outgoing edge
(i,j) ∈ E at stochastic rate of occurrence β and is removed from the graph
at stochastic rate of occurrence δ. The process ends for a given T > 0. It is
straightforward that, if the removed events are not observed, this infection pro-
cess is equivalent to CTIC(F,T) where for any (i,j) ∈ E,f (t) = βexp(−δt).
The hazard matrix H is therefore equal to βA where A = (cid:0)1 (cid:1) is the
adjacencymatrixoftheunderlyingnetwork. Notethat,byLemma1,ourresults
can be used in order to model the total number of infected nodes in a setting
where infection and recovery rates of a given node exhibit a non-exponential
behavior. For instance, incubation periods for different individuals generally
follow a log-normal distribution [17], which indicates that continuous-time IC
with a log-normal rate of removal might be well-suited to model some kind of
infections.
It was recently shown by Draief, Ganesh and Massouli´e ([15]) that, in the
case of undirected networks, and if βρ(A)<δ,
This result shows, that, when ρ(H) = βρ(A) < 1, the influence of set of nodes
AisO( n). Weshowinthenextlemmathatthisresultisadirectconsequence
of Corollary 1: the condition ρ (A) < 1 is weaker than ρ(H) < 1 and, under
these conditions, the bound of Corollary 1 is tighter.
Lemma 2. For any symmetric adjacency matrix A, initial set of influencers
A such that |A| = n < n, δ > 0 and β < δ , we have simultaneously
(cid:115) √
n + ρ c (A) (cid:112) n (n−n )≤ nn 0 , (11)
where the condition β < δ imposes that the regime is sub-critical.
Moreover,thesenewboundscapturewithmoreaccuracythebehaviorofthe
influence in extreme cases. In the limit β → 0, the difference between the two
boundsissignificant,becauseProposition1yieldsσ(A)→n whereas(10)only
ensuresσ(A)≤ nn . Whenn=n ,Proposition1alsoensuresthatσ(A)=n
whereas (10) yields σ(A)≤ n0 . Secondly, Proposition 1 gives also bounds
inthecaseβρ(A)≥δ. Finally, Proposition1appliestomoregeneralcasesthat
the classical homogeneous SIR model, and allows infection and recovery rates
to vary across individuals.
4.2 Bond percolation
GivenafiniteundirectedgraphG =(V,E),bondpercolation theorydescribesthe
behaviorofconnectedclustersofthespanningsubgraphofG obtainedbyretain-
ingasubsetE(cid:48) ⊂E ofedgesofG accordingtoagivendistributiononP(E).When
theseremovalsoccurindependentlyalongeachedgewithsameprobability1−p,
this process is called homogeneous percolation and is fairly well known (see e.g
[18]). The inhomogeneous case, where the independent edge removal probabil-
ities 1−p vary across the edges, is more intricate and has been the subject
of recent studies. In particular, results on critical probabilities and size of the
giant component have been obtained by Bollobas, Janson and Riordan in [16].
However, these bounds hold for a particular class of asymptotic graphs (inho-
mogeneous random graphs) when n → ∞. In the next lemma, we show that
our results can be used in order to obtain bounds that hold in expectation for
any fixed graph.
Lemma 3. Let G =(V,E) be an undirected network where each edge (i,j)∈E
hasanindependentprobability1−p ofbeingremoved. Then,foranyv ∈V,the
expected size of the connected component containing v is equal to the influence
of v in G under the infection process DTIC(P).
We now derive an upper bound for C (G(cid:48)), the size of the largest connected
component of the spanning subgraph G(cid:48) = (V,E(cid:48)). In the following, we will
denote by E[C (G(cid:48))] the expected value of this random variable, given P =
(p ) .
Proposition 3. Let G = (V,E) be a connected undirected network where each
edge (i,j) ∈ E has an independent probability 1−p of being removed. The
expected size of the largest connected component of the resulting subgraph G(cid:48) is
upper bounded by:
where γ is the unique solution in [0,1] of the following equation:
(cid:18) (cid:19)
Moreover,theresultingnetworkhasaprobabilityofbeingconnectedupperbounded
by:
P(G(cid:48) is connected)≤γ . (14)
In the case ρ(H) < 1, we can further simplify our bounds in the same way
than for Propositions 1 and 2.
Corollary 3. In the case ρ(H)<1, E[C (G(cid:48))]≤ n .
Whereas our results hold for any n∈N, classical results in percolation the-
ory study the asymptotic behavior of sequences of graphs when n → ∞. In
order to further compare our results, we therefore consider sequences of span-
ningsubgraphs(G(cid:48)
∈N,obtainedbyremovingeachedgeofgraphsofnnodes
(G n ) n ∈N with probability 1−pn ij . A previous result ([16], Corollary 3.2 of sec-
tion 5) states that, for particular sequences known as inhomogeneous random
graphs and under a given sub-criticality condition, C (G(cid:48) ) = o(n) asymptoti-
cally almost surely (a.a.s.), i.e with probability going to 1 as n → ∞. Using
Proposition 3, we get for our part the following result:
Corollary 4. Assume the sequence (cid:16) Hn = (cid:0) −ln(1−pn) (cid:1) (cid:17) is such that
ij ij n ∈N
limsupρ (Hn)<1. (15)
Then, for any (cid:15)>0, we have asymptotically almost surely when n→∞,
This result is to our knowledge the first to bound the expected size of the
largest connected component in general arbitrary networks.
5 Application to particular networks
In order to illustrate our theoretical results, we now apply our bounds to three
specificnetworksandcomparethemtoexistingresults,showingthatourbounds
are always of the same order than these specific results. We consider three
particular networks: 1) star-shaped networks, 2) Erd¨os-R´enyi networks and
3) random graphs with an expected degree distribution. In order to simplify
these problems and exploit existing theorems, we will consider in this section
thatp =pisfixedforeachedge(i,j)∈E. Infectiondynamicsthusonlydepend
on p, the set of influencers A, and the structure of the underlying network.
5.1 Star-shaped networks
For a star shaped network centered around a given node v , and A={v }, the
exact influence is computable and writes σ({v })=1+p(n−1). As H(A) =
−ln(1−p)1 , the spectral radius is given by
Therefore, Proposition 1 states that σ({v }) ≤ 1+(n−1)γ where γ is the
solution of equation
(cid:18)(cid:18) √ 1 (cid:19) ln(1−p) (cid:19)
1 1 γ n−1 2
Itisworthmentionningthat,whenp= √ √ n 1 −1 ,γ 1 = √ n 1 −1 issolutionof(18)and
therefore the bound is σ({v }) ≤ 1+ n−1 which is tight. Note that, in the
case of star-shaped networks, the influence does not present a critical behavior
and is always linear with respect to the total number of nodes n.
5.2 Erd¨os-R´enyi networks
For Erd¨os-R´enyi networks G(n,p) (i.e. an undirected network with n nodes
where each couple of nodes (i,j)∈V2 belongs to E independently of the others
with probability p), the exact influence of a set of nodes is not known. How-
ever, percolation theory characterizes the limit behavior of the giant connected
componentwhenn→∞. InthesimplestcaseofErd¨os-R´enyinetworksG(n, c)
the following result holds:
Lemma 4. (taken from [16]) For a given sequence of Erd¨os-R´enyi networks
G(n, c), we have:
• if c<1, C (G(n, c))≤ 3 log(n) a.a.s.
1 n (1−c)2
As previously stated, our results hold for any given graph, and not only
asymptotically. However, we get an asymptotic behavior consistent with the
aforementioned result. Indeed, using notations of section 4.2, Hn = −ln(1−
c)1 andρ(Hn)=−(n−1)ln(1− c). UsingProposition3,andnotingthat
n {i(cid:54)=j} n
γ =(1+o(1))β, we get that, for any (cid:15)>0:
• if c<1, C (G(n, c))=o(n1/2+(cid:15)) a.a.s.
5.3 Random graphs with given expected degree distribu-
In this section, we apply our bounds to random graphs whose expected degree
distribution is fixed (see e.g [19], section 13.2.2). More specifically, let w =
(w ) be the expected degree of each node of the network. For a fixed
i i∈{1,...,n}
w, let G(w) be a random graph whose edges are selected independently and
randomly with probability
{i(cid:54)=j} i j
q = . (19)
ij (cid:80) w
For these graphs, results on the volume of connected components (i.e the ex-
pected sum of degrees of the nodes in these components) were derived in [20]
but our work gives to our knowledge the first result on the size of the giant
component. Note that Erd¨os-R´enyi G(n,p) networks are a special case of (19)
where w =np for any i∈V.
In order to further compare our results, we note that these graphs are also
verysimilartothewidelyusedconfigurationmodel wherenodedegreesarefixed
to a sequence w, the main difference being that the occupation probabilities p
are in this case not independent anymore. For configuration models, a giant
component exists if and only if (cid:80) w2 > 2 (cid:80) w ([21, 22]). In the case of
graphs with given expected degree distribution, we retrieve the key role played
byth (cid:16) eratio (cid:80) (cid:80) (cid:17) i i w w i 2 i inourcriterionofnon-existenceofthegiantcomponentgiven
by ρ H+H(cid:62) <1 where
(cid:18) H+H(cid:62)(cid:19) (cid:80) w2
2 ij ij (cid:80) w
The left-hand approximation is based on −ln(1−x) ≈ x and is particularly
goodwhentheq aresmall. Thisisforinstancethecaseassoonasthereexists
α < 1 such that, for any i ∈ V, w = o(nα). The right-hand side is based on
the fact that the spectral radius of the matrix (cid:16) q ij +1 {i=j}(cid:80) w
i 2 wk (cid:17)
by (cid:80) (cid:80)i
.
6 Experimental results
Inthissection, weshowthattheboundsgiveninSec.3aretight(i.e.veryclose
to empirical results in particular graphs), and are good approximations of the
influence on a large set of random networks.
Fig.1 compares experimental simulations of the influence to the bound de-
rived in proposition 1. The considered networks have n = 1000 nodes and are
of6types(seee.g[19]forfurtherdetailsonthesedifferentnetworks): 1)Erd¨os-
R´enyi networks, 2) Preferential attachment networks, 3) Small-world networks,
4) Geometric random networks ([23]), 5) 2D regular grids and 6) totally con-
nected networks with fixed weight b∈[0,1] except for the ingoing and outgoing
edges of the influencer node A = {v } having weight a ∈ [0,1]. The results
showthattheboundinproposition1istight(seetotallyconnectednetworksin
Fig.1) and close to the real influence for a large class of random networks. In
particular, the tightness of the bound around ρ (A)=1 validates the behavior
in n of the worst-case influence in the sub-critical regime.
0 2 4 6 8 10
spectral radius of the Hazard matrix (ρ c(A))
totally connected
erdos renyi 300
preferential attachment
small World 200
contact network
2D grid 100
upper bound
0 2 4 6 8 10
spectral radius of the Hazard matrix (ρ c)
Figure 1: Empirical influence of a
fixed set of influencers on random
networksofvarioustypes. Thesolid
line is the upper bound in proposi-
tion 1.
σ( ecneulfni
totally connected
erdos renyi
preferential attachment
small World
contact network
upper bound
Figure 2: Empirical influence of a
uniformly distributed set of influ-
encers on random networks of var-
ious types. The solid line is the up-
per bound in proposition 2.
0 200 400 600 800 1000
size of the network (n)
totally connected
erdos renyi
preferential attachment 500
small World contact network
2D grid 400 upper bound
0 200 400 600 800 1000
size of the network (n)
(a) Sub-critical regime: ρ (A)=0.5
totally connected
erdos renyi
preferential attachment
small World contact network
2D grid upper bound
(b) Super-critical regime: ρ (A)=1.5
Figure 3: Influence w.r.t. the size of the network in the sub-critical (ρ (A)<1)
and super-critical regime (ρ (A) > 1). The solid line is the upper bound in
proposition 1. Note the square-root versus linear behavior of the influence.
Similarly, Fig.2 compares experimental simulations of the influence to the
bound derived in proposition 2 in the case of random initial influencers. While
this bound is not as tight as the previous one, the behavior of the bound agrees
with experimental simulations, and proves a relatively good approximation of
the influence under a random set of initial influencers. It is worth mentioning
that the bound is tight for the sub-critical regime and shows that corollary 2 is
a good approximation of σ when ρ <1.
In order to verify the criticality of ρ (A) = 1, we compared the behavior of
σ(A) w.r.t the size of the network n. When ρ (A) < 1 (see Fig.3a in which
ρ (A) = 0.5), σ(A) = O( n), and the bound is tight. On the contrary, when
ρ (A) > 1 (see Fig.3b in which ρ (A) = 1.5), σ(A) = O(n), and σ(A) is linear
w.r.t. n for most random networks.
7 Conclusion
In this paper, we derived the first upper bounds for the influence of a given
set of nodes in any finite graph under the Independent Cascade Models (ICM)
framework, andrelatethemtothespectralradiusofagivenhazard matrix. We
show that these bounds can also be used to generalize previous results in the
fields of epidemiology and percolation. Finally, we provide empirical evidence
that these bounds are close the best possible for general graphs.