TinkerCell: modular CAD tool for synthetic biology
Deepak Chandran∗1 , Frank T. Bergmann1,2 and Herbert M. Sauro1
1DepartmentofBioengineering,UniversityofWashington,Box355061,WilliamH.FoegeBuilding,RoomN210E,
Seattle,WA,USA98195-5061
2KeckGraduateInstitute,535WatsonDrive,Claremont,CA,USA,91711
Email: DeepakChandran∗-deepakc@u.washington.edu;
∗Correspondingauthor
Background: Synthetic biology brings together concepts and techniques from engineering and biology. In this
field, computer-aided design (CAD) is necessary in order to bridge the gap between computational modeling and
biological data. Using a CAD application, it would be possible to construct models using available biological
“parts” and directly generate the DNA sequence that represents the model, thus increasing the efficiency of
design and construction of synthetic networks.
Results: An application named TinkerCell has been created in order to serve as a CAD tool for synthetic
biology. TinkerCell is a visual modeling tool that supports a hierarchy of biological parts. Each part in this
hierarchy consists of a set of attributes that define the part, such as sequence or rate constants. Models that are
constructed using these parts can be analyzed using various C and Python programs that are hosted by
TinkerCell via an extensive C and Python API. TinkerCell supports the notion of a module, which are networks
with interfaces. Such modules can be connected to each other, forming larger modular networks. TinkerCell is a
free and open-source project under the Berkeley Software Distribution license. Downloads, documentation, and
tutorials are available at www.tinkercell.com.
Conclusions: The final goal of a CAD application is to make the design and construction process easier. The
biggest limitation in synthetic biology at present is the limited knowledge on the precise kinetics and parameters
that explain the dynamics of biological parts. TinkerCell is built under the assumption that this limitation will be
resolved, allowing models to represent the real system more accurately. TinkerCell can assist in pushing the field
]NM.oib-q[
1v6793.7090:viXra
toward this goal by providing a framework for constructing models using parts and modules. Because TinkerCell
associates parameters and equations in a model with their respective part, parts can be loaded from databases
along with their parameters and rate equations. The modular network design can be used to exchange modules
as well as test the concept of modularity in biological systems. The flexible modeling framework along with the
C and Python API allows TinkerCell to serve as a host to numerous third-party algorithms.
Background
Systems level modeling has lead to a clearer mechanistic understanding of biological systems and provided
mathematical explanations for experimental observations [1–3]. One of the consequences of such
understanding has been the ability to design and engineer synthetic biological networks in microorganisms,
which has given rise to the field of Synthetic Biology [4]. The idea of engineering biological systems brings
together concepts from various fields. While the laboratory procedure at present is borrowed from genetic
engineering, concepts such as abstraction and interchangeable parts are taken from computer science and
electrical engineering. Synthetic biology introduces the notion of biological “parts” [4], which are
individual components that can be assembled in different ways to construct synthetic networks with
different functions. Networks built by different engineers can then be reused to construct larger networks,
much like a programmer using existing subroutines to build a new program more efficiently. Since synthetic
biology is a young field, the best practices for making molecular biology interchangeable and programmable
have not been established. Nonetheless, various success stories [5–7] have shed light on the enormous
potential of synthetic biology to understand fundamental science [4] or create new solutions for
applications ranging from fuels [8] to medicine [9].
The terminology, software, and laboratory procedures required to push synthetic biology forward are still
in development. However, one can anticipate that certain key concepts such as standarization and
modularity will become commonplace in synthetic biology [10]. In synthetic biology, the need for
standardization exists at several levels. At one level, there is a standard for defining parts. While biological
parts are the individual components for building a network, standardized parts contain additional
restrictions that are intended to make synthetic networks easier to build, more reliable, and easier to
exchange. An existing standard is the standard assembly [11], which has made DNA assembly simpler. In
future, it is anticipated that standards will also exist for describing the dynamics of a part; for example,
standard promoter parts might contain a “strength” value, describing its efficiency in recruiting RNA
polymerase under some standard environmental condition [12]. This leads to the second level of standards,
which describes parts in a computer-readable format such as the Resource Definition Language [13], so
that searching and organizing parts can be automated. Under such a framework, parts could be organized
by a defined ontology. The third level of standards applies to computational models. While there are
existing standard formats for representing biological models [14,15], synthetic biology models might require
additional information such as the DNA sequence or specific information about the parts that are needed
to physically construct the network.
Several issues in modeling for synthetic biology have to be addressed. One is that the models need to
support kinetic information as well as information for constructing the network. Second, due to the fact
that synthetic biology is a merger of multiple fields, a large number of analyses may be possible on
synthetic networks, ranging from dynamical systems analysis to analysis of the DNA sequence or statistics
on the part usage in the model. The software application presented in this work, TinkerCell, will address
these issues. While TinkerCell targets synthetic biology, it addresses several issues that are equally
applicable outside the field. These issues include support for third-party libraries, modular design of
networks, flexible modeling framework, and flexible visual formats.
TinkerCell is an improvement on a similar effort, Athena, by the same authors [16]. Athena addressed
issues such as modular design of networks and biological parts. However, the underlying design of Athena
was not as flexible as it was intended to be. For example, Athena was not able to support an ontology of
biological parts. Due to such limitations in the design, the project was completely restarted under a
different name.
Existing computational tools : Numerous software tools exist that allow construction and analyses of
models using scripts or visual interfaces. A comprehensive list can be found at www.sbml.org. Some of
these applications include Jarnac [17] , JDesigner [18] , CellDesigner [19] , BioTapestry [20] , PySCeS [21],
BioJADE [22], little-B [23], SynBioSS [24], ProMot [25–27], and Antimony [28]. Each of the applications
that have their respective advantages. For example, Jarnac and PySCeS are highly flexible due to their
programming interface. Little-B is similar, building on Lisp, but it supports modules in addition.
CellDesigner offers a plug-in interface, which has permitted the community to add new features.
BioTapestry has a simple visual depiction for genetic networks and genetic modules. BioJADE and
SynBioSS, being a synthetic biology applications, supports a parts database [29]. Antimony is a library
defining a text-based language for constructing biological modules and composing models using those
modules. ProMot is similar but also has a visual interface that supports modularity as well as using parts
to compose a circuit [26]. We considered that TinkerCell should, at the least, contain the qualities of each,
which include the flexibility of programming, plug-in support, database support, modularity, and ability to
construct genetic networks. However, the intent behind TinkerCell is not to create yet another modeling
application, but to create an application that can serve as a host to the algorithms, data, and ontologies
that the synthetic biology and the systems biology community can offer. Unlike most modeling
applications, TinkerCell does not impose a particular modeling method (e.g. differential equations), visual
representation, or a strict definition of a model.
Results and Discussion
The application named TinkerCell is a synthetic biology CAD tool for visually constructing and analyzing
biological networks. The visual interface itself does not have any analysis capabilities. The analyses are
performed by third-party C or C++ libraries and Python modules that interface with TinkerCell.
Therefore, TinkerCell can be thought of as a front-end to C and Python programs. The visual interface of
TinkerCell must remain as open as possible so that it can host a variety of third-party programs. This is
achieved by remaining oblivious to the meaning of a model. The meaning is given by the C and Python
programs that utilize the information stored in the model. This framework allows TinkerCell to remain
open to different modeling methods used by different C or Python programs (see Figure 5).
The visual side of TinkerCell provides the interface for drawing nodes and connections as well as
constructing modules and compartments (see Figure 1). Nodes represent physically distinct biological
components such as proteins or metabolites as well as regions of the DNA, such as promoter or coding
region. Connections refer to reactions such as catalysis, transcription, or translation, as well as other
relationships between nodes such as relative location on the DNA, i.e. upstream or downstream.
Compartments represent spatially separated regions such as cells or sub-cellular compartments. Modules
are networks with interfaces that can be connected with each other to form larger models. The visual
appearance is similar to cartoon diagrams that are used in text-book diagrams to explain pathways (see
Figure 2).
Within each part and connection, TinkerCell stores information pertaining to that component of the
model. A computational model is typically described by the variables in the system, the dynamics of the
system (e.g. differential equations), and the parameters and other functions used in the model; TinkerCell
takes a slightly different approach: the parameters and functions are stored within the components of the
model. For example, a traditional model of gene regulation might have a rate equation for transcription,
translation, and protein degradation that all use parameters defined in the model. In TinkerCell, the rate
equations belong with the transcription regulation connection, and parameters such as the promoter
efficiency belong with the parts used in the model. This allows a user to replace one of the parts in the
model, which would automatically result in changes to the rate equations or parameters. In a traditional
model setting, one would need to identify which parameters are associated with each of the replaced parts
and change them individually. Other information such as DNA sequence, annotation, authorship, or
experimental data are also stored within the components in the model.
TinkerCell serves as a drawing and information storage application; the task of analyzing the model is
handed to C and Python programs. For this reason, TinkerCell provides an extensive C and Python
Application Programming Interface (API), which allows third-party programs to access information in
TinkerCell models and perform various analyses. The API also provides a rich set of output functions,
allowing C and Python functions to fully integrate with TinkerCell’s visual interface. The motivation for
the separation of the visual interface and functionality is to allow users with programming experience to
add new functionality to TinkerCell. These new functions can then be shared among other users. Further,
existing C libraries or Python modules can also be integrated into TinkerCell. Thus, TinkerCell serves as a
host for programs that the community can contribute. Currently, it hosts a handful of C libraries such as
simulation and linear programming libraries, and a few Python modules, such as SciPy [30], PySCeS [21],
and NerworkX [31].
TinkerCell is designed to meet future standards in synthetic biology. We anticipate that one of the results
of standardization efforts in synthetic biology will be an organized ontology describing biological parts and
reactions. The set of parts and reactions available in TinkerCell are loaded from two Extensible Markup
Language (XML) files, thus keeping TinkerCell flexible so that it can cope with future standards regarding
part and connection ontology (see Figure 3).
In summary, there are three features by which TinkerCell is uniquely suitable as a CAD tool for synthetic
biology. One, TinkerCell can construct models from a catalog of parts that are obtained from an outside
source. The model dynamics are determined by the parts used in the model rather than parameters of the
model, as in traditional modeling. Second, networks can be modularized, allowing one user to build new
designs by utilizing existing ones. Being able to build upon the constructs from previous work is essential
for any engineering discipline. Third, TinkerCell can support a large number of functionality because it is
not restrictive to the modeling approach and has an extensive C and Python API, which has been
demonstrated to support functions ranging from simulations to sequence analysis. In addition to these
primary features, TinkerCell’s architecture and visual framework are kept as flexible and open as possible
in order to welcome contributions from the community.
TinkerCell is organized in layers (see Figure 4), with the bottom-most layer being a generic API for
constructing network drawing programs and the top-most layer being a scripting interface. TinkerCell is
extensible at each of the layers. There is an additional level of flexibility provided by the XML files that
load the ontology of parts and connections (see section ). The goal of this structure is to foster
contributions from the community.
The Core library
The TinkerCell “Core” library is a C++ library built using the Qt Toolkit 4.5.0 [32]. The Core library
contains the data structures and functions for drawing parts and connections and storing information
associated with those items (see Figure 5). It provides an API which can be used to build new network
drawing programs. The Core library also provides support for C functions and a generic console window,
which is currently used as a Python console but can later be used to support other languages as well. The
complete TinkerCell application is a collection of plug-ins that utilize the TinkerCell Core library in order
to provide the full set of features. Throughout this article, the name “TinkerCell” will refer to the
collection of plug-ins and the TinkerCell Core library, because the Core library alone has no modeling
capability. Documentation on the Core library is available at www.tinkerell.com.
Plug-ins and flexible modeling framework
TinkerCell uses the notion of plug-ins. Plug-ins are C++ programs that add new features to TinkerCell
without altering the existing code (see Figure 5), thus allowing programmers to extend TinkerCell. The
current set of plug-ins are responsible for storing parameters, rate equations, and other information
relevant to modeling as well as storing sequence and other details needed for physical construction of the
network. The plug-ins also provide the user interface for editing these values. The complete TinkerCell
application is composed of a collection of plug-ins that build on the TinkerCell Core library (see Figure 5).
Plug-ins are responsible for providing visual features such as scaling and coloring as well as modeling
features such as loading the catalog of parts and connections and inserting parts and connection from that
catalog. See section for details on how the tasks are divided between the Core library and the plug-ins.
An important role of plug-ins is to determine what information is stored by a TinkerCell model. For
example, the Numerical Attributes plug-in and the Reaction Rates plug-in, together, ascertain that a
TinkerCell model will contain sufficient information to generate the stoichiometry matrix and rate
equations for the model (see Figure 6), which are required to generate differential equation models or
stochastic models. Additional information, such as function definitions and events, are added by other
plug-ins. While the existing plug-ins focus on building models based on stoichiometry and rates, new
plug-ins can focus on other modeling approaches, such as rule-based or Boolean modeling. The current set
of plug-ins do not include such approaches, but the underlying structure of TinkerCell is not limited to any
one modeling approach.
C and Python interface
Plug-ins that are related to modeling are almost always supported by C or Python functions. For example,
the Numerical Attributes plug-in and the Reaction Rates plug-in enrich the model with sufficient
information to generate dynamic models, but the plug-in itself does not perform any analysis. Instead, each
plug-in provides an API containing functions such as “getParameter”, “getRate”, or “getStoichiometry”,
allowing third-party C and Python programs to obtain the necessary information needed to carry out a
simulation or other analyses. Almost every plug-in in TinkerCell exposes an API, creating a rich C and
Python API with over a hundred different functions. The collection of API functions allow C and Python
programs to get or set kinetic information such as parameters, rates, functions, and stoichiometries, or
change visual aspects such as positions, colors, and line widths (see Figure 19). The API also provides
ways for C and Python programs to bring up dialogs, asking the user for inputs (see Figure 16).
All C and Python programs automatically run on separate threads, allowing a user to continue working on
a model while a time consuming task is running. TinkerCell’s default simulators compile the model as a
separate C program, allowing the simulations to run at the speed of a compiled C program. This strategy is
used by the deterministic simulator as well as the stochastic simulator, where the speed gain is more visible.
The C API has been used to include the following C programs in TinkerCell: deterministic simulation and
steady state analysis using the Sundials library [33], stochastic simulation using a custom C library, flux
balance analysis using LPsolve [34], and some custom C programs. The Python API has been used to
include the SciPy module [30], PySCeS module [21], NerworkX module [31], a custom programs for
generating transcriptional rate formulas, and another custom program for generating a FASTA file with the
DNA sequences of the parts in the model.
A user may add new C functions to TinkerCell by placing the C dynamic library files in the TinkerCell’s
“Plugins/c” folder and new Python functions by adding the name of their script files in
“pythonscripts.txt”. The C programs can appear as buttons or menu items, and the Python programs will
automatically appear as buttons in the TinkerCell application, making integration of new function simple.
Modular design of networks
In TinkerCell, new models can be constructed by connecting existing networks to one another. Such
composable networks, or modules, are constructed by defining interfaces. A user may declare one or more
components of a module as interfaces. These interfaces can then be connected with one another, which
indicates that the respective components of the modules have been merged. For example, if a user wishes
to construct a cascade of phosphorylation cycles [35], then they may simply connect the kinase of one
module to the phosphorylated protein in the other module, which will merge the two. Merging two
molecular species means that the two visually presented species represent the same physical entity (see
Figure 7). The connections do not alter the modules themselves.
Genetic modules
Another way to connect two or more modules is by introducing new reactions between the interfaces. The
synthetic biology community is familiar with the notion of modules in the context of DNA. For example,
one module might be responsible for regulating a promoter, and the next module might be situated
downstream of the promoter, thus implying a regulatory relationship between the two modules. In
TinkerCell, this is achieved by connecting the promoter of the upstream module to the gene in the
downstream module (see Figure 8). This connection belongs to a special family of connections that
represents RNA polymerase activity along a DNA strand, known as “PoPS” (Polymerase Per Second [12])
in the synthetic biology community.
Modules as composite parts
The synthetic biology community is familiar with the notion of a “composite part”, or a biological part
that has been constructed by assembling other parts together [29]. TinkerCell can represent such an object
as a module (see Figure 9). Each sub-part inside the composite part retains its original set of attributes
and other information while the composite part can have its own family and set of attributes. The C and
Python API can be used to access the parameters, annotation, authorship, and other identification
numbers for each of the sub-parts as well as the composite part.
Support for standards
It is our anticipation that the growth in synthetic biology will result in a general agreement in the
community about what attributes are sufficient to define a biological part. For example, it might be
sufficient to state the sequence, binding sites, and RNA polymerase binding affinity to define a promoter
part; there will be a similar list of sufficient attributes for other biological parts. Further, ontologies or
other ways of organizing biological parts will become necessary when annotating a model. TinkerCell is
structured to support such an organized set of parts with attributes. Every item in TinkerCell belongs to a
“family”. The families themselves are defined in an XML file and are organized as a hierarchy. For
example, the family called “Transcription Factors” belongs under the family named “Proteins”. Each
family is defined with a set of attributes. For example, genes contain a “sequence” attribute. In addition to
sequence, promoters or Ribosomal binding sites contain a “strength” attribute, which is a number
describing the relative strength of the promoter or RBS. The families and their set of attributes are not
intended to be defined by TinkerCell; the hierarchy of parts is intended to be obtained from a database of
biological parts in future. Just as every part in TinkerCell model is identified with a family, so are
connections defined with a family. Examples of connection families are “Biochemical reaction”, “Binding
reaction”, and “Transcriptional regulation”. Each connection family also contains attributes; for example,
“Transcription regulation” contains parameters named “h”, the Hill coefficient, and “Kd”, the dissociation
constant. The connection families are also loaded from an XML file, hence they are not intended to be
defined by TinkerCell either.
Using ontology in models
The advantage of constructing models that also define the family of each item is that plug-ins or
third-party programs can utilize the fact that certain parts or connections will always have certain
parameters. An example is the “Hill equations” Python script, which automatically generates rate
equation using the fractional saturation model [36]. The script utilizes that fact that every “Transcription
regulation” connection contains a “Kd” and a “Hill” parameter, and it uses these parameters to
automatically generate the transcription rate equation. Another Python script included with TinkerCell
searches the RegulonDB database [37] for ribosomal binding sites, promoters, and terminators from E.coli
and automatically fill in appropriate attributes based on the type of part that is selected; for example,
when the script sees a promoter, it adds the sigma factor information to the part, and when it sees a
terminator, it adds information about whether or not it is a rho-dependent terminator. An example plug-in
that uses the family information is the DNA sequence viewer (see Figure 11), which assumes that every
item of the family “DNA” will contain an attribute called “sequence” and is able to present the
information visually. One can imagine other functions where features of the promoter, such as the
sigma-factor, may be used within the model to provide additional details, and the user can load different
promoters from a catalog of biological parts to test how the different promoters affect the network.
It should be noted that the families and their attributes are not defined within TinkerCell, so the
algorithms are general for any future ontology that the synthetic biology community will adopt. In
addition to the family information, each part and connection in TinkerCell contains its own annotation,
storing information such as authorship, references, and date. As with any other information in TinkerCell,
all of this information is accessible and editable from C and Python.
Standard visual formats
Standard visual formats, such as the standard symbols that are used to draw electronic circuits, allow
network diagrams to be unambiguous. While systems biology has made progress to standardize visual
representations of biological systems [38], such standards for synthetic biology are still in development [39].
TinkerCell has been designed so that it will be able to cope with a variety of visual standards or even
multiple visual standards. This is achieved by having a flexible visual representation. The visual
representation of proteins, genes, promoters, and the rest of the parts are stored as XML files. These files
are generated using a polygon drawing program that comes with TinkerCell (see Figure 12). The same file
format is used for arrow heads and decorators such as phosphorylation sites, which keeps visual
representations for those objects flexible as well.
In order to cope with a future visual standards, new files will be generated using the polygon drawing
program that match the prescribed visual standard.
Genetic networks
Since the majority of the current synthetic networks are genetic networks, TinkerCell gives special
consideration to them. TinkerCell provides three different ways for modeling genetic networks, allowing the
modeler to choose which is most suitable.
Fractional saturation models :
The first method of modeling gene regulatory networks is using the equilibrium assumption for
transcription factor binding [36]. Under this model, a single rate expression is generated that captures the
probability of the promoter being in an active state. This rate expression assumes that the transcription
factor binding and unbinding are at equlibrium. TinkerCell automatically generates the rate expressions
when a user connects transcription factors to a gene. See Figure 13.
Using parts to model genetic networks:
The second method of modeling gene regulatory networks involves the same equilibrium assumption
mentioned above. However, the entire gene is not represented as a single item; it is split into a set of
distinct parts (see Figure 14). Each part can be moved individually. The rate expression can be described
in terms of the promoter strength and ribosomal binding site strength, thus allowing a user to swap one
part with another, e.g. replace a weak promoter with a strong one. The rate expression remains defined in
terms of the parts that are directly upstream of the coding region. See Figure 14.
Explicitly defining intermediate steps:
A more elaborate way of describing gene regulatory networks is to define each reaction in the transcription
and translation process, including the movement of RNA polymerase across the gene [40]. Creating such a
model would be nearly impossible without some sort of automation, and TinkerCell provides a function for
automating this process (see section ). While such models can avoid the use of equilibrium assumptions,
simulation can be time-consuming due to the fact that each transcription and translation step is comprised
of multiple reactions. See Figure 15.
List of functions provided through the C and Python interface
While the visual side of TinkerCell provides the interface for constructing a model, the analyses are carried
out by C and Python functions. New C and Python functions may be added to TinkerCell by listing the
program names in a text file. Programs that are currently listed in those files provide various
functionalities, as described below.
Fast simulators
The default simulators use existing C libraries that perform deterministic and stochastic simulation. For
example, the Gillespie simulator uses a custom Gillespie algorithm C library available from
tinkercell.googlecode.com. The C library accepts a user-defined stoichiometry matrix and propensity
function. The Gillespie simulator in TinkerCell takes the stoichiometry matrix and reaction rates from the
TinkerCell model and generates the C code containing the stoichiometry matrix and propensity function.
This C code is compiled and linked against the existing Gillespie algorithm library. The compiled C
program performs the simulation and outputs the result to TinkerCell’s plot window. Therefore, the
simulation itself is performed by a compiled C program, which means that the simulation will be fast.
Conventional simulators interpret the rate equation string and construct an internal representation of the
equation, which is used to compute the rate value during every iteration; this is generally an order or
magnitude slower than the compiled program. The same idea is used by the deterministic simulation,
which uses the Sundials CVODE numerical integrator [33] to perform the simulation. One drawback is
that there is a short time delay when compiling the code, which may be more than the time for simulation
for simple networks. Therefore, the speed gain due to this strategy is only visible for larger networks.
However, this demonstrates how existing C libraries can be used without modification to create new
simulators for TinkerCell. The Tiny C Compiler [41] and GNU C Compiler [42] are used to perform the
compilation in windows and unix, respectively.
Further, the simulation programs use an function called “createInputWindow” that is provided by the API.
This function allows C programs to create simple input windows where the user can input parameters such
as the time for simulation or the type of simulation (see Figure 16). There are several such functions that
allow C and Python programs to interact with the user through visual interfaces.
Visual inputs and outputs for C and Python programs
While C and Python programs are generally expected to take command-line inputs and produce
command-line outputs, TinkerCell provides functions that allow C and Python functions to have more
interactive inputs and outputs. TinkerCell’s C and Python API contain functions for displaying dialogs or
input tables. The outputs from these dialog and tables are returned to the calling C or Python program.
The C or Python program can then use the information from the model and the inputs from the user to
perform some analyses. As an output, the C and Python programs can change the size or color of items in
the model, circle items in the model, or display numbers or strings next to items in the model. At the same
time, the programs may also print to the TinkerCell command-line window.
Flux balance analysis : The flux balance analysis is one example where a C program produces visual
outputs. This particular program uses a C++ plug-in to create a custom input window. The C++ plug-in
sets up the windows, tables, and buttons specifically for flux balance analysis. This window simply serves
as a user interface to a C program. The C program that performs flux balance analysis is less than 100
lines long. It receives input from the C++ plug-in and uses the LPSolve C library [34] to do the
optimization. The C program then changes the width of the reaction arcs according to the result from
LPSolve. The optimal fluxes are also displayed next to the reactions arcs.
Sensitivity analysis : The sensitivity analysis is yet another example of visual output (see Figure 19).
The senstivity converts the TinkerCell model into a PySCeS [21] model and uses PySCeS to perform the
analysis. The script then takes the PySCeS output and colors the reactions in the network according to
their control coefficients.
Accessing E.coli genetic parts through RegulonDB : RegulonDB [37] houses a large set of
promoters, transcription factor binding sites, and ribosomal binding sites for the E. coli K12 strain.
Through a Python script, a user can load sequences and other information such as promoter type into
TinkerCell models. The script provides the user with a visual interface for selecting the parts. The script
also limits the search by using known information. For example, if the transcription factor LacI is
repressing a promoter, then the script will show only those binding sites that are targeted by LacI (see
Figure 20), allowing a user to automatically generate the correct network using real parts. The Python
script is able to use the family information of objects in the model to identify whether it is a promoter,
RBS, coding region, or transcription factor. It would be impossible to search for an appropriate part with
this information in the model, which demonstrates how the meta-data is useful for database search.
Automated kinetics
One of TinkerCell’s objectives is to combine the appeal of visual network design with the flexibility of
programming. Automatic generation of kinetics is a good example where this objective is met. There are
three functions currently included with TinkerCell that fall in this category. First, the “Hill equation”
Python function automatically generates the fractional saturation model for transcription regulation based
on the activators and repressors of a promoter. Second, the “binding reactions” C program automatically
generates all the intermediate stages of a protein that form multiple complexes. Third, the “multiple step
process” function can automatically insert intermediate steps into any given reaction. For example, if the
conversion of one molecule to another requires several intermediate stages, this function can be used to
automatically generate those intermediates reactions. Gene regulatory networks are one area where this
function can have addition relevance.
Automatically generate multiple conformations of a protein: The automatic generation of
kinetics is a good example of how this objective is met. Consider a simple situation of two small proteins
binding to a larger protein. In addition to the three proteins, there are three other complexes. However,
the number of possible complexes grows exponentially with the number of binding proteins, thus modeling
every complex explicitly becomes impractical. Generally, a modeller may choose to ignore such details due
to the difficulty in modeling. TinkerCell offers a feature for automatically generating all necessary
combinations (see Figure 17). This feature is provided by a C function that recursively generates all the
intermediate states and reactions. Integrating the existing function into TinkerCell required adding code
that obtained “Binding reactions” in the set of items that the user has selected and passing the
stoichiometry for those reactions to the existing C function. The output from the C function is then used
to modify the TinkerCell model.
Automatically generate intermediate stages of a multi-step process: Another automated feature
is converting a single reaction into a multi-step reaction. This feature was inspired by the fact that
transcription can be understood as several individual reactions, where each reaction is catalyzed by RNA
polymerase. Modeling genetic networks in this manner can have significantly different outcomes in some
situations [40]. It would be impossible for a user to draw hundred of reactions for each transcriptional
process in a model. TinkerCell offers an automated function, again written in C, that will convert one
reaction into multiple reactions. The visual model remains unchanged, but the selected reactions will
represent multiple reactions even though only one will be visible (see Figure 18). While an alternative
approach might be delayed differential equations, this approach allows other details such as leaks in
transcription and different delays based of the type of process.
TinkerCell file format
TinkerCell stores the entire model as a single XML file, which contains both the model information as well
as the graphical information. All the graphical objects in TinkerCell are generated from XML files, and
therefore they can be saved as XML files. The model itself is stored as a set of components and
information associated with those components. The information associated with each component is a set of
tables containing the parameters, reaction rates, function definitions, events, DNA sequence, annotation,
and any other information pertaining to that component in the model. The file format is therefore just a
list of objects, their family information, and data tables associated with the objects. The datatables are
labeled as “parameters”, “reaction rates”, “text attributes”, and so on. The format is generic, which
reflects TinkerCell’s underlying structure.
Conclusion
We have described an application that combines the flexibility of programming with a visual interface as
well as provides the structure for supporting standards and exchange of information. The intent behind
TinkerCell is not to create yet another modeling application. TinkerCell is an application for bringing
together models, information, and algorithms. Thus, it serves a host by itself. The C and Python interface
have been demonstrated to be very versatile because simulation libraries as well as linear programming
libraries were easy to integrate. Similarly, various Python modules have been readily integrated as well.
Therefore, TinkerCell has the features to serve as a hub that can allow programmers, experimentalists,
modellers, and theoreticians to exchange models and information.
The modular modeling framework of TinkerCell can serve two purposes. The first is to aid in the
engineering process by allowing one modeler to use existing modules to design new networks. The second
purpose is that modeling with modules can be used to explore the possible implication of functional
modules in biology. It is an open question of whether a module’s functionality is retained when it is placed
in different situations [43]. There may be common themes behind modules where functionality is retained.
Answers to such questions will be highly relevant to synthetic biology, since the ability to construct one
system using another is a central theme in engineering. TinkerCell can serve as a platform for testing how
different modules behave and what types of modules are able to retain their functional identity. The
flexible modeling framework provides such experiments to be carried out at different levels of detail. For
example, some issues regarding modularity may not be visible when using fractional saturation models of
gene regulation, but they may be evident when the reactions are modeled explicitly. Since TinkerCell
provides different ways of modeling, it is suitable for studying such questions.
Future work
Efforts will be made in order to assure that the interface for constructing models as well as integrating new
programs is suitable for different types of users. For example, an expert in the field of modeling might wish
to see and edit all the details of the model, whereas another user may desire automated features. Similarly,
users may wish to contribute programs that may perform mathematical analyses or exchange information
with a database. TinkerCell is designed to meet all of these demands, but user inputs will decide what
changes need to be made.
Models in TinkerCell are constructed visually. While text-based modeling is supported through the
Antimony plug-in, it does not provide all the features that are available through visual model construction.
At present, we are adding a text-based model construction framework that will contain all the features of
the visual modeling framework. The syntax for the text-based framework will be kept flexible. With the
completion of this feature, users can build models using text-based and graphical approaches.
In addition to improving the interface, TinkerCell will remain active in standardization efforts for synthetic
biology, which may include standard ontologies or visual standards. While conversion to the de facto
standard file format in systems biology, the Systems Biology Markup Language (SBML) [14], is available in
TinkerCell through Antimony or PySCeS, this conversion will be improved in the near future by making
this a direct conversion as well as exporting and importing layout information.
The modular approach to modeling will be explored further by using it to construct small modules and
investigating the types of systems that can emerge by connecting simple modules in different ways. Other
efforts will be directed toward adding interfacing existing C and Python programs with TinkerCell in order
to add additional functionalities such as optimization or different types of simulations.
Acknowledgements
This work was partly funded by the National Science Foundation (Id 0527023- FIBR) and Microsoft’s
Computational Challenges in Synthetic Biology 2006 Award.
Division of labor between the Core library and the plug-ins
The Core library provides the following functionalities:
• Drawing of parts that are defined in a XML format
• Drawing of connections and saving connections to an XML file
• Selecting, inserting, and moving items on the canvas
• Undo and redo capabilities
• Memory management for parts and connections
• Loading C libraries as separate threads (i.e. parallel processing)
• Indexing variables in a model, allowing easy look-up
• Parsing math formulas using muparser library (muparser.sourceforge.net)
• Command window that plug-ins can use for command-based interaction
The plug-ins provide the following features:
Parts Tree Provides a window displaying all the parts listed in an XML file.
Connections Tree Provides a window displaying all the connections listed in an XML file. Each
connection is restricted to certain types of parts. For example, a “transcription regulation” can only
be made between a “transcription factor” and a “regulator” part.
Part Insertion Tool Monitors the Parts Tree and allows user to insert parts from the tree.
Connection Insertion Tool Monitors the Connections Tree and allows user to make permitted
connections.
Selection Tool Highlights selected items and handles a few other user interface details.
Copy Paste Tool Provides the copy, cut, and paste feature as well as aliasing and replacing a part’s
visual representation (see section ).
Name and Family Tool Displays the family information of items and allows users to change the family
of items.
Collision Detector Detects collision events and reports to other plug-ins. This information is used by
several other plug-ins to respond when user places one item adjacent to another.
Container Tool Allows user to drag items into a container or module (explained in section ). Also
displays the parameter window.
Plot Tool Provides the 2D graphing window that can handle multiple graphs. C and Python programs
can output to the graph window directly.
Module Tool Allowsconstructionofmoduleswithinterfacesthatcanbeconnected(explainedinsection)
Gene Regulatory Network Tool Provides various automated features that allows easier construction of
genetic networks. For example, when a user places a promoter upstream of a gene, the gene’s
transcription rates are automatically updated. Similarly, when a user connects a transcription factor
to a regulator, the kinetics are automatically generated.
Antimony Tool Uses libAntimony (antimony.sourceforge.net)
Sample Python scripts
Linear algebra operations on the Stoichiometry matrix
The following script gets the list of reactions that are selected by the user and generates a stoichiometry
matrix for just the selected reactions. It then uses SciPy to perform QR and LU factorization on the
stoichiometry matrix. Most of the output is not shown for reading clarity.
>>A = selectedItems()
>>N = stoichiometry(A)
[[-1. 0. 0. 0. 1. 0.]
[ 1. -1. 0. 0. 0. 0.]
[ 0. 1. -1. 0. 0. 1.]
[ 0. 0. 1. -1. 0. 0.]
[ 0. 0. 0. 1. -1. -1.]]
>>from scipy import linalg
>>print linalg.qr(M)
>>print linalg.lu(M)
Get all the part sequences in the model as a multi-FASTA file
The following script will find all the components in the model that belong to the family called “DNA”,
which is the root family for promoters, RBS, genes, and other parts that belong on the DNA. Then the
script will get the sequence for each part and print the sequence to the screen in FASTA format.
import pytc
A = pytc.itemsOfFamily(’DNA’);
names = pytc.getNames(A);
attribs = (’sequence’,);
seqs = pytc.getAllTextNamed(A,attribs);
n = len(seqs);
for i in range(0,n):
Getting annotation and sequence information about a module and its sub-components
The following script will find a module with a particular name and obtain all of its sub-parts. Then it will
loop through the sub-part and print annotation information and sequence for each sub-part. The part
which is being accessed in this script is the one shown in figure 9. Names of people in the output have been
replaced with “no name”, and some of the longer sequences have been truncated.
>>part = find("BBa_I0462")
>>print annotation(part)
(’no name’, ’12/04/2003’, ’luxR Protein Generator’, ’uri’, ’reference’)
>>print getTextAttribute(part,"format")
>>print getTextAttribute(part,"type")
>>subparts = getChildren(part)
>>for i in subparts: print getName(i) + " is a " + getFamily(i);
BBa_I0462_B0012 is a Terminator
BBa_I0462_B0010 is a Terminator
BBa_I0462_C0062 is a Coding
BBa_I0462_B0034 is a RBS
>>for i in subparts: print getName(i) + " : "; print annotation(i);
BBa_I0462_B0012 :
(’no name’, ’NA’, ’Transcription terminator for the E.coli RNA polymerase.’, ’uri’, ’reference’)
BBa_I0462_B0010 :
(’no name’, ’11/19/2003’, ’Transcriptional terminator consisting of a 64 bp stem-loop’, ’uri’, ’reference’)
BBa_I0462_C0062 :
(’no name’, ’2003’, ’luxR repressor/activator’, ’uri’, ’reference’)
BBa_I0462_B0034 :
(’no name’, ’2003’, ’RBS based on Elowitz repressilator’, ’uri’, ’reference’)
>>for i in subparts: print getName(i) + " : "; print getTextAttribute(i,"sequence");
BBa_I0462_B0012 :
tcacactggctcaccttcgggtgggcctttctgcgtttata
BBa_I0462_B0010 :
ccaggcatcaaataaaacgaaaggctcagtcgaaagactgggcctttcgttttatctgttgtttgtcggtgaacgctctc
BBa_I0462_C0062 :
aaagaggag ... ttctgcgtttata
BBa_I0462_B0034 :
aaagaggagaaa
>>print getParameter(subparts[3],"strength")