Tipping points in macroeconomic Agent-Based models
Stanislao Gualdi,1 Marco Tarzia,2 Francesco Zamponi,3 and Jean-Philippe Bouchaud4
1 Universit´e Pierre et Marie Curie - Paris 6, Laboratoire de Physique Th´eorique de la Mati`ere Condens´ee,
4, Place Jussieu, Tour 12, 75252 Paris Cedex 05, France and IRAMIS,
CEA-Saclay, 91191 Gif sur Yvette Cedex, France ∗
2 Universit´e Pierre et Marie Curie - Paris 6, Laboratoire de Physique Th´eorique de la Mati`ere Condens´ee,
4, Place Jussieu, Tour 12, 75252 Paris Cedex 05, France
3Laboratoire de Physique Th´eorique, E´cole Normale Sup´erieure,
UMR 8549 CNRS, 24 Rue Lhomond, 75231 Paris Cedex 05, France
4CFM, 23 rue de l’Universit´e, 75007 Paris, France,
and Ecole Polytechnique, 91120 Palaiseau, France.
The aim of this work is to explore the possible types of phenomena that simple macroeconomic
Agent-Based models (ABM) can reproduce. We propose a methodology, inspired by statistical
physics, that characterizes a model through its “phase diagram” in the space of parameters. Our
first motivation is to understand the large macro-economic fluctuations observed in the “Mark I”
ABM devised by D. Delli Gatti and collaborators. In this regard, our major finding is the generic
existenceofaphase transitionbetweena“goodeconomy”whereunemploymentislow, anda“bad
economy” where unemployment is high. We then introduce a simpler framework that allows us to
showthatthistransitionisrobustagainstmanymodificationsofthemodel,andisgenericallyinduced
by an asymmetry between the rate of hiring and the rate of firing of the firms. The unemployment
level remains small until a tipping point, beyond which the economy suddenly collapses. If the
parametersaresuchthatthesystemisclosetothistransition,anysmallfluctuationisamplifiedas
the system jumps between the two equilibria. We have explored several natural extensions of the
model. One is to introduce a bankruptcy threshold, limiting the firms maximum level of debt-to-
salesratio. Thisleadstoarichphasediagramwith,inparticular,aregionwhereacute endogenous
crises occur, during which the unemployment rate shoots up before the economy can recover. We
alsointroducesimplewagepolicies. Thisleadstoinflation(inthe“good”phase)ordeflation(inthe
“bad” phase), but leaves the overall phase diagram of the model essentially unchanged. We have
also explored the effect of simple monetary policies that attempt to contain rising unemployment
and defang crises. We end the paper with general comments on the usefulness of ABMs to model
macroeconomic phenomena, in particular in view of the time needed to reach a steady state that
raises the issue of ergodicity in these models.
It is human nature to think wisely and to act absurdly – Anatole France
∗Electronicaddress: stanislao.gualdi@gmail.com
]NG.nif-q[
4v9135.7031:viXra
I. Introduction 3
A. From micro-rules to macro-behaviour 3
B. A methodological manifesto 3
C. Outline, results and limitations of the paper 4
II. A phase transition in “Mark I” 5
A. Description of the model in a nutshell 5
B. State variables 6
C. Update rules for prices and production 6
D. Debt and loans 6
E. Spending budget and bankruptcy 7
F. Numerical results: a phase transition 7
III. Hybrid ABM’s: the minimal “Mark 0” model 8
A. Set-up of the model 9
B. Numerical results & Phase diagram 12
C. Qualitative interpretation. Position of the phase boundaries 14
1. The EC phase 15
2. The role of β 16
3. The role of f 16
D. Intermediate conclusion 16
IV. Extension of Mark 0: Wage Update 17
A. Results: variable wages and the appearance of inflation 18
B. Other extensions and policy experiments 19
V. Analytical description 19
A. Stability of the high employment phase 21
B. Oscillations in the high employment phase 23
C. The “representative firm” approximation 24
VI. Summary, Conclusion 24
Acknowledgements 26
A. Pseudo-code for Mark I+ 27
1. Notations 27
2. Classes 27
B. Pseudo-code of Mark 0 35
C. Perturbative solution of the schematic model 37
1. Stationary distribution at first order in γ 37
2. Perturbative analysis of the oscillations 38
a. Stationary state 39
b. Oscillation around the stationary state – a simple approximation 39
c. Oscillation around the stationary state – perturbative computation 39
References 40
I. INTRODUCTION
A. From micro-rules to macro-behaviour
Inferring the behaviour of large assemblies from the behaviour of its elementary constituents is arguably one of
the most important problems in a host of different disciplines: physics, material sciences, biology, computer sciences,
sociology and, of course, economics and finance. It is also a notoriously hard problem. Statistical physics has
developed in the last 150 years essentially to understand this micro-macro link. Clearly, when interactions are absent
or small enough, the system as a whole merely reflects the properties of individual entities. This is the canvas of
traditionalmacro-economicapproaches. Economicagentsareassumedtobeidentical,non-interacting,rationalagents,
an idealization known as the “Representative Agent” (RA). In this framework, micro and macro trivially coincide.
However, we know (in particular from physics) that discreteness, heterogeneities and/or interactions can lead to
totallyunexpectedphenomena. Thinkforexampleofsuper-conductivityorsuper-fluidity1: beforetheirexperimental
discovery, it was simply beyond human imagination that individual electrons or atoms could “conspire” to create a
collective state that can flow without friction. Micro and macro behaviour not only do not coincide in general, but
genuinely surprising behaviour can emerge through aggregation. From the point of view of economic theory, this is
interesting, because financial and economic history is strewn with bubbles, crashes, crises and upheavals of all sorts.
These are very hard to fathom within a Representative Agent framework [2], within which crises would require large
aggregate shocks, when in fact small local shocks can trigger large systemic effects when heterogeneities, interactions
and network effects are taken into account [3–6]. The need to include these effects has spurred a large activity in
“Agent-Based models” (ABMs) [7–9]. These models need numerical simulations, but are extremely versatile because
any possible behavioural rules, interactions, heterogeneities can be taken into account.
Infact,thesemodelsaresoversatilethattheysufferfromthe“wildernessofhighdimensionalspaces”(paraphrasing
Sims [10]). The number of parameters and explicit or implicit choices of behavioural rules is so large (∼10 or more,
even in the simplest models, see below) that the results of the model may appear unreliable and arbitrary, and the
calibration of the parameters is an hopeless (or highly unstable) task. Mainstream RA “Dynamic Stochastic General
Equilibrium” models (DSGE), on the other hand, are simple enough to lead to closed form analytical results, with
simple narratives and well-trodden calibration avenues [11]. In spite of their unrealistic character, these models
appear to perform satisfactorily in ‘normal’ times, when fluctuations are small. However, they become deeply flawed
in times of economic instability [12], suggesting different assumptions are needed to understand what is observed in
reality. Butevenafterthe2008crisis,thesetraditionalmodelsarestillfavouredbymosteconomists,bothinacademia
and in institutional and professional circles. ABMs are seen at best as a promising research direction and at worst as
an unwarranted “black box” (see [13] for an enlightening discussion on the debate between traditional DSGE models
and ABMs, and [14–17] for further insights).
B. A methodological manifesto
Atthisstage,itseemstousthatsomeclarificationsareindeedneeded,concerningboththeobjectivesandmethod-
ology of Agent-Based models. ABMs do indeed suffer from the wilderness of high dimensional spaces, and some
guidance is necessary to put these models on a firm footing. In this respect, statistical physics offers a key concept:
the phase diagram in parameter space [18]. A classic example, shown in Fig. 1, is the phase diagram of usual sub-
stances as a function of two parameters, here temperature and pressure. The generic picture is that the number
of distinct phases is usually small (e.g. three in the example of Fig. 1: solid, liquid, gas). Well within each phase,
the properties are qualitatively similar and small changes of parameters have a small effect. Macroscopic (aggregate)
propertiesdonotfluctuateanymoreforverylargesystemsandarerobustagainstchangesofmicroscopicdetails. This
is the “nice” scenario, where the dynamics of the system can be described in terms of a small number of macroscopic
(aggregate) variables, with some effective parameters that encode the microscopic details. But other scenarios are of
course possible; for example, if one sits close to the boundary between two phases, fluctuations can remain large even
for large systems and small changes of parameters can radically change the macroscopic behaviour of the system.
There may be mechanisms naturally driving the system close to criticality (like in Self Organized Criticality [19]), or,
alternatively, situations in which whole phases are critical, like for “spin-glasses” [20].
In any case, the very first step in exploring the properties of an Agent-Based model should be, we believe, to
identify the different possible phases in parameter space and the location of the phase boundaries. In order to do
1 Seee.g. Ref.[1]foranhistoryofthediscoveryofsuper-fluidityandalistofreferences.
this, numerical simulations turn out to be very helpful [21, 22]: aggregate behaviour usually quickly sets in, even for
small sizes. Some parameters usually turn out to be crucial, while others are found to play little role. This is useful
toestablishaqualitativephenomenologyofthemodel–whatkindofbehaviourcanthemodelreproduce,whichbasic
mechanisms are important, which effects are potentially missing? This first, qualitative step allows one to unveil
the “skeleton” of the ABM. Simplified models that retain most of the phenomenology can then be constructed and
perhapssolvedanalytically,enhancingtheunderstandingoftheimportantmechanisms,andprovidingsomenarrative
to make sense of the observed effects. In our opinion, calibration of an ABM using real data can only start to make
sense after this initial qualitative investigation is in full command – which is in itself not trivial when the number
of parameters is large. The phase diagram of the model allows one to restrict the region of parameters that lead to
“reasonable” outcomes (see for example the discussion in [23, 24]).
C. Outline, results and limitations of the paper
Theaimofthispaperistoputtheseideasintopracticeinthecontextofawell-studiedmacroeconomicAgent-Based
model (called “Mark I” below), devised by Delli Gatti and collaborators [25, 26]. This model is at the core of the
European project “CRISIS”, which partly justifies our attempt to shed some theoretical light on this framework.2 In
the first part of the paper, we briefly recall the main ingredients of the model and show that as one increases the
baseline interest rate, there is a phase transition between a “good” state of the economy, where unemployment is
low and a “bad” state of the economy where production and demand collapse. In the second part of the paper, we
study the phase diagram of a highly simplified version of Mark I, dubbed ‘Mark 0’ that aims at capturing the main
drivers of this phase transition. The model is a “hybrid” macro/ABM model where firms are treated individually
but households are only described in aggregate. Mark 0 does not include any exogeneous shock; crises can only be of
endogeneous origin. We show that the most important parameter in this regard is the asymmetry between the firms’
propensity to hire (when business is good) or to fire (when business is bad). In Mark I, this asymmetry is induced by
the reaction of firms to the level of interest rates, but other plausible mechanisms would lead to the same effect. The
simplestversionofthemodelisamenabletoananalytictreatmentandexhibitsa“tippingpoint”(i.e. adiscontinuous
transition) between high employment and high unemployment. When a bankruptcy condition is introduced (in the
form of a maximum level of debt-to-sales ratio), the model reveals an extremely rich phenomenology: the “good”
phaseoftheeconomyisfurthersplitintothreedistinctphases: oneoffullemployment,asecondonewithasubstantial
levelofresidualunemployment, andathird, highlyinterestingregion, whereendogeneouscrisesappear. Wefindthat
both the amount of credit available to firms (which in our model sets the bankrupcty threshold), and the way default
costsareabsorbedbythesystem, arethemostimportantaspectsinshapingthequalitativebehavioroftheeconomy.
Finally, we allow wages to adapt (whereas they are kept fixed in Mark I) and allow inflation or deflation to set in.
Still, the overall shape of the phase diagram is not modified. We investigate further enhancements of the models, in
particular simple policy experiments. Open questions and future directions, in particular concerning macroeconomic
ABMs in general, are discussed in our final section.
Before embarking to the core of our results, we want to clearly state what our ambition and objectives are, and
what they are not. We do claim that the methodology proposed here is interesting and general, and could help
improvingtherelevanceofmacroeconomicABMs. Wedobelievethatlargeaggregatevolatilityandcrises(inparticular
those appearing in Mark I) can be understood through the lens of instabilities and phase transitions, as exemplified
by our highly stylized Mark 0 model. We are also convinced that simple “skeleton” ABMs (for which most of
the phenomenology can be fully dissected) must be developed and compared with traditional DSGE models before
embarking into full-fledged models of the economy. On the other hand, we do not claim that our basic Mark 0
framework is necessarily the best starting point. Mark 0 was primarily set up as a simplification of Mark I. Still,
we find that Mark 0 leads to a surprisingly rich and to some extent realistic set of possible behaviours, including
business cycles and crises, inflation, policy experiments, etc. However, we do not wish to claim that Mark 0 is able to
reproduce all the known empirical stylized facts and could well be in contradiction with some of them3. In view of
the simplicity of the model, this has to be expected. But we believe that Mark 0 can serve as a useful building block
in the quest of a more comprehensive ABM, as more and more effects are progressively incorporated, in a controlled
2 seewww.crisis-economics.eu
3 Theideaofbuildingmathematicalmodelsofrealitythatreproducesomephenomena,butmightevenbeincontradictionwithothers,is
attheheartofthedevelopmentofphysics. Mostprobably,itsusewasintroducedintheHellenisticperiod[27]. Astrikingexample[27]
is Archimedes’ On Floating Bodies. In the first of the two books, in fact, Archimedes provides a mathematical proof of the sphericity
ofEarth(assumedtobeliquidandatrest). However,inthesecondbook,heassumesthesurfaceofEarthtobeflatforthepurposeof
describingotherphenomena,forwhichthesphericityofEarthisirrelevant.
FIG. 1: A typical “phase diagram”, here the solid-liquid-gas phases in the temperature-pressure plane. Far from phase
transitions,withinagivenphase,thebehaviourofthesystemisqualitativelysimilarforallvaluesoftheparameters. Closeto
phase boundaries, on the other hand, small changes of parameters can lead to dramatic macroscopic changes.
manner, to the model. Even if Mark 0 turns out to be little more than a methodological exercice, we hope that the
ABM community (and perhaps beyond) will find it inspiring.
To conclude this (long) introduction, let us insist that all the claims made in this paper only refer to the studied
models,butdonotnecessarilyapplytoeconomicreality. Iffact,ourcentralpointisthatamodelhastobeunderstood
inside-out before even trying to match any empirical fact.
II. A PHASE TRANSITION IN “MARK I”
A. Description of the model in a nutshell
The Mark I family of agent-based models was proposed by Delli Gatti and collaborators as a family of simple
stylized macroeconomic models [25, 26]. Note that several other macroeconomic Agent-Based models have been put
forth in the recent years, see [28–33]. Mark I is particularly interesting because large fluctuations in unemployment
and output seem to persist in the stationary state (a feature in fact shared by many ABMs cited above).
The Mark I economy [25] is made up of a set of firms, households, firms owners and a bank. Firms produce a
certain quantity of a single (and not storable) good, proportional to the number of their employees, that is sold at a
time-dependent and firm-dependent prices. Firms pay identical time-independent wages. When the cash owned by a
firm is not enough to pay the wages, it asks banks for a loan. The bank provides loans to the firms at an interest rate
that depends on the financial fragility of the firm. Households provide workforce in exchange of a salary and want
to spend a fixed fraction of their savings (or wealth). The owners of the firms do not work but receive dividends if
the firms make profits. Firms are adaptive, in the sense that they continuously update their production (i.e. they
hire/fire workers) and their prices, in an attempt to match their production with the demand of goods issued by the
households. They also choose how much extra loan they want to take on, as a function of the offered interest rate.
This last feature, combined with the price and production update rules, will turn out to be crucial in the dynamics
of the model.
TheabovedescriptiondefinesthebasicstructureoftheMarkIfamily, butitisofcoursetotallyinsufficienttocode
the model, since many additional choices have to be made, leading to several different possible implementations of
the model. Here we will use as a baseline model one of the simplest implementation of Mark I, whose description can
be found in [34]; the total number of parameters in this version is 10 (but some parameters are actually implicitly
fixed from the beginning). We have recoded this basic version and also a slightly different version that we call “Mark
I+”, whichdiffersonminordetails(somethatwewillspecifybelow)butalsoononemajoraspect: ourversionofthe
model strictly conserves the amount of money in circulation, i.e. the money in the bank + total firm assets + total
households wealth (here savings), in order to avoid – at this stage – any effect due to uncontrolled money creation.
A detailed pseudo-code of Mark I+ is provided in Appendix A.
B. State variables
Inshort(seeAppendixAforacompletedescription),thedynamicevolutionofthemodelisdefinedbythefollowing
statevariables. Thestateofeachfirmi=1···N isspecifiedbyitspricep (t),thesalaryitoffersW (t),itsproduction
Y (t), its target production YT(t), its demand D (t), its liquidity L (t), its total debt DT(t). Moreover, each firm
is owned by a household and has a list of employees that is dynamically updated. The state of each household
a=1···N is specified by its wealth (in the form of savings) S (t) and by the firm for which it works (if any).
C. Update rules for prices and production
Amongallthemicro-rulesthatanyAgent-Basedmodelhastopostulate,someseemtobemorecrucialthanothers.
An important item in Mark I is the behavioural rule for firms adaptation to their economic environment. Instead
of the standard, infinite horizon, profit optimizing firm framework (that is both unrealistic and intractable), Mark I
postulates a heuristic rule for production Y (t) and price p (t) update, which reads as follows:
i i i i i y i
i i i i i p i
i i i i i y i
i i i i i p i
where D (t) is the total demand for the goods produced by firm i at time t, and
p (t)D (t)
istheaveragepriceofsoldgoodsattimet,ξ (t)aU[0,1]randomvariable,independentacrossfirmsandacrosstimes,
and γ ,γ two parameters in [0,1]. The quantity YT(t) is the target production at time t, not necessarily the realized
one, asdescribedbelow. Theseheuristicrulescanbeinterpretedasaplausibletˆatonnementprocessofthefirms, that
attempt to guess their correct production level and price based on the information on the last time step. In spirit,
each unit time step might correspond to a quarter, so the order of magnitude of the γ parameters should be a few
percent. Note that in the version of Mark I that we consider, wages are fixed to a constant value W (t) ≡ 1, for all
times and all firms.
Asweshallseelater, theadaptiveprice/productionadjustmentsdescribedinEq. (1)leadstotwostableattractors
(full employment and full unemployment). Which of the two is be reached by the dynamics depends mainly on the
levelofasymmetrybetweenanupwardanddownwardproductionadjustments. InEq. (1),theproductionadjustment
dependsonasingleparameterγ andinthiscasethesystemevolvestowardsafullemploymentstateintheabsenceof
anyotherconstraint. However,asitwillbecomeclearinthefollowingsection,financialconstraintsonloansmaylead
to an effective “weakening” of the upward adjustment, possibly driving the dynamics towards the full unemployment
state. Aslongassuchasymmetriesbetweenupwardanddownwardproductionadjustmentsexist(togetherwithsome
noise in the price dynamics), the scenario described above and in the following sections is very general and in fact do
not depend on details of the update process.
D. Debt and loans
The model further assumes linear productivity, hence the target production corresponds to a target workforce
YT(t)/α, whereαisaconstantcoefficientthatcanalwaysbesettounity(gainsinproductivityarenotconsideredat
this stage). The financial need of the firm is max[0,YT(t)W (t)−L (t)], where L (t) is the cash available. The total
current debt of the firm is DT(t). The financial fragility of the firm (cid:96) (t) is defined in Mark I as the ratio of debt over
cash. The offered rate by the banks for the loan is given by:
whereρ isthebaseline(centralbank)interestrate,Gisanincreasingfunction(takentobeG((cid:96))=1+tanh((cid:96))inthe
reference Mark I and G((cid:96))=1+ln(1+(cid:96)) in Mark I+), and ξ(cid:48) another noise term drawn from a uniform distribution
U[0,1]. Dependingontherateoffered, firmsdecidetotakethefullloantheyneedoronlyafractionF(ρ)ofit, where
F ≤1 is a decreasing function of ρ, called “credit contraction”. For example, in the reference Mark I, F(ρ≤5%)=1
and F(ρ > 5%) = 0.8. We have played with the choice of the two functions F,G and the phase transition reported
below is in fact robust whenever these functions are reasonable. In Mark I+, we chose a continuous function, such as
to avoid built in discontinuities:4
if x>10%.
The important feature here is that when F < 1, the firm does not have enough money to hire the target workforce
YT(t) and is therefore obliged to hire less, or even to start firing in order to match its financial constraints. This
financial constraint therefore induces an asymmetry in the hiring/firing process: when firms are indebted, hiring will
be slowed down by the cost of further loans. As we will see later, this asymmetry is responsible for an abrupt change
in the steady state of the economy.
E. Spending budget and bankruptcy
Firms pay salaries to workers and households determine their budget as a fraction c (constant in time and across
households) of their total wealth (including the latest salary). Each household then selects M firms at random and
sorts them according to their price; it then buys all it can buy from each firm sequentially, from the lower price to
the highest price5. The budget left-over is added to the savings. Each firm sells a quantity D (t) ≤ Y (t), compute
its profits (that includes interests paid on debt), and updates its cash and debt accordingly. Moreover, each firm
pays back to the bank a fraction τ of its total debt DT(t). It also pays dividends to the firm owners if profits are
positive. Firms with negative liquidity L (t)<0 go bankrupt. In Mark I+, the cost of the bankruptcy (i.e. −L (t))
is spread over healthy firms and on households. Once a firm is bankrupt it is re-initialized in the next time step with
theowner’smoney, toafirmwithapriceandproductionequaltotheircorrespondingaveragevaluesatthatmoment
in time, and zero debt (see Appendix A for more precise statements).
F. Numerical results: a phase transition
When exploring the phase space of Mark I, it soon becomes clear that the baseline interest rate ρ plays a major
role. In order not to mix different effects, we remove altogether the noise term ξ in Eq. (3) that affects the actual
rate offered to the firms. We find that as long as ρ is smaller than a certain threshold ρ , firms are on average below
the credit contraction threshold and always manage to have enough loans to pay wages. In this case the economy is
stableandafterfew(∼100)timestepsreachesastationarystatewheretheunemploymentrateislow. Ifontheother
hand the baseline interest rate ρ exceeds a critical value ρ , firms cannot afford to take as much loans as they would
need to hire (or keep) the desired amount of workers. Surprisingly, this induces a sudden, catastrophic breakdown of
the economy. Production collapses to very small values and unemployment sky-rockets. This transition between two
states of the economy takes place in both the reference Mark I and in the modified Mark I+; as we shall show in the
next section, this transition is actually generic and occurs in simplified models as well. Note in particular that ρ is
different from the value at which F(x) starts decreasing.
The data we show in Fig. 2 corresponds to Mark I+ with parameters γ = γ = 0.1 and M = 3 (see Appendix A
for the general parameter setting of the model). While the qualitative behaviour of the model is robust, the details of
the transition may change with other parameter settings. For example, smaller values of γ ,γ lead to lower critical
thresholdsρ (aswellassmallervaluesofM)andtolongerequilibrationtimes(T scalesapproximatelyas1/γ for
ρ <ρ ). Increasing the size of the economy only affects the magnitude of the fluctuations within one phase leaving
theessentialfeaturesofthetransitionunchanged. Interestingly,althoughitisnotclearfromFig.2,themodelexhibits
oscillatorypatternsoftheemploymentrate. Thepresenceoftheseoscillationscanbeseeninthefrequencydomainof
theemploymentratetimeseries(notshownhere), whichisessentiallycharacterizedbyawhitenoisepowerspectrum
4 Notehoweverthatthearbitrarythresholds(5%and10%)inEq. (4)areoflittleimportanceandonlyaffectthepreciselocationofthe
phasetransition.
5 Inthissense,thegoodmarketisnotefficientsincethehouseholddemandisnotnecessarilysatisfiedwhenM issmall. Thejobmarket
instead, though not efficient due to the presence of unvoluntarely unemployment, is characterized by perfect information since all the
workerscancontactallthefirmsuntilalltheopenpositionsarefilled.
T 0.8 0.89
10 1 u 5000 5250 5500
0.8 0.4 0.01
0.6 u u - - N N F F = = 1 1 0 0 0 00
R - NF = 1000
5000 5250 5500
1 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5 4.0 0 2000 4000 6000 8000 10000
FIG. 2: Left: Average unemployment rate u as a function of the interest rate ρ for two system sizes (with N = 10N in
both cases). The average is over 100000 time steps discarding the first 50000 time steps. The phase transition at ρ =2.1%
is of first order with u jumping discontinuously from small values to 1 (intermediate values obtained for ρ ∈[2.1%,3.1%] are
only due to a much longer equilibration time near the critical point). Note that in the bottom graph we show averages for
T = 50000 regardless of ρ while an estimate of the time needed to reach the steady state as a function of ρ is plotted in
logarithmic scale in the top graph. In the bottom graph we also show the average value of the asymmetry measure R (see
main text) for N =1000. As one can see R is decreasing with the interest rate up to a point where the asymmetry is strong
enough to drive the economy into the high unemployment phase. Right: Two trajectories of the unemployment rate with
N =1000 at ρ =1.9% and ρ =2.5%.
with a well defined peak at intermediate frequencies. All these effects will become clearer within the reduced model
described in the next section.
Anticipating the results of the next section, we have characterized, as a function of ρ , the asymmetry ratio R that
characterizes how firms react to the need to hire or to fire. More precisely, we compute the ratio between the target
number of job creations (resp. destructions) – as a reaction to excess demand (or supply) in the previous time step
– to the realized number of hires (fires) after financial constraints are met. At each time step we can then extract
the average target-to-realized ratios for firms in excess supply and demand respectively. The ratio R (averaged over
time) between these two numbers is a proxy of the asymmetry with which firms react to the need to hire or fire. It is
clear that increasing ρ hobbles the capacity of firms to hire when they need to, and therefore decreases the ratio R,
as seen in Fig. 2, which suggests that the employment collapse is related to this ratio. The results of the next section
will fully confirm this scenario.
To sum up, our most salient finding is that Mark I (or Mark I+) has essentially two stationary states, with a first
order (discontinuous) transition line separating the two. If the parameters are such that the system lies close to this
critical line, then any small modulation of these parameters – such as the noise term that appears in Eq. (3) – will
be amplified by the proximity of the transition, and lead to interesting boom/bust oscillations, of the kind originally
observed in Mark I [34], and perhaps of economic relevance. The question, of course, is how generic this scenario is.
We will now show, by studying much simplified versions of Mark I, that this transition is generic, and can indeed be
inducedbytheasymmetrybetweenhiringandfiring. Wewillthenprogressivelyenrichourwatered-downmodel(call
“Mark 0” below) and see how the qualitative picture that we propose is affected by additional features.
III. HYBRID ABM’S: THE MINIMAL “MARK 0” MODEL
Moving away from the RA framework, Agent-Based Modeling bites the bullet and attempts to represent in details
alltheindividualcomponentsoftheeconomy(as,forexample,in[28,29]). Thismighthoweverbecounter-productive,
at least in the research stage we are still in: keeping too many details is not only computer-time consuming, it may
also hobble the understanding of the effects that ABMs attempt to capture. It may well be that some sectors of
the economy can be adequately represented in terms of aggregate variables, while discreteness, heterogeneities and
interactions are crucial in other sectors. In our attempt to simplify Mark I, we posit that the whole household sector
canberepresentedbyaggregatevariables: totalwealth(againentirelyintheformofsavings)S(t),totalincomewage
W(t) and total consumption budget C (t) (which, as we will emphasize below, is in general larger than the actual
consumption C(t)). We also remove the banking sector and treat the loans in the simplest possible way – see below.
While the interest rate is zero in the simplest version, the incentive to hire/fire provided by the interest rate, that
was at play in Mark I, will be encoded in a phenomenological way in the update rule for production. The firms,
on the other hand, are kept as individual entities (but the above simplifications will allow us to simulate very large
economies, with N =100000 firms or more).
A. Set-up of the model
The minimal version of the Mark 0 model is defined as follows. The salient features are:
• There are N firms in total and µN households, µ > 1.6 Each firm i = 1···N pays a salary W (t) and
produces output Y (t) by means of a one-to-one technology that uses only labor as an input. Productivity is
chosen to be constant in time and fixed to α = 1. We therefore neglect any productivity shocks in our model;
interestingly, crises (when they occur) will be of endogeneous origin. With α = 1, Y (t) is simply equal to the
number of employees of firm i. Hence, the employment rate ε(t) and unemployment rate u(t) are:
1 (cid:88)
• Households are described by their total accumulated savings S(t) (which at this stage are always non-negative)
and by their total wage income (cid:80) W (t)Y (t). At each time step, they set a total consumption budget7
which is distributed among firms using an intensity of choice model [36]. The demand of goods for firm i is
therefore:
where β is the price sensitivity parameter determining an exponential dependence of households demand in the
price offered by the firm; β =0 corresponds to complete price insensitivity and β →∞ means that households
select only the firm with the lowest price.8 The normalization is such that C (t)= (cid:80) p (t)D (t), as it should
be.
• Firms are described by their price p (t), their salary W (t), and their production Y (t).
– For simplicity, we fix the salary W (t)≡1 – an extension that includes wage dynamics is discussed below.
– For the price, we keep the Mark I price update rule (1), with the average production-weighted price:
p (t)Y (t)
p(t)= i i i . (8)
Note that this price update rule only makes sense if firms anticipate that households are price sensitive,
i.e. if β > 0, which we will assume in the following. Still, the dynamics of the model as defined remains
perfectlywell-behavedwhenβ =0,evenifinthislimit,therationalbehaviouroffirmswouldbetoincrease
their price indefinitely and produce very little.
6 Actually, households are treated as a unique aggregate variable, therefore µ is not a relevant parameter: one can see that its value is
irrelevant and one can always set µ=1 for simplicity. Yet it is useful to think that the aggregate variables represents in an effective
wayacertainnumberofindividualhouseholds,hencewekeeptheparameterµexplicitinthefollowing.
7 Ofcourse,onecouldchoosedifferentc’sforthefractionofsavingsandthefractionofwagesdevotedtospending,oranyothernon-linear
spendingschedule.
8 In this sense, as long as β >0 firms compete on prices. An averaged scatter plot of firms profits versus the price offered (not shown
here)indeeddisplaysawell-shapedconcaveprofitfunction.
– For production, we assume that firms are more careful with the way they deal with their workforce than
posited in Mark I. Independently of their price level, firms try to adjust their production to the observed
demand. Whenfirmswanttohire,theyopenpositionsonthejobmarket;weassumethatthetotalnumber
of unemployed workers, which is µN u(t), is distributed among firms according to an intensity of choice
of model which depends on both the wage offered by the firm9 and on the same parameter β as it is for
Eq. (7); therefore the maximum number of available workers to each firm is:
W (t)Y (t)
w(t)= i i i . (10)
In summary, we have
 i i + i i i
i i i i i p i
 i i − i i
i i i i i p i
whereη ∈[0,1]arewhatwedenoteasthehiring/firingpropensityofthefirms. Notethatthisruleensuresthat
there is no overshoot in production; furthermore the max in the second rule is not necessary mathematically
when η ≤ 1, but we kept it for clarity. Each row of Eq. (11) specifies an adjustment mechanism for output
and the individual price. According to this mechanism, there is an increase in output if excess demand is
positive, and a decrease in output if excess demand is negative, i.e. if there is excess supply. The propensities
to hire/fire η can be seen as the sensitivity of the output change to excess demand/supply. These sensitivities
are generally less than unity (i.e. the firm is not adjusting output one to one with excess demand/supply),
because there are hiring (firing) costs of different kinds (real costs, time-to-hire, administrative constraints,
inertia,etc.). Firingcostsgenerate“labourhoarding”,whilehiringcostspreventstheeconomytoadaptquickly
to excess demand. Hiring and firing costs may not be identical. Therefore the sensitivity to excess demand (or
hiring propensity η ) may be different from the sensitivity to excess supply (or firing propensity η ). Note
that because of the min{D (t)−Y (t),µu(t)} term in Eq. (11), the total production of the model is bounded
by Y (t) = µN ε(t) ≤ µN , as it should be because ε(t) = 1 corresponds to full employment and in that
(cid:80)i i F F
case Y (t) = µN . However, in the following we will sometimes (when stated) remove this bound for a
better mathematical tractability. This amounts to replace min{D (t)−Y (t),µu(t)}→D (t)−Y (t) in Eq. (11)
(it corresponds to choosing µ = ∞). Removing the bound corresponds to a situation where labor resources
can freely exceed the working population, such that the high employment phase translates into an exponential
explosion of the economy output, which is of course unrealistic.
• Accounting of firms and households. Each firm i=1···N pays a total wage bill W (t)Y (t) and has total sales
p (t)min{Y (t),D (t)}. Moreover,iftheprofitofthefirmP (t)=p (t)min{Y (t),D (t)}−W (t)Y (t)ispositive,
i i i i i i i i i
the firm pays a dividend δ×P (t) to the households.10
Note that if D > Y , the demand for goods of firm i cannot be immediately satisfied, and we assume that in
thiscasehouseholdsinvoluntarilysaveanddelaytheirconsumptionuntilthenextround(butstillusingEq. (6)
with the correctly updated savings). The actual consumption C(t) (limited by production) is therefore given
by:
i i i B i i
9 Sinceatthisstagewagesareequalamongfirmsthedistributionisuniform. Belowweallowfirmstoupdatetheirwage. Ahigherwage
willthentranslateintheavailabilityofalargershareofunemployedworkersinthehiringprocess.
10 Wehavealsoconsideredthecasewherefirmsdistributeafractionδ oftheprofitsplusthereserves. Seebelow.
Insummary,theaccountingequationsfortotalaccumulatedsavingsS(t)andfirms’netdepositsE (t)–possibly
negative – are the following (here θ(x≥0)=1 and θ(x<0)=0 is the Heaviside step function):
i i i i i i
i i i i i (13)
(cid:88) (cid:88)
where I(t) is the total income of the households (wages plus dividends) and C(t) is the money actually spent
by households, which is in general less than their consumption budget C (t). This corresponds to unvoluntarly
households savings whenever production is below demand.
(cid:80) (cid:80)
NotethattotalmoneyS(t)+ E (t)isclearlyconservedsince∆S(t)=−∆[ E (t)]forcash-flowconsistency
in a closed economy.
• Bank accounting. As mentioned above, we allow the firms’ net deposits to become negative, which we interpret
as the firm being in need of an immediate extra line of credit. Depending on the financial fragility of the firm
(definedbelow),thebankmayormaynotagreetorestructurethedebtandprovidethisextracredit. Ifitdoes,
our accounting procedure can be rephrased in the following way. In case of negative net deposits E (t)<0 the
bank provides the firm with the extra liquidity needed to pay the wages. The equity of the firm is therefore
equal to its deposits when positive, and is close to zero, but still equal to what it needs, when the net deposits
is negative. However, when the firm becomes too indebted, the bank will not provide the liquidity needed to
pay the wages, leading to negative equity and bankruptcy. From an accounting perspective the matrix balance
sheet of our model can be summarized as follows. We assume the bank’s equity to be constant in time (let it be
0 for simplicity). The bank holds at the beginning of the simulation a quantity M of currency (issued by the
central bank, not modeled here) and therefore has assets equal to M throughout the simulation.
Households have deposits S > 0 while firms have either deposits (if E > 0) or liabilities (if E < 0). Defining
E+ = (cid:80) max(E ,0) and E− =− (cid:80) min(E ,0), the balance sheet of the banking system is therefore:
which means that the total amount of deposits X at any time is equal to initial deposits plus deposits created
by the banking system when issuing loans. In this setting reserves M at the bank are kept unchanged when
loans are issued (as outlined for example in [35]) and deposits increase (decrease) only when loans are issued
(repaid). Correspondingly, the fundamental time-invariant macroeconomic accounting identity
is obeyed and amounts to our money conserving equation.
• Financial fragility and bankruptcy resolution. We measure the indebtement level of a firm through the ratio of
(negative) net deposits over payroll (equal, to a good approximation, to total sales):
whichweinterpretasameasureoffinancialfragility. (Implicitly,thisassumesthatthe“realassets”ofthefirms
– not modeled here – are proportional to total payroll). If Φ (t)<Θ, i.e. when the level of debt is not too high
comparedtothesizeofthecompany,thefirmisallowedtocontinueitsactivity. IfontheotherhandΦ (t)≥Θ,
the firm defaults.
When firms exceeds the bankrupcty threshold the default resolution we choose is the following. We first define
the set H of financially “healthy” firms that are potential buyers for the defaulted firm i. The condition for
this is that E (t)>max(−E (t),ΘY (t)W (t)), meaning that the firm j has a strongly positive net deposits and
can take on the debt of i without going under water.
– With probability 1−f, f ∈ [0,1] being a new parameter, a firm j is chosen at random in H ; j transfers
to i the needed money to pay the debts, hence E → E +E (remember that E is negative) and E → 0
after the transaction. Furthermore, we set p = p and W = W , and the firm i keeps its employees and
its current level of production.
– With probability f, or whenever H = ∅, the firm i is not bailed out, goes bankrupt and its production
is set to zero. In this case its debt E (t) < 0 is transferred to the households’ accumulated savings,
S(t)→S(t)+E (t) in order to keep total money fixed11.
Hence,whenf islarge,mostofthebankruptciesloadweighsonthehouseholds,reducingtheirsavings,whereas
whenf issmall,bankruptciestendtofragilisethefirmsector. (TheMarkI+modeldiscussedabovecorresponds
tof =1/2.) Itisimportanttostressthatchangingthedetailsofthebankruptcyruleswhilemaintainingproper
money conservation does not modify the main qualitative message of our paper. The important point here is
that the default costs are transferred to households and firms (to ensure money conservation) and have some
repercussion on demand (through households accumulated savings) or on firms fragility (through firms net
deposits). This can create default avalanches and crises.
• Firm revival. A defaulted firm has a finite probability ϕ per unit time to get revived; when it does so its
price is fixed to p (t) = p(t), its workforce is the available workforce, Y (t) = µu(t), and its net deposits is the
amount needed to pay the wage bill, E (t)=W (t)Y (t). This liquidity is provided by the households, therefore
S(t)→S(t)−W (t)Y (t) when the firm is revived, again to ensure total money conservation. Note that during
this bankrupt/revival phase, the households’ savings S(t) might become negative: if this happens, then we set
S(t) = 0 and the debt of households is spread over the firms with positive liquidity12, proportionally to their
current value of E , again in order to ensure total money conservation and S(t)≥0.
The above description contains all the details of the definition of the model, however for full clarification a pseudo-
code of this minimal Mark 0 model is provided in Appendix B (together with the extensions discussed in Sec. IV).
The total number of relevant parameter of Mark 0 is equal to 9: c,β,γ ,η ,δ,Θ,ϕ,f plus the number of firms N .
However, most of these parameters end up playing very little role in determining the qualitative, long-time aggregate
behaviour of the model. Only two quantities play an important role, and turn out to be:
1. theratioR=η /η betweenη andη ,whichismeanttocaptureanyasymmetryinthehiring/firingprocess.
As noted above (see Fig. 2), a rising interest rate endogeneously leads to such a hiring/firing asymmetry in
Mark I and Mark I+. But other sources of asymmetry can also be envisaged: for example, overreaction of the
firms to bad news and under-reaction to good news, leading to an over-prudent hiring schedule. Capital inertia
can also cause a delay in hiring, whereas firing can be immediate.
2. the default threshold Θ, which controls the ratio between total debt and total circulating currency. In our
minimal setting with no banks, it plays the role of a money multiplier. Monetary policy within Mark 0 boils
down to setting of the maximum acceptable debt to payroll ratio Θ.
The other parameters change the phase diagram of the model quantitatively but not qualitatively. In order of
importance, the most notable ones are f (the redistribution of debt over households or firms upon bankruptcies) and
β (the sensitivity to price) – see below.
B. Numerical results & Phase diagram
When running numerical simulations of Mark 0, we find (Fig. 3) that after a transient that can be surprisingly
long13, the unemployment rate settles around a well defined average value, with some fluctuations (except in some
cases where endogenous crises appear, see below).
We find the same qualitative phase diagram for all parameters β,γ ,ϕ,δ,f. For a given set of parameters, there
is a critical value R of R = η /η separating a full unemployment phase for R < R from a phase where some of
the labour force is employed for R>R . Here R ≤1 is a value that depends on all other parameters. In Sec. V we
11 One can interpret this by imagining the presence of a bank that collects the deposits of households and lend money to firms, at zero
interestrate. Ifafirmgoesbankrupt,thebankloosesitsloan,whichmeansthatitsdeposits(thehouseholds’savings)arereduced.
12 Again,thiscanbeinterpretedbyimaginingthatthefirmswithpositiveliquiditydeposittheircashinthebank. Whenthebankneeds
to provide a loan to a revived firm, or loses money due to a bankrupt, it prefers to take this money from households’ deposits, but if
thesearenotavailable,thenittakesthemoneyfromfirms’deposits.
13 Thinkofonetimestepasaquarter,whichseemsreasonableforthefrequencyofpriceandworkforceupdates. Theequilibrationtimeis
then20yearsorso,orevenmuchlongerasfortheconvergencetothe‘bad’stateinMarkI,seeFig.2. Albeitstudyingaverydifferent
ABM,similarlylongtimescalescanbeobservedintheplotsshownin[33]. Seealsothediscussionintheconclusiononthispoint
N = 104, γ = 0.01
full employment
N = 104, γ = 0.1
0.4 N = 103, γ = 0.01 0.8
N = 103, γ = 0.1
0.3 0.6 full employment
η + u full unemployment
0.1 full unemployment 0.2
0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000
FIG. 3: (Left) Phase diagram of the basic Mark 0 model with β = 2 and Θ = ∞. There are two distinct phases separated
by a critical line which depends on the parameters γ and β. The dashed lines correspond to the analytical result in Eq. (29)
which agrees well with numerical simulations for small values of η ,η where the perturbative method of Section III-C and
AppendixC1isjustified. Forsimplicityweshowhereonlyresultswithβ =2butEq.(29)isingoodagreementwithnumerical
resultsuptoβ ∼4. (Right)Twotypicaltrajectoriesofu(t)inthetwophases(R=5/3inthefullemploymentlineandR=3/5
in the full unemployment line). The other parameters are: N =10000, γ =0.1, Θ=∞, ϕ=0.1, β =2, c=0.5. δ =0.02
and ϕ=1.
explain how the phase transition at R and other features of the model can be understood by means of approximate
analytical calculations.
The transition is particularly abrupt in the limit Θ → ∞ (no indebtment limit), in which the unemployment rate
jumps all the way from 0 to 1 at R , see Fig. 3. The figure shows that indeed only the ratio R = η /η is relevant,
theactualvaluesofη onlychangethetimescaleoverwhichtheproductionfluctuates. Moreover,thephasediagram
is almost independent of N , which confirms that we are effectively in a limit where the number of firms can be
considered to be very large14.
Interestingly, for finite values of Θ, the phase diagram is more complex and shown in Fig. 4. Besides the full
unemployment phase (region 1, which always prevails when R<R , we find three other different regions for R>R ,
that actually survive many extensions of Mark 0 that we have considered (see section IV):
• AtverylargeΘ(region4,“FE”),thefullemploymentphasepersists,althoughasmallvalueoftheunemployment
appears in a narrow region around R ≈ R . The width of this region of small unemployment vanishes as Θ
increases.
• At very low Θ (region 2, “RU”), one finds persistent “Residual Unemployment” in a large region of R > R .
TheunemploymentratedecreasescontinuouslywithR andΘbutreachesvaluesaslargeas0.5closetoR=R
(see Fig. 4, Bottom Left).
• A very interesting endogenous crises phase appears for intermediate values of Θ (region 3, “EC”), where the
unemploymentrateismostofthetimeveryclosetozero,butendogenouscrisesoccur,whichmanifestthemselves
assharpspikesoftheunemploymentthatcanreachquitelargevalues. Thesespikesappearalmostperiodically,
and their frequency and amplitude depend on some of the other parameters of the model, in particular f and
β, see Fig. 4, Bottom Right.
The phase diagram in the plane R−Θ is presented in Fig. 4, together with typical time series of the unemployment
rate, for each of the four phases.
We also show in Fig. 5 a trajectory of u(t) in the good phase of the economy (FE, region 4) and zoom in on
the small fluctuations of u(t) around its average value. These fluctuations reveal a clear periodic pattern in the low
unemployment phase; recall that we had already observed these oscillations within Mark I+. Oscillating patterns
14 Actually, in the specific case Θ=∞, even NF =1 provides a similar phase diagram, although the critical Rc slightly depends on NF
whenthisnumberissmall
4 - FE 1 - FU
8 0.8 2 - RU
decreasing f 3 - EC
increasing β 4 - FE
Θ 1 - FU 3 - EC u
increasing employment
0 1 2 3 4 0 10 20 30 40
R time / 1000
1 f = 1.0 -- β = 0
Θ = 0.5 f = 1.0 -- β = 1
0.8 Θ Θ = = 1 1 . . 0 5 0.4 f = 0.9 -- β = 0
0.3 f = 0.5 -- β = 0
0 1 2 3 4 0 10 20 30 40
R time / 1000
FIG. 4: (Top Left) Phase diagram of the basic Mark 0 model in the R−Θ plane, here with N = 5000, c = 0.5, γ = 0.05,
δ =0.02, ϕ=0.1. Here we keep the ’extreme’ cases β =0 and f =1 since the dependence of phase boundaries on β and on
f (here reported schematically) is shown in detail in Fig. IIIC3. The other parameters are irrelevant. There are four distinct
phases separated by critical lines. (Top Right) Typical time series of u(t) for each of the phases. (Bottom Left) Stationary
value of the unemployment rate as a function of R for different values of Θ in phase 2. (Bottom Right) Typical trajectories of
u(t) in the Endogenous Crisis phase (region 3) for different values of f and β, the other parameters are kept fixed. Note that
increasing β or decreasing f lead to small crisis amplitudes.
(perhapsrelatedtotheso-calledbusinesscycle)oftenappearinsimplifiedfirstorderdifferentialmodelsofthemacro-
economy;oneofthebestknownexamplesisprovidedbytheGoodwinmodel[37,38],whichisakintoapredator-prey
model where these oscillations are well known. But these oscillations do also show up in other ABMs, see [31, 33].
Note that these fluctuations/oscillations around equilibrium do not regress when the number of firms get larger. We
have simulated the model with N = 10000 firms and N = 1000000 firms with nearly identical amplitude and
frequencies for these fluctuations. We will offer some insight on the origin of these oscillations in Sec. V. Note that
we do not expect such oscillations to remain so regular in the real economy, in particular because exogeneous shocks
are absent from our model and because we assume that all firms are characterised by the very same adaptation time
scale γ .
C. Qualitative interpretation. Position of the phase boundaries
An important quantity that characterizes the behavior of the model in the “good” phase of the economy (i.e. for
R>R ) is the global leverage (debt-to-equity) ratio k:
2000 2050 2100
0 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 2000 2025 2050 2075 2100
FIG. 5: Left: Typical time evolution of the unemployment u, starting from an initial condition u = 0.5, for the basic Mark
0 model in the Full Employment phase (region 4). The trajectory leading to a “good” state of the economy is obtained for
η =0.5 and η =0.3. Note the clear endogenous “business cycles” that appear in that case. These runs are performed with
N =10000 firms, c=0.5, β =2, γ =0.1, ϕ=0.1, Θ=5, δ=0.02.
Right: Oscillations for the average price and the average accumulated savings per household (each shifted by their average
values for clarity) for the same run as in the Left figure. When prices are low, savings increase, while when prices are high,
savings decrease. See Sec. V for a more detailed description.
where, due to money conservation, k ≤1. The good state of the economy is characterized by a large average value of
k reflecting the natural tendency of the economy towards indebtment, the level of which being controlled in Mark 0
by the parameter Θ (the average value of k increases with Θ).15 Interestingly, in regions 2-RU and 4-FE k(t) reaches
a stationary state, whereas in region 3-EC its dynamics is characterized by an intermittent behavior corresponding
to the appearance of endogenous crises during which indebtment is released through bankruptcies.
1. The EC phase
This phenomenology can be qualitatively explained by the dynamics of the distribution of firms fragilities Φ . For
R > R , firms overemploy and make on average negative profits, which means that the Φ ’s are on average drifting
towards the bankruptcy threshold Θ.
• When Θ is small enough (i.e. in region 2-RU) the drift is continuously compensated by the reinitialization of
bankrupted firms and the fragility distribution reaches a stationary state.
• For intermediate values of Θ, however, (i.e. in region 3-EC) the number of bankruptcies per unit of time
becomesintermittent. Firmsfragilitiesnowcollectivelydrifttowardsthebankruptcythreshold; assoonasfirms
with higher fragilities reach Θ, bankruptcies start to occur. Since for f large enough, bankruptcies are mostly
financed by households, demand starts falling which has the effect of increasing further the negative drift. This
feedback mechanism gives rise to an avalanche of bankruptcies after which most of the firms are reinitialized
with positive liquidities. This mechanism has the effect of synchronizing the fragilities of the firms, therefore
leading to cyclical waves of bankruptcies, corresponding to the unemployment spikes showed in Fig. 4. The
distribution of firms fragilities does not reach a stationary state in this case.
• When Θ(cid:29)1 (i.e. region 4-FE), households are wealthy enough to absorb the bankruptcy cost without pushing
the demand of goods below the maximum level of production reached by the economy.16 Hence, the economy
settles down to a full employment phase with a constant (small) rate of bankruptcies.
15 Inafurtherversionofthemodel,acentralbankwillbeinchargeofcontrollingk throughapropermonetarypolicy.
16 TheamountofmoneycirculatingintheeconomyincreaseswithΘandforR>Rc itislargelychannelledtohouseholdssavingssince
firmshaveonaveragenegativeliquidities.
Theaboveinterpretationissupportedbyasimpleone-dimensionalrandomwalkmodelforthefirmsassets,withadrift
that slef-consistently depends on the number of firms that fail. This highly simplified model accurately reproduces
the above phenomenology, and is amenable to a full analytical solution, which will be published separately.
TheexistenceoftheECphaseisagenuinelysurprisingoutcomeofthemodel, whichwasnotputbyhandfromthe
outset (see our discussion in the first lines of the Introduction section above). Crises occur there not as a result of
sweeping parameters through a phase transition (as is the case, we argued, of Mark I with a time dependent interest
rate) but purely as a result of the own dynamics of the system.
2. The role of β
The dependence of the phase boundaries on the different parameters is in general quite intuitive. The dependence
ofaggregatevariablesonβ,forexample,isinteresting: everythingelsebeingkeptequal,wefindthatincreasingβ (i.e.
increasing the price selectivity of buyers), increases the level of unemployment (see inset of Fig. 6) and the amplitude
ofthefluctuationsaroundtheaveragevalue(asimilareffectwasnotedin[29]). Increasingγ increasesthedispersion
of prices around the average value and is thus similar to increasing β.
Increasing β has also, within the present setting of Mark 0, some counter-intuitive effects: it increases both the
average price compared to wages and the profits of firms, hence stabilizing the FE phase and shifting its boundary
withECtolowervaluesofΘandR (seeFig.6fortheamplitudeofregion3-ECasafunctionofβ. Thiseffectcanbe
understood by considering the demand-production gap G =D −Y as a function of the price difference δp =p −p¯.
For a fixed value of G the rules for price and production updates are independent of β; however, the response of
the demand to a price change is stronger for higher values of β: for small values of δp one finds approximately
G ≈ −C(β)δp , where C(β) > 0 is increasing with β. As a consequence, the absolute value of the gap, |G | for a
given value of |δp | is on average increasing with β. Therefore, the total amount of unsold goods max[Y −D ,0]
and households accumulated savings S also increase with β: households involuntarily save more when they are more
selective on prices. An increased amount of savings is in turn responsible for the average price increase while the
households’ higher wealth expands the FE region by shifting its boundary to lower values of Θ. Note, however, the
effectofβ ontheaveragepriceisnumericallyverysmallanddependssensitivelyonthepreciseconsumptionrule. For
example, if we insist that households fully spend their consumption budget C (t) by looking for available products
at a higher price (as in Mark I), then the above effect disappears (see Section V).
3. The role of f
A potentially more relevant discussion concerns the effect of the bankruptcies on the financial health of the firm
sector. Decreasing f (i.e. the financial load taken up by households when bankruptcies occur) also stabilize, as
expected, the full employment phase. Such a stabilization can also be achieved by distributing a fraction δ+ of the
profit plus the total positive liquidity of the firms (instead of a fraction δ of the profits only), which has the obvious
effect of supporting the demand. In fact, we find that as soon as f ≤ 0.81 or δ+ ≥ 0.25, the Endogenous Crisis
phase disappears and is replaced by a continuous cross-over between the Residual Unemployment phase and the Full
Employment phase (see Fig. 6).
D. Intermediate conclusion
The main message of the present section is that in spite of many simplifications, and across a broad range of
parameters, the phase transition observed in Mark I as a function of the baseline interest rate is present in Mark 0
as well. We find that these macroeconomic ABMs generically display two very different phases – high demand/low
unemployment vs. low demand/high unemployment, with a boundary between the two that is essentially controlled
by the asymmetry between the hiring and firing propensity of the firms (compare Figs. 2 & 3).
Moreover, in the Mark 0 model there is an additional splitting of the low unemployment phase in several regions
characterized by a different dynamical behaviour of the unemployment rate, depending on the level of debt firms can
accumulatebeforebeingforcedintobankruptcy. Wefindinparticularanintermediatedebtregionwhereendogenous
crisesappear,characterizedbyacuteunemploymentspikes. ThisEndogenousCrisisphasedisappearswhenhouseholds
are spared from the financial load of bankruptcies and/or when capital does not accumulate within firms, but is
transferred to households through dividends. Clearly, these different phases will coexist if the model parameters
themselves evolve with time, which one should expect in a more realistic version of the model.
10 region RU → EC 0.5 β = 0 10 0.4 region RU → EC
region EC → FE 0.4 β = 4 0.3 f f = = 1 0 . . 0 9 region EC → FE
8 u 0.3 β = 8 8 u0.2 f = 0.8
6 0 6 0 1 2 Θ 3 4 5
Θ 0 1 2 3 4 5 Θ
0 2 4 6 8 10 0.8 0.85 0.9 0.95 1
FIG. 6: Phase boundary location Θ as a function of the price sensitivity β (left) and of the debt share parameter f (right).
Circles correspond to the location of the boundary between regions 2-RU and 3-EC while squares correspond to the boundary
between regions 3-EC and 4-FE. In the inset of both figures we plot the average unemployment rate as a function of Θ for
differentvaluesofβ andf. Forf ≤0.81region4-ECdisappearsandtheaveragevalueoftheunemploymentcontinuouslygoes
to 0 without the appearance of endogenous crises. Increasing β shrinks the amplitude of region 3-EC which however remains
finite for β (cid:29) 1. As a criterion for being in region 3-EC we require that the amplitude of the crises max(u)−min(u) stays
above 5%. Parameters are: N =5000, R=3 (η =0.1), δ=0.02, ϕ=0.1, γ =0.05.
We now turn to the first extension of Mark 0 allowing for a wage dynamics that lead to long term inflation or
deflation, absent in the above version of the model. Finally, several other extensions of the model will be briefly
discussed and presented in a separate publication.
IV. EXTENSION OF MARK 0: WAGE UPDATE
Asemphasizedabove,theMarkI+andMark0modelsinvestigateduptonowbothrevealagenericphasetransition
betweena“good”anda“bad”stateoftheeconomy. However,manyfeaturesareclearlymissingtomakethesemodels
convincing – setting up a full-blown, realistic macroeconomic Agent-Based Model is of course a long and thorny
endeavour which is precisely what we want to avoid at this stage, focusing instead on simple mechanisms. Still, it
is interesting to progressively enrich these simplified models not only to test for robustness of our phase diagram but
also to investigate new effects that are of economic significance. We consider here wage dynamics, which is obviously
an important ingredient in reality. Wage dynamics leads to some relevant effects, in particular the appearance of
inflation. WagedynamicsisindeedanitemmissingfromboththebasicMark0andMarkImodelsconsideredabove,
which assume fixed wages across time and across firms. Clearly, the ability to modulate the wages is complementary
to deciding whether to hire or to fire, and should play a central role in the trajectory of the economy as well as in
determining inflation rates.
Introducing wages in Mark 0 again involves a number of arbitrary assumptions and choices. Here, we follow (in
spirit)thechoicesmadeinMarkIforpriceandproductionupdate,andproposethatateachtimestepfirmiupdates
its wage as:
i i w i P (t) >0
i i w i P (t) <0
where u = 1−ε is the unemployment rate and γ a certain parameter; P (t) = min(D (t),Y (t))p (t)−W (t)Y (t)
w i i i i i i
is the profit of the firm at time t and ξ(cid:48)(t) an independent U[0,1] random variable. If WT(t+1) is such that the
profit of firm i at time t with this amount of wages would have been negative, W (t+1) is chosen to be exactly at
the equilibrium point where P =0, hence W (t+1)=min(D (t),Y (t))p (t)/Y (t); otherwise W (t+1)=WT(t+1).
i i i i i i i i
The above rules are intuitive: if a firm makes a profit and it has a large demand for its good, it will increase the
pay of its workers. The pay rise is expected to be larger if unemployment is low (i.e. if ε is large) because pressure
8 0.8 3 - EC 0
6 1 - FU inflation 0.6 -0.2
Θ deflation u 0 5 10
decreasing γ
2 3 - EC alternating inflation / deflation 0.2
2 - RU null inflation
0 increasing employment 0
0 1 2 3 4 0 5 10 15
R time / 1000
FIG.7: (Left)PhasediagramintheR−ΘplaneoftheextendedMark0modelwithwageupdatewithγ =γ . Theparameters
of the basic model are the same as in Fig. 4: N = 5000, c = 0.5, γ = 0.05, δ = 0.02, ϕ = 0.1, f = 1, β = 0. As for the
basicmodel,therearefourdistinctphasesseparatedbycriticallines. WageupdatebringsininflationintheFullEmployment
phase,anddeflationinthefullunemploymentphase. Endogenouscrisesarecharacterizedbyalternatingcyclesofinflationand
deflation. Interestingly, we find that the location of phase boundaries is in this case almost untouched by changes in both β
and f; the other parameters are irrelevant. Note that the wage update strongly stabilizes the full employment phase. (Right)
Atypicaltrajectoryofu(t)foreachofthephases. Intheinset,thepricedynamicsisshown,displayinginflationanddeflation.
on salaries is high. Conversely, if the firm makes a loss and has a low demand for its good, it will reduce the wages.
This reduction is larger when unemployment is high because pressure on salaries is low. In all other cases, wages are
not updated.
When a firm is revived from bankruptcy (with probability ϕ per unit time), its wage level is set to the production
weighted average wage of all firms in activity.
The parameters γ allow us to simulate different price/wage update timescales. In the following we set γ =0.05
and γ =zγ with z ∈[0,1]. The case z =0 clearly corresponds to removing completely the wage update rule, such
that the basic version of Mark 0 is recovered. The extended version of Mark 0 that we consider below is therefore
characterized by single additional parameter γ =zγ , describing the frequency of wage updates.
A. Results: variable wages and the appearance of inflation
In our money conserving toy economies17, a stationary inflation rate different from zero is possible as long as the
ratio p(t)/W(t) fluctuates around a steady value. In absence of wage update, we have a fixed W ≡1 and inflation is
therefore impossible. The main effect induced by wage dynamics is therefore the possibility of inflation.
Using the wage update rules defined below, we found that the average inflation rate depends on parameters such
as the households propensity to consume c and the price/wage adjustment parameters γ . Most interestingly, we
observe a strong dependence of the inflation rate upon the bankruptcy threshold Θ, with large Θ’s triggering high
inflation and low Θ’s corresponding to zero inflation. For intermediate Θ’s, periods of inflation and deflation may
alternate and the model displays interesting instabilities.
Wenowanalyzetheinfluenceofwageadjustmentsonthephasetransitionsdiscussedintheprevioussections. The
phase diagram for z =1 (γ =γ ) is reported in Fig. 7. The phenomenology that we find is again very similar to the
simple Mark 0 without wage update, except for inflation. The most interesting effect is the appearance of inflation
in the “good” phases of the economy, and deflation in the “bad” phases, as shown in Fig. 7. When Θ (cid:29) 1, we find
againafirstordercriticalboundaryatR=R thatseparatesahighunemploymentphase(withdeflation)fromalow
unemployment phase (with inflation). For R>R we see again two additional phases: “EC”, with endogenous crises
and, correspondingly, alternating periods of inflation and deflation but stable prices on the long run, and “RU”, for
small Θ, where there is no inflation but a substantial residual unemployment rate (see Fig. 7).
17 Recallthatthephysicalmoneyisconservedinthemodel,butvirtualmoneycreationisstillpossiblethroughfirms’indebtement.
The appearance of endogenous crises is consistent with what discussed in section IIIB and is related to situations
in which the debt-to-savings ratio k(t) grows faster than prices. From this point of view, increasing γ allows firms
to better adapt wages (and thus prices) and to absorb the indebtment through inflation; region EC indeed shrinks
when increasing γ . Note that relating the parameters γ to the flexibility of the labor and goods markets is not
straightforward. In this sense, it would be instead useful to study the effects of asymmetric upward/downward wage
andpriceflexibilities(forexample bydefiningdifferent γ± )inorderto understand whetherimprovingtheflexibility
of the labor and goods markets destabilizes the economy [40–42]. If, however, one considers the ratio z = γ /γ as
an indicator of wages flexibility (relative to prices flexibility), our results suggests that higher labor flexibility has a
stabilizing effect.
We also observe that the oscillatory pattern found for the basic model persists as long as γ (cid:28)γ , i.e. when wage
updates are much less frequent that price updates. The power spectrum of the model for R > R and Θ (cid:29) 1 is
still characterized by the appearance of a peak (roughly corresponding to a period of 7 time steps). Interestingly,
we find that upon increasing the ratio z, the peak in the frequency spectrum disappears but not in a monotonous
fashion;intermediatevaluesofz giverisetoevenmorepronouncedoscillationsthanforz =0,beforetheseoscillations
disappear for z >z ≈0.25.
In conclusion, the comparison between Figs. 7 and 4 demonstrates the robustness of our phase diagram against
changes; introducing wages is a rather drastic modification since it allows inflation to set in, but still does not affect
the phase transition at R , nor the overall topology of the phase diagram, which confirms its relevance. Interestingly,
inflation is present in the good phases of the economy and deflation in the bad phases. Our analytical understanding
of these effects is however still poor; we feel it would be important to bolster the above numerical results by solving
simpler “toy models” as we do for the basic Mark 0 (see section V and Appendix C1).
B. Other extensions and policy experiments
One of the final goal of our study is to have a prototype framework where one is able to run meaningful policy
experiments. In order to do that the model described so far is lacking a number of important ingredients, namely
a central bank exogenously setting interest rates level and the amount of money in circulation. This is the project
on which we are currently pursuing, with encouraging results [43]. Still, even within the simplistic framework of
Mark 0, one can envisage an interesting prototype policy experiment which consists in allowing the “central bank”
to temporarily increase the bankruptcy threshold Θ in times of high unemployment. Fig. 8 shows an example of
this: the economy is, in its normal functioning mode, in the EC (region 3) of the phase diagram, with R = 2 and
(say) Θ=2. This leads in general to a rather low unemployment rate u but, as repeatedly emphasized above, this is
interrupted by acute endogenous crises. The central bank then decides that whenever u exceeds 10%, its monetary
policy becomes accommodating, and amounts to raising Θ from its normal value 2 to – say – Θ = 10. As shown
in Fig. 8, this allows the bank to partially contain the unemployment bursts. However, quite interestingly, it also
increases the crisis frequency, as if it did not allow the economy to fully release the accumulated stress. We expect
that this phenomenology will survive in a more realistic framework.
We have also explored other potentially interesting extensions of Mark 0, for example adding trust or confidence,
that may appear and disappear on time scales much shorter than the evolution time scale of any “true” economic
factor, and can lead to market instabilities and crises (see e.g. [5, 39, 44]). There are again many ways to model the
potentially destabilizing feedback of confidence. One of the most important channel is the loss of confidence induced
by raising unemployment, that increases the saving propensity of households and reduces the demand. The simplest
way to encode this in Mark 0 is to let the “c” parameter, that determines the fraction of wages and accumulated
savings that is devoted to consumption, be an increasing function of the employment rate ε=1−u. We indeed find
thattheconfidencefeedbackloopcanagaininducepurelyendogenousswingsofeconomicactivity. Similarly,astrong
dependence of c on the recent inflation can induce instabilities [43].
V. ANALYTICAL DESCRIPTION
We attempt here to describe analytically some aspects of the dynamics of Mark 0 in its simplest version, namely
withoutbankruptcies(Θ=∞forwhichϕandf becomeirrelevant),withβ ≥0,fixedwagesW =1,andnodividends
(δ =0). For simplicity, we also fix µ=1 and c=1/2. The only relevant parameters are therefore β, γ and η . The
without policy
with policy
policy threshold
1000 1250 1500 1750 2000
FIG. 8: Here we show an example of a “toy” policy experiment in the Mark 0 model without wage update (i.e γ = 0). We
first run a simulation (the “without policy” line) with a constant value Θ=2 lying in the 3-EC region of Fig. 3. We then run
the same simulation with a prototype central bank which increases Θ to 10 as long as u exceeds the threshold of 10%. Note
that unemployment is partially contained, but the crisis frequency concomitantly increases. The other parameters values are:
N =10000, R=2, γ =0.05, ϕ=0.1, δ=0.02, f =1.
equations of motion of this very minimal model are:
 i i + i i
i i i i i p i
 i i − i i
i i i i i p i
i i i i i i
Here M is the total money in circulation, whose precise value is irrelevant for this discussion, and s=S/N are the
savings per agent. Overlines denote an average over firms, which is flat for Y
Y (t) and E
F i i F i i
while it is weighted by production for p, see Eq. (8). Note that the basic variables here are {p ,Y ,E }, all the other
quantities are deduced from these ones.
In the high employment phase, the model admits a stationary state with Y ∼1. To show this, let us focus on the
case where γ is very small, but not exactly zero, otherwise of course the price dynamics is frozen. The stationary
state is attained after a transient of duration ∼1/γ , and in the stationary state fluctuations between firms are very
small in such a way that p ∼ p and Y ∼ Y. A stationary state of Eq. (19) has Y (t+1) = Y (t) and therefore
Y = D , hence Y = D = Y. Furthermore, from E (t+1) = E (t) we deduce that p = p = 1. Finally, we have
i i i i i i i
D = Y = (s+Y)/2, which gives s = Y and E = M −Y. One obtains therefore a continuum of stationary states,
because the production Y or equivalently the employment are not determined by requiring stationarity. However, we
willshowinthefollowingthattheseequilibriabecomeunstableassoonasfluctuationsaretakenintoaccount(γ >0).
We will see that fluctuations can induce either an exponentially fast decrease of Y towards zero (corresponding to
the full unemployment phase), or an exponentially fast grow of Y, which is therefore only cutoff by the requirement
Y ≤ µ = 1, corresponding to full employment. It is therefore natural to choose the stationary state with Y = 1 as
a reference, and study the effect of fluctuations around this state. We therefore consider the stationary state with
Y =D =p =1, and E =M −1 in such a way that s=Y =1.
For analytical purposes, we will focus below on the limit in which η ,γ → 0, in such a way that we can expand
around the high employment stationary state and obtain results for the phase transition point. Numerically, the fact
that γ and/or η are small does not change the qualitative behavior of the model.
In order to consider small fluctuations around the high employment stationary state, we define the following
variables:
Note that in the following, overlines over ζ,α,λ always denote flat averages over firms. Using p (t) = 1+γ λ (t)+
(γ λ (t))2/2 for γ →0, one finds that, to order γ2:
e−βpi(t) 1 (cid:20) (cid:21)
Z(t) p i 2 p i i
Since we will find later that λ(t) is itself of order γ , we will drop the part of the last term in the above expression,
which is O(γ3), i.e.
e−βpi(t) 1
Z(t) p i 2 p i
A. Stability of the high employment phase
To study the stability of the high employment phase, we make two further simplifications.
1. We neglect the fluctuations of the savings and fix α ≡0. This is justified if the employment rate varies slowly
overthetimescaleτ =−1/ln(1−c)thatcharacterizesthedynamicsofthesavings. But,asweshallshowbelow,
the dynamics of employment becomes very slow in the vicinity of the phase transition, hence this assumption
seems justified.
2. In order to proceed analytically, we also consider the limit η ,η → 0 with η = Rη and R of order one.
In fact, we will even assume below that η (cid:28) γ . Then, it is not difficult to see that ζ is a random variable
of order η and is therefore also very small. We define ζ = η z . We believe that these approximations are
actually quite accurate, as is confirmed by the comparison of the theoretical transition line with numerical data
(see Fig. 3).
With these further simplifications (i.e. setting α =0 and assuming that γ , η are small and z =O(1)), we have,
together with Eq. (20):
i p i i 2 p i p + p
p 2 p p + p
If, as announced above we further assume that η (cid:28)γ , it is justified to keep the terms of order γ2 while neglecting
the terms of order γ η and γ3.
We also note that if |λ | is bounded by a quantity of order 1 (which we will find below), then the condition
i i 2 p i i i
If λ (t)< λ(t) ⇒ i i i i 2 p i
i i i 2 p i
If λ (t)> λ(t) ⇒ i i R i i 2 p i
i i i 2 p i
where βˆ = 1+β +β2. Therefore, in this limit, the evolution of λ decouples from that of ζ (or z). Note that from
1+β p 1+β p min max
From the simplified evolution equation Eq. 24 we now obtain the evolution of the probability distribution P (λ)
and for z(t), which are by definition:
t+1 t 2 t 2
R t 2 p t 2 p
Since the dynamics of λ is decoupled from the one of z, we can assume that P (λ) reaches a stationary state. In
Appendix C1 we show that, at first order in γ , we have for the stationary distribution
(cid:18) (cid:19)
Hence,usingtheconditionP (λ)≥0wefindthat|λ|≤1+O(γ ),consistentlywiththeassumptionswemadeabove.
From this result, we also find that λ=−γ (1+β)/4.
Note that the average price here decreases as β increases, confirming the discussion in Section IIIC2. Indeed, we
have neglected the fluctuations of S in the above calculation, while, as explained in Section IIIC2, it is the increase
of involuntary savings (and thus of S) with β that leads to the average price increase. As a further confirmation, one
can easily simulate Eqs. (24) with α (cid:54)=0, and find dλ/dβ >0 in this case.
Let us now discuss the dynamics of z(t). If at some time t we have z(t) = 0, then it is clear from Eq. (26) that
z(t) will grow with time, and it will continue to do so unless the last term in the equation becomes sufficiently large.
Recalling that |λ| ≤ 1+O(γ ), it is clear that even if z(t) becomes very large, the last term in Eq. (26) can be at
most given by (cid:82)0 dλP (λ) (cid:0) −λ−β(λ−λ)+ 1γ λ2(cid:1) . Therefore, if
1 (cid:90) λmax (cid:18) 1 (cid:19) (cid:90) −γpβ/4 (cid:18) 1 (cid:19)
R st 2 p st 2 p
then z(t) will continue to grow with time, and Y(t) = 1−γ η z(t) will become very small and the economy will
collapse. Conversely, if the condition in Eq. (28) is not satisfied, then Eq. (26) admits a stationary solution with
0<z <∞. Using Eq. (27), the critical boundary line finally reads:18
(cid:16) (cid:17)
λmin st 2 p
where we used the condition γ < 4/(β +2) which is always verified for 0 < β < +∞ and γ → 0. As one can see
in Fig. 3 this results is in good agreement with numerical result for β = 2. We therefore find, interestingly, that
increasing β decreases the value of R , i.e. stabilizes the high employment phase, as indeed discussed above, see Fig.
4 and the discussion around it.
In other words, the ζ perform a biased random walk, in presence of a noise whose average is given by the last
two terms in Eq. (26) (of course, when ζ is too small the minimum in the last term is important, because it is
there to prevent ζ from becoming negative). The system will evolve towards full employment, with ζ = O(η ) and
Y =1−O(γ η ),whenevertheaveragenoiseisnegative,andtofullcollapse,withζ →∞andY =0,otherwise. The
critical line is given by the equality condition, such that the average noise vanishes. Therefore, right at the critical
point, the unemployment rate makes an unbiased random walk in time, meaning that its temporal fluctuations are
large and slow. This justifies the “adiabatic” approximation19 made above, that lead us to neglect the dynamics of
the savings.
18 Itwouldbeinterestingtocomputethefirstnontrivialcorrectionsinη tothetransitionline. Weleavethisforalaterstudy.
19 This refers, in physics, to a situation where a system is driven by an infinitely slow process. One can then consider the system to be
alwaysclosetoequilibriumduringtheprocess.
B. Oscillations in the high employment phase
Asdiscussedabove,intheFEphasemacroeconomicvariablesdisplayanoscillatorydynamics,seeFig.5. Intuitively,
themechanismbehindtheseoscillationsisthefollowing. Whenpricesarelow, demandishigherthanproductionand
firms increase the prices. But at the same time, households cannot consume what they demand, so they involuntarily
save: savings increase when prices are low. These savings keep the demand high for a few rounds even while prices
are increasing, therefore prices keep increasing above their equilibrium value. When prices are too high, households
need to use their savings to consume, and therefore savings start to fall. Increase of prices and decrease of savings
determine a contraction of the demand. At some point demand falls below production and prices start to decrease
again, with savings decreasing at the same time. When prices are low enough, demand becomes again higher then
production and the cycle is restarted. An example is shown in Fig. 5.
Based on this argument, it is clear that to study these oscillations, we need to take into account the dynamics of
the savings so we cannot assume α = 0 as in the previous section. However, here it is enough to consider the first
order terms in γ . In terms of the basic variables in Eq. (20), the other variables that appear in Eq. (19) are easily
written as follows:
where for ζ,α,λ, overlines denote flat averages over firms, and
(cid:18) (cid:19)
Inserting this in Eq. (19), we arrive to the following equations that hold at the lowest order in γ :
1 1  i i + 2 2 i i
i 2 2 i i i i i
1 1  i i − 2 2 i i
i 2 2 i i i i i
From an analytical point of view, the above model is still to complex to make progress. We make therefore a further
simplification, by assuming that
where C is a certain numerical constant. In terms of the original Mark 0 variables, this approximation is equivalent
to, roughly speaking,
i.e. fluctuations of the prices are proportional to supply-demand gaps. Although numerical simulations only show
a weak correlation, the approximation (33) allows us to obtain a more tractable model that retains the basic phe-
nomenology of the oscillatory cycles and reads:
This very minimal model, when simulated numerically, indeed gives persistent oscillations, independent on N, when
C >C∗ ≈0.45, and can also be partially investigated analytically, see Appendix C1.
C. The “representative firm” approximation
To conclude this section, we observe that there is a further simplification that allows one to retain some of the
phenomenology of Mark 0. It consists in describing the firm sector by a unique “representative firm”, N = 1, with
production Y(t), price p(t) and demand Y(t)/p(t). The dynamics of the production and price are given by the same
rule as above, but now the dynamics of the price completely decouples:
Ofcourse,thissimplemodelmissesseveralimportanteffects: mostnotablythoseassociatedtoΘ,hencethetransition
between the Full Employment, Endogenous Crises, and Residual Unemployment phases in Fig. 4. In particular,
endogenous crises are never present in this case, because of the absence of a bankrupt/revival mechanism, and also
the oscillatory pattern in the Full Employment phase disappears, because in this model savings are not considered.
Still, this model is able to capture the transition between the Full Unemployment and Full Employment regions as
a function of R (see Fig. 4), as confirmed by the analytical solution, which is in fact identical to the one of the
model with N > 1 when β = 0 and η is small. And since the model is so simple, one can hope that some of the
extensions discussed in the previous section can be at least partly understood analytically within this “representative
firm” framework (we will give a few explicit. This would be an important step to put the rich phenomenology that
we observe on a firmer basis.
VI. SUMMARY, CONCLUSION
The aim of our work (which is part of the CRISIS project and still ongoing) was to explore the possible types of
phenomena that simple macroeconomic Agent-Based Models can reproduce, and to map out the corresponding phase
diagram of these models, as Figs. 7 and 4 exemplify. The precise motivation for our study was to understand in
detail the nature of the macro-economic fluctuations observed in the “Mark I” model devised by D. Delli Gatti and
collaborators [25, 26]. One of our central findings is the generic existence, in Mark I (and variations around that
model) of a first order, discontinuous phase transition between a “good economy” where unemployment is low, and
a “bad economy” where unemployment is high. By studying a simpler hybrid model (Mark 0), where the household
sector is described by aggregate variables and not at the level of agents20, we have argued that this transition is
induced by an asymmetry between the rate of hiring and the rate of firing of the firms. This asymmetry can have
many causes at the micro-level, for example different hiring and firing costs. In Mark I, for example, it reflects the
reluctance of firms to take loans when the interest rate is too high. As the interest rate increases, the unemployment
level remains small until a tipping point beyond which the economy suddenly collapses. If the parameters are such
thatthesystemisclosetothistransition,anysmallfluctuations(forexampleinthelevelofinterestrates)isamplified
as the system jumps between the two equilibria. It is actually possible that the central bank policy (absent in our
current model), when attempting to stabilize the economy, in fact bring the system close to this transition. Indeed,
toolowaninterestrateleadstooverheatingandinflation, andtoohighaninterestrateleadstolargeunemployment.
The task of the central bank is therefore to control the system in the vicinity of an instability and could therefore be
a natural realization of the enticing ‘self-organized criticality’ scenario recently proposed in [46] (see also [19]).
Mark0issimpleenoughtobepartlyamenabletoanalytictreatments, thatallowustocomputeapproximatelythe
location of the transition line as a function of the hiring/firing propensity of firms, and characterize the oscillations
and the crises that are observed. Mark 0 can furthermore be extended in several natural directions. One is to allow
this hiring/firing propensity to depend on the financial fragility of firms – hiring more when firms are financially
healthy and firing more when they are close to bankruptcy. We find that in this case, the above transition survives
but becomes second order. As the transition is approached, unemployment fluctuations become larger and larger,
and the corresponding correlation time becomes infinite, leading to very low frequency fluctuations. There again, we
are able to give some analytical arguments to locate the transition line [43]. Other stabilizing mechanisms, such as
20 Forarecentstudyexploringtheideaofhybridmodels,see[45].
the bankruptcy of indebted firms and their replacement by healthy firms (financed by the accumulated savings of
households), lead to a similar phenomenology.
TheroleofthebankruptcythresholdΘ,whichistheonly“proto-monetary”effectinMark0,turnsouttobecrucial
in the model, and leads to the phase diagram shown in Fig. 4. We generically find not one but three “good” phases
of the economy: one is where full employment prevails (FE), the second one is where some residual unemployment is
present (RU), and the third, intermediate one is prone to acute endogenous crises (EC), during which the unemploy-
ment rate shoots up before the economy recovers. Note again that there are no exogeneous productivity shocks in
Mark 0; interestingly, crises (when they occur) are of endogeneous origin and not as a result of sweeping parameters
through a phase transition (as is the case, we argued, of Mark I with a time dependent interest rate) but purely as a
result of the own dynamics of the system. The existence of endogenous crises driven by feedback loops in such simple
settings is quite interesting from a general standpoint (see also [29, 31]), and reinforces the idea that many economic
and financial crises may not require large exogenous shocks (see [5, 6, 26, 47, 50–54] for related discussions). We
have shown that the endogenous crises can be defanged (in the model) if the household sector does not carry the full
burden of firms bankruptcies and/or when the profits of firms is efficiently re-injected in the economy (see e.g. Fig.
6).
Wehavethenallowedfirmstovarythewagesoftheiremployeesaccordingtosomeplausiblerulesofthumb(wages
inMarkIandMark0arefixed); thisleadstoinflationordeflationbutleavestheabovepictureessentiallyunchanged
(see Fig. 7). Several other extensions are of obvious interest, and we plan to study them in the near future in the
same stylized way as above. The most obvious ones is to understand how a central bank that prints money and sets
exogenously the interest rate can control the unemployment rate and the inflation rate in the vicinity of an unstable
point,aswementionedjustabove[43]. Otherinterestingtopicsare: modelingresearchandinnovation,allowingfirms
to produce different types of goods, and introducing a financial sector and a housing market [55].
Beyond the generic phase diagram discussed in the whole paper, we found another notable, robust feature: the low
unemployment phase of all the ABMs we considered are characterized by endogenous oscillations that do not vanish
as the system size becomes large, with a period corresponding, in real time, to ∼5−10 years [31]. It is tempting to
interpret these oscillations as real and corresponding to the “business cycle”, as they arise from a very plausible loop
between prices, demand and savings. These oscillations actually also appear in highly simplified models, where both
the household and the firm sectors are represented by aggregate variables [37, 56], as well as in network models [6].
Building upon this last remark, a very important question, it seems to us, is how much can be understood of the
phenomenologyofABMsusing“mean-field”approaches[58,59],i.e. dynamicalequationsforaggregatevariablesofthe
type considered, for example, in [37, 38]? A preliminary analysis reveals that the dynamical equations corresponding
to Mark 0 or Mark I already lead to an amazingly complex phase-diagram [56]. Are these mean-field descriptions
quantitatively accurate? When do we really need agents and when is an aggregate description sufficient? The answer
to this question is quite important, since it would allow one to devise faithful “hybrid” ABMs, where whole sectors
of the economy would be effectively described in terms of these aggregate variables, only keeping agents where they
are most needed.
AnothernaggingquestionconcernsthecalibrationofmacroeconomicABMs. Itseemstousthatbeforeattempting
anykindofquantitativecalibration,exploringandmakingacatalogueofthedifferentpossiblequalitative“phases”of
the model is mandatory. Is the model qualitatively plausible or is the dynamics clearly unrealistic? In what “phase”
is the true economy likely to be? On this point, one of the surprise of the present study is the appearance of very
long time scales. For example, even in the case of perfectly stable economy with wage update rule (18) and all γ
parameters equal to 10% (a rather large value), the equilibrium state of the economy (starting from an arbitrary
initial condition) is only reached after ≈200 time steps. If one thinks that the elementary time scale in these models
is of the order of three months, this means that the physical equilibration time of the economy is 20-50 years, or even
much longer, see e.g. Figs. 4 & 7. But there is no reason to believe that on these long periods all the micro-rules
and their associated parameters are stable in time. Therefore, studying the stationary state of macroeconomic ABMs
might be completely irrelevant to understand the real economy. The economy could be in a perpetual transient state
(aka “non ergodic”), unless one is able to endogenise the time evolution of all the relevant parameters governing its
evolution (see the conclusion of [13] for a related discussion).
Ifthisisthecase,isthereanyuseinstudyingABMsatall? WestronglybelievethatABMswouldstillbegenuinely
helpful. ABMs allow us to experiment and scan the universe of possible outcomes – not missing important scenarios
is already very good macroeconomics. Human imagination turns out to be very limited, and that is the reason we
like models and equations, that help us guessing what can happen, especially in the presence of collective effects that
are often very counterintuitive. In this respect, ABMs provide extremely valuable tools for generating scenarios, that
can be used to test the effect of policy decisions (see e.g. the pleas by Buchanan [21], and Farmer & Foley [22]). In
order to become more quantitative, we think that ABMs will have to be calibrated at the micro-level, using detailed
behavioural experiments and field studies to fine tune all the micro-rules needed to build the economy from bottom
up (see [55, 57] for work in this direction.) Calibrating on historical data the emergent macro-dynamics of ABMs
will most probably fail, because of the dimensionality curse and of the Lucas critique (i.e. the feedback between the
trajectory of the economy and policy decisions that dynamically change the parameters of the model).
Acknowledgements
This work was partially financed by the CRISIS project. We want to thank all the members of CRISIS for most
useful discussions, in particular during the CRISIS meetings. The input and comments of P. Aliferis, T. Assenza,
J. Batista, E. Beinhocker, M. Buchanan, D. Challet, D. Delli Gatti, D. Farmer, J. Grazzini, C. Hommes, F. Lillo,
G. Tedeschi, S. Battiston, A. Kirman, A. Mandel, M. Marsili and A. Roventini are warmly acknowledged. We
are especially grateful to F. Altarelli and G. Cencetti for a careful critical reading of the manuscript and for their
suggestions. The comments and criticisms of the referees were also useful to improve the manuscript. Finally, J.P.B.
wants to thank J.C. Trichet for his warm support for this type of research when he was president of the ECB.
Appendix A: Pseudo-code for Mark I+
We describe here the pseudo-code of our version of Mark I, which we call Mark I+. To keep the length reasonable,
afewirrelevantdetailswillbeomitted,buttheinformationgivenhereisenoughtoreproducetheresultspresentedin
thepaper. Inparticular,wedescribehereonlythepartofthecodethatisneededtogeneratethedynamicalevolution
of the model, and we omit the part that is needed to generate the data output. The source code is available on the
site of the CRISIS project (www.crisis-economics.eu).
1. Notations
Wedescribethealgorithminanobject-orientedfashion, wherethedifferentagentsaredescribedasrepresentatives
of a few classes. We use an object oriented syntax. This syntax should be very intuitive and easy to follow. However,
it is useful to clarify a few notational conventions:
• The declaration of a variable a (for example of integer type int) will be written in C syntax as int a.
• If a is an object of some class, then a.f(x) means that we are calling the method (function) f(x) of object a
with argument x.
• For simplicity, in the for loops we will use the C syntax where, for example, for(t←1;t≤T;t←t+1) means
that t is set to one before the loop starts, t is increased by 1 at the end of each iteration, and the loop continues
if the condition t≤T is true.
• Instead of arrays we will use vectors of objects, and we will follow the notation of C++21. For example,
vector<int> will denote an ordered set (array) of integers. Moreover:
– A vector of size N will be declared as vector<int> A(N), and by default the declaration vector<int>
A means that the set A is initiated as empty.
– |A| will denote the size of the set A
– The notation A[i] will denote the i-th element of the set (with i=0,··· ,|A|−1).
– The notation A ← a will denote the operation of adding the element a to the set A, therefore increasing
its size by one (this correspond to the “push back” operation in C++).
– The notation a ← A will denote the extraction of a random element from A, which is set equal to a.
Note that the element is not removed from A so the size of A remains constant. The notation A(cid:48) ← A
denotes extraction at random of M different elements from the set A, that constitute the set A(cid:48).
– The notation A (cid:54)→ a will denote the removal of element a from set A, therefore reducing the size of A by
one.
– To denote an ordered iteration over an ordered set A, we will use a loop for(a∈A).
– We define a function average(a.f(), a ∈ A) that returns the average of the |A| numbers a[i].f(), i =
• For logical operators, we use the C++ convention22 which should be quite transparent.
2. Classes
The classes are:
• Household
The role of the bank is very limited at this level and this class is mainly included for the purpose of future extension.
Onehouseholdhasaspecialroleasitisthe“owner”ofthefirms,whichwillpaydividendstothisonehousehold. The
main loop is described in Algorithm 1 below. The implementation of the firm class is in Algorithm 3, the household
class in Algorithm 6 and the bank class in Algorithm 7.
Algorithm 1 Main loop of Mark I+
Require: N Number of firms; N Number of households; ρ baseline interest rate; T total evolution time;
(cid:46) Initialisation
vector<household> H(N )
household O (cid:46) The owner of all firms
vector<firm> F(N )
p←1 (cid:46) Average price
for f ∈F do
f.set owner(O)
(cid:46) Main loop
for (t←1;t≤T;t←t+1) do
vector<firm> E,D
for f ∈F do (cid:46) Firm decide new strategy on prices and production
f.set new strategy(p)
f.get loans(B)
f.compute interests()
f.define labor demand()
if f.n vacancies() > 0 then D←f (cid:46) Firms in D demand workforce
else if f.n vacancies() < 0 then E ←f (cid:46) Firms in E have an excess of workforce
for f ∈E do (cid:46) Job market and production
while f.n vacancies() < 0 do f.fire random worker() (cid:46) Firms with excess workforce fire random workers
vector<household> U
for h∈H do
if !h.working() then U ←h (cid:46) U is the set of unemployed households
while |U|>0 && |D|>0 do (cid:46) Random match of unemployed households and demanding firms
U (cid:54)→h
if f.n vacancies()==0 then D(cid:54)→f
Algorithm 2 Main loop of Mark I+ (continued)
for f ∈F do (cid:46) Firms produce and pay workers
f.produce()
f.pay workers()
if f.age()<100 then f.markup rule() (cid:46) Young firms apply a markup rule to avoid bankrupt
(cid:46) Goods market
H ←random permutation(H)
for h∈H do h.consume(F) (cid:46) Consume in random order
(cid:46) Accounting and bankrupts
bad debts ←0
vector<firm> L
for f ∈F do
f.accounting(B)
if f.liquidity() < 0 then (cid:46) Firms with negative liquidity go bankrupt
bad debts ← bad debts + f.liquidity() (cid:46) Note: bad debts is negative!
L←f (cid:46) L is the sent of bankrupt firms
else L←f (cid:46) L is the set of healthy firms
if |L|==0 then break (cid:46) If all firms are bankrupt, exit the program
p ← average(f[i].price(), f ∈L)
Y ← average(f[i].target production(), f ∈L)
Y ← average (f[i].production(), f ∈L)
for f ∈L do f.reinit(p ,Y ,Y) (cid:46) Bankrupt firms are reinitialized with the average parameters of healthy firms
total liquidity ←
(cid:80)NF
(cid:80)NH
for f ∈F do f.get money(bad debts * f[i].equity() / total liquidity)
for h∈H do h.get money(bad debts * h[i].wealth() / total liquidity)
end for (cid:46) Bad debt is spread over firms and households proportionally to their wealth
(cid:46) Update average price
Algorithm 3 The class firm
Parameters : W =1, α=1, γ =0.1, γ =0.1, µ=0, δ=0.2, τ =0.05
Dynamic variables : vector<household> E; household O;p,Y,YT,D,L,v,DT,t
Dynamic variables (auxiliary): L ,ρ,I
(cid:46) Initialization methods
function init
E ←empty (cid:46) The set E is the list of employees and is initialized as empty
p←1 (cid:46) Price
Y ←1 (cid:46) Production
YT ←1 (cid:46) Target production
D←1 (cid:46) Demand
L←50 (cid:46) Liquidity
v←0 (cid:46) Number of vacancies
DT ←0 (cid:46) Total debt
t←0 (cid:46) Internal clock
end function
function set owner(household O(cid:101))
O←O(cid:101)
end function
function reinit(p
,Y(cid:101)T,Y(cid:101))
Y ←Y(cid:101)
YT ←Y(cid:101)T
L←min{O.wealth(), Y/α} (cid:46) The owner injects money to restart the bankrupt firm
O.get money(-L)
for h∈E do
end function
(cid:46) Output methods
function price
end function
function production
end function
function stock
return Y −D
end function
function sales
end function
function target production
end function
function equity
return L−DT
end function
function liquidity
end function
function n vacancies
end function
Algorithm 4 The class firm (continued)
function age
end function
(cid:46) Accounting methods
function get money(m)
end function
function get loans(bank B(cid:101))
L ←WL −L (cid:46) Financial need
if L >0 then
(cid:96)←(DT +L )/(L+0.001) (cid:46) This is the leverage
←B(cid:101).compute offer rate((cid:96)) (cid:46) New offered interest rate
Dc ←L F(ρ ) (cid:46) The function F(ρ) can be whatever decreasing function of ρ, see Eq. (4)
if Dc >0 then
ρ←ρ (cid:46) If new credit is contracted, the interest rate is updated
DT ←DT +Dc (cid:46) Total debt is increased by current debt Dc
B(cid:101).get money(-Dc)
end function
function compute interests
I ←ρDT (cid:46) Interests to be paid in this round
end function
function pay workers
for h∈E do
h.get money(W)
end function
function markup rule
if Y >0 then
p←max{p,p }
end function
function accounting(bank B(cid:101))
L←L−I−τDT (cid:46) Firm pays interests and repays a fraction τ of its debt
B(cid:101).get money(I+τDT)
P ←pD−W|E|−I (cid:46) Profit
if P >0 then
O.get money(δP) (cid:46) Firm pays dividends to the owner
end function
function sell(q)
end function
Algorithm 5 The class firm (continued)
(cid:46) Production and job market methods
function set new strategy(p)
if Y =D && p≥p then YT ←Y(1+γ random) (cid:46) This is Eq. (1) in the main text
(cid:101) y
else if Y =D && p<p then p←p(1+γ random)
(cid:101) p
else if Y >D && p≥p then p←p(1−γ random)
(cid:101) p
else if Y >D && p<p then YT ←Y(1−γ random)
(cid:101) y
end function
function define labor demand
L ←min{L ,floor(L/W)}
L ←max{L ,0}
end function
function produce
D=0 (cid:46) The demand is reset to zero at each production cycle
end function
function hire(household h)
h.get job(W)
end function
function fire(household h)
h.lose job()
E (cid:54)→h
end function
function fire random worker
if |E|>0 then
end function
Algorithm 6 The class household
Parameters : M =3, c=0.8
Dynamic variables : S, W
(cid:46) Initialization methods
function init
S ←0 (cid:46) Savings
W ←0 (cid:46) Salary
end function
(cid:46) Accounting methods
function get money(m)
end function
(cid:46) Output methods
function wealth
end function
function working
if W >0 then return True
elsereturn False
end function
(cid:46) Job and goods market methods
function get job(W(cid:102))
W ←W(cid:102)
end function
function lose job
end function
function consume( vector<firm> F(cid:101) )
budget ←cS
if budget >0 then
F(cid:101) (cid:46) Extract M random firms from F(cid:101) and put them in the set F
F ← sort(f ∈F , f.price()) (cid:46) Order the set F according to firms’ prices
for (i←0;i<|F | && spent<budget;i←i+1) do
s←f[i].stock() (cid:46) s is the stock available from this firm
if s>0 then
q← (budget - spent)/f[i].price() (cid:46) Maximum possible consumption from this firm
if s>q then
spent ← budget (cid:46) The household has finished the budget, the loop ends
spent ← spent +sf[i].price()
S ←S−spent
end function
Algorithm 7 The class bank
Dynamic variables : E, ρ
function init
E ←0 (cid:46) Bank liquidity
ρ ←0 (cid:46) Baseline interest rate
end function
function set ρ(ρ)
b (cid:101)
end function
function compute offer rate((cid:96)(cid:101))
G((cid:96)(cid:101)) (cid:46) We chose G((cid:96))=1+log(1+(cid:96))
end function
function get money(m)
end function
Appendix B: Pseudo-code of Mark 0
We present here the pseudo-code for the Mark 0 model discussed in Sec. IIIA and in Sec. IV. The source code is
available on the site of the CRISIS project (www.crisis-economics.eu).
Algorithm 8 The basic Mark 0
Require: N Number of firms; µ,c,β,γ ,η0,η0,δ,Θ,ϕ,f; T total evolution time;
(cid:46) Initialization
for (i←0;i<N ;i←i+1) do
W[i]←1 (cid:46) Salaries are always fixed to one
Y[i]←µ[1+0.2(random−0.5)]/2 (cid:46) Initial employment is 0.5
(cid:46) Main loop
for (t←1;t≤T;t←t+1) do
u←1− 1 (cid:80) Y[i]
(cid:46) Firms update prices, productions and wages
for (i←0;i<N ;i←i+1) do
if a[i]==1 then
if Y[i]<D[i] then (cid:46) Wage update
if P[i]>0 then
end if (cid:46) This is Eq. (11) in the main text
else if Y[i]>D[i] then
if P[i]<0 then
u←1− 1 (cid:80) Y[i] (cid:46) Update u and p
p← (cid:80) (cid:80)ip
Algorithm 9 The basic Mark0 (continued)
(cid:46) Households decide the demand
for (i←0;i<N ;i←i+1) do
D[i]← Ca[i]exp(−βp[i]/p) (cid:46) Inactive firms have no demand
(cid:46) Accounting
for (i←0;i<N ;i←i+1) do
if a[i]==1 then
if P[i]>0 && E[i]>0 then (cid:46) Pay dividends
S ←S+δP[i]
if E[i]>ΘW[i]Y[i] then (cid:46) Set of healthy firms
(cid:46) Defaults
deficit =0
for (i←0;i<N ;i←i+1) do
if random <1−f && E[j]>−E[i] then (cid:46) Bailed out
else (cid:46) Bankrupted
deficit ← deficit −E[i]
(cid:46) Revivals
for (i←0;i<N ;i←i+1) do
if a[i]==0 && random <ϕ then (cid:46) Reactivate firm
deficit ← deficit +E[i]
if a[i]==1 && E[i]>0 then (cid:46) Firms total savings
(cid:46) Debt
if deficit >S then (cid:46) Households cannot be indebted
deficit ← deficit −S
for (i←0;i<N ;i←i+1) do
S ←S− deficit
Appendix C: Perturbative solution of the schematic model
1. Stationary distribution at first order in γ
From Eq. (25), the stationary distribution P (λ) satisfies
(cid:90) 1 (cid:90) ∞ (cid:16) γ (cid:17) (cid:90) 1 (cid:90) 0 (cid:16) γ (cid:17)
st st 2 st 2
We recall that the dynamics of λ (t) is
i i i i 2 p i (C2)
i i i i 2 p i
withξ (t)arandomvariablein[0,1]. Fromtheseequationsitisclearthatpositiveandnegativeλ arepushedtowards
the origin, and after some transient time one necessarily has
We first set γ =0 and therefore restrict λ∈[−1,1] in Eq. (C1). We obtain
st st st 0 st
where we call L the linear operator that appears on the right hand side. When one computes the action of L on
the functions g (λ)=sign(λ)λn and h (λ)=λn, one finds, for λ>0:
with Ck the binomial coefficients and Dk = (cid:80)n Ck, and
Let us focus on small values of n, useful in the following:
n=0 → L g =0 , L h =2(h −g ) ,
0 0 0 0 0 1
n=1 → L g =1−g , L h =−g +h , (C7)
0 1 1 0 1 2 1
n=2 → L g =h −g , L h = (h −g )+h −g .
0 2 1 2 0 2 3 0 3 2 1
In particular, one has:
0 0 1 0 1 1 0 1
This shows that P (λ)=h (λ)−g (λ)=1−|λ| (called the “tent”) is an eigenvector of L with eigenvalue 1, i.e. this
is the stationary state for γ =0.
This basic solution allows us to obtain perturbatevely the stationary solution for small γ . Recalling that the
support of P (λ) is given by Eq. (C3), Eq. (C1) can be written as
(cid:90) a+ 1 (cid:90) b+ 1
st st 2 p st 2 p γp st
with:
(cid:110) γ (cid:111) (cid:110) γ (cid:111)
(cid:110) γ (cid:111) (cid:110) γ (cid:111)
these integration bounds coming from the combination of the support in Eq. (C3) and the integration bounds on λ(cid:48)
in Eq. (C1). Writing P =P +γ P where P is the tent solution, and L =L +γ L , we obtain at first order in
st 0 p 1 0 γp 0 p 1
γ an equation of the form:
The source term S can be most easily computed by computing L P and expanding the result at first order in γ .
We find S = λ/2−sign(λ)λ2 = 1h −g . This is nice because one can look for a solution involving only n = 1 and
n=2 that closes the equation:
Using: L g =h −g =L h , one finds:
0 2 1 2 0 1
0 1 1 2 1 2 1 2 2 1 2
so the result for the coefficients is
The final solution for the stationary state to first order in γ is:
Note that P is still normalized, as it should and goes to zero (to first order in γ ) at the boundary of the support
interval given in Eq. (C3).
2. Perturbative analysis of the oscillations
In order to understand oscillations, we start from Eqs. (35) and in the following we assume that 0 < C < 1. We
The master equation for the distribution of λ reads:
(cid:90) Λ(t) (cid:90) 1 (cid:90) Ω(t) (cid:90) ∞ (cid:90) 1
(cid:90) Λ(t) (cid:90) 1 (cid:90) ∞ (cid:90) 1
while the evolution equation for α is
(cid:90) ∞ 1
a. Stationary state
Numerically, we observe that Λ(t)∼Ω(t) and their variations are much smaller than the width of the distributions
of λ and α. In the limit where
α(t)−Cλ(t)
(cid:90) Λ(t) (cid:90) 1 (cid:90) ∞ (cid:90) 1
whose stationary solution is P(λ) = P [λ − λ ] where P (x) = (1 − |x|)θ(1 − |x|) is the tent function, with λ
undetermined at this stage. Plugging this result in Eq. (C18), we have
The fixed point is therefore λ ∗ = 1−C and from the condition (C19) we get α∗ =(2−C)λ ∗ =(2−C)(1−C)/6.
b. Oscillation around the stationary state – a simple approximation
In order to study the small oscillations we can make a very simple approximation, namely that at each time t we
have P (λ) = P [λ−λ¯(t)]. If we inject this approximation in Eq. (C18) we get, provided λ¯(t)−λ¯∗ is not too large,
(cid:90) ∞
Next, injecting this approximation in Eq. (C17) we get
(cid:90) ∞
Ω(t)−λ¯(t)
(cid:20) (cid:21)
We therefore get a closed system of two equations for λ¯(t) and α¯(t). For small C, this system of equations converges
quickly to the fixed point. However, for C sufficiently close to 1 (C ∼ 0.94) it has a limit cycle of period 2, followed
by an exponential divergence.
c. Oscillation around the stationary state – perturbative computation
Another strategy to characterize the oscillations is to look again for a perturbed solution around the stationary
now P (λ) = P (λ− 1−C)+δP (λ− 1−C). The shifted variable λ− 1−C will be denoted x. The aim is to write an
t 0 6 t 6 6
evolution for δP after one time step. The L operator is the same as before, as well as the set of functions g and
h . We also introduce ∆(x) as a δ-function slightly spread out, but of unit area (its precise width is irrelevant if it is
small enough).
To lowest order, one has:
L ∆≈ h . (C24)
We will also need, as found above:
L h =2(h −g ), L g =0, L g =h −g . (C25)
0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 1
We now introduce d=|δλ −δλ | and s=δλ +δλ . Assuming d,s(cid:28)1, one finds, to first order:
δP =L δP − d h + s g +d ∆ (C26)
t+1 0 t 2 t 0 2 t 0 t
Note that the integral [δP] = dxδP(x) is zero and conserved in time, as it should be (one has [h ] = 2, [g ] = 0
The idea now is to expand δP in terms of the h,g functions. It turns out that only three of them are needed, plus
the ∆ contribution. Indeed, assume:
t t 0 t 0 t 1 2 0
Then, using the dynamical equation and the algebra above, one finds:
0 t t 0 1 0 t 1 2 0
Hence, the evolution is closed on itself, with the following evolution rules:
A =− d , B = s , C =−2A . (C29)
t+1 2 t t+1 2 t t+1 t
t t 2 t−1 t−1 1t−1 2t−1 t−1
Now, by definition λ = 1−C + (cid:82)1 dxxδP , but since h and g are even, the only contribution comes from the g
t 6 −1 t 0 1 0
component. Therefore:
(cid:90) 1
This leads to a first evolution equation:
1t+1 2 t 2 1t 2t
The second equation comes from the evolution of the α ’s. From:
1−C (cid:90) 0
we finally find:
2t+1 4 2t 4 t−1 24 t−2 4(1−C) 1t 2t
The coupled set of iterations for δλ and δλ , Eqs. (C31) and (C33), lead to damped oscillations for C < C∗∗
and sustained oscillations for C >C∗∗, with C∗∗ ≈0.91. The numerical value of C∗∗ however does not coincide with
that of C∗ ≈ 0.45, obtained from the direct simulation of Eqs. (35). This might be due to neglecting higher order
corrections, which appear to be numerically large: the oscillations generated by Eqs. (35) are of amplitude ∼ 0.1 at
theonset, suggestingasub-criticalbifurcation. ForsmallC, ontheotherhand, theoscillationamplitudeissmalland
the above equations appear to be quantitatively correct, validating the above calculations.
[1] see e.g. S. Balibar, The Discovery of Superfluidity, Journal of Low Temperature Physics 146:441-470 (2007).
[2] A. Kirman, Whom or What Does the Representative Individual Represent?, Journal of Economic Perspectives, 6: 117-136
(1992).
[3] W. Brock, S. Durlauf, Discrete choice with social interactions, Rev. Econ. Stud. 68, 235 (2001)
[4] see e.g.: P. Ball. Why Society is a Complex Matter. Springer, Berlin (2012) for an introductory review.
[5] forarecentreview,see: J.-P.Bouchaud,CrisesandCollectiveSocio-EconomicPhenomena: SimpleModelsandChallenges,
J. Stat. Phys. 151: 567-606 (2013), and refs. therein.
[6] J. Bonart, J.-P. Bouchaud, A. Landier, D. Thesmar, Instabilities in large economies: aggregate volatility without idiosyn-
cratic shocks, arXiv 1406.5022
[7] foraconciseoverviewofABMforcollectivephenomena,see: R.Goldstone,M.Janssen,ComputationalModelsofCollective
Behavior, Trends in Cognitive Science 9: 424-30 (2005).
[8] forearlypapersonABMforeconomics,seee.g.: R.L.Axtell,Whyagents? Onthevariedmotivationsforagentcomputing
in the social sciences,in: Sallach,C.M.MacalandD.(Eds.),ProceedingsoftheWorkshoponAgentSimulation,2000;L.
Tesfatsion, Agent-Based Computational Economics: Growing Economies From Botton Up, Artificial Life, 8: 55-82 (2002).
More recent attempts can be found in: Q. Ashraf, B. Gershman and P. Howitt, Banks, market organization, and macroe-
conomic performance: an agent-based computational analysis.No.w17102.NationalBureauofEconomicResearch(2011);
M. Raberto, A. Teglio and S. Cincotti, ’Debt, deleveraging and business cycles: an agent-based perspective’ Economics:
The Open-Access, Open-Assessment E-Journal 6.2012-27 (2012): 1-49; G. Dosi et al., ’Income distribution, credit and
fiscal policies in an agent-based Keynesian model’ Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 37.8 (2013): 1598-1625.
[9] forsomereviewpapersonABMforeconomicsandfinance,seee.g.: A.Leijonhufvud,Agent-Based MacroinTesfatsion,L.
and Judd, K. (eds.), Handbook of Computational Economics, 1625-1636 (2006); C. H. Hommes, Heterogeneous Agent
Models in Economics and Finance, Handbooks in Economics Series 23, 1109-1186 North-Holland: Elsevier (2006); B.
LeBaron and L. Tesfatsion, Modeling macroeconomies as open-ended systems of interacting agents, American Economic
Review: Papers and Proceedings, 98: 246-250 (2008); H. Dawid and M. Neugart, Agent-based Models for Economic
Policy Design Eastern Economic Journal, 37: 44-50 (2011). M. Cristelli, L. Pietronero, A. Zaccaria: Critical overview of
agent-based models for economics. arXiv:1101.1847.
[10] C. Sims, Macroeconomics and Reality, Econometrica, 48: 1-48 (1980)
[11] see e.g. J. Gali, Monetary Policy, Inflation and the Business Cycle, Princeton University Press (2008).
[12] W. Buiter, The unfortunate uselessness of most “state of the art” academic monetary economics,
[13] G. Fagiolo and A. Roventini, ’Macroeconomic policy in dsge and agent-based models’ Revue de l’OFCE 5 (2012): 67-116.
[14] G. Fagiolo, A. Moneta and P. Windrum, A critical guide to empirical validation of agent-based models in economics:
methodologies, procedures, and open problems. Computational Economics 30.3 (2007): 195-226.
[15] A. Pyka and G. Fagiolo, Agent-based modelling: a methodology for neo-Schumpeterian economics. Elgar companion to
neo-schumpeterian economics 467 (2007).
[16] A. Kirman, The Economic Crisis is a Crisis for Economic Theory, CESifo Economic Studies, 56: 498-535 (2010)
[17] R. J. Caballero, Macroeconomics after the Crisis: Time to Deal with the Pretense-of-Knowledge Syndrome, Journal of
Economic Perspectives, 24: 85-102 (2010)
[18] for a general, insightful introduction, see: N. Goldenfeld, Lectures on Phase Transitions and the Renormalization Group.
AddisonWesley, Reading (1992)
[19] P. Bak, How Nature Works: The Science of Self-Organized Criticality, Copernicus, Springer, New York, 1996.
[20] on this point, see the interesting discussion in: I. Kondor, I. Csabai, G. Papp, E. Mones, G. Czimbalmos, M. Cs. Sandor,
Strong random correlations in networks of heterogeneous agents, arXiv:1210.2224
[21] M. Buchanan, This Economy does not compute, New York Times, October 1, 2008.
[22] D. Farmer, D. Foley, The economy needs agent-based modelling, Nature 460, 685-686 (2009)
[23] I. Giardina, J.-P. Bouchaud, Bubbles, Crashes and Intermittency in Agent Based Market Models, The European Physics
Journal B 31: 421-37 (2003).
[24] R. Lyea, J. Peng, L. Tana, S. A. Cheonga Understanding agent-based models of financial markets: a bottom-up approach
based on order parameters and phase diagrams, arXiv:1202.0606;
[25] The Mark I family of models was elaborated in a series of papers and books, in particular: E. Gaffeo, D. Delli Gatti,
S. Desiderio, and M. Gallegati, Adaptive Microfoundations for Emergent Macroeconomics, Eastern Economic Journal, 34:
441-463 (2008); D. Delli Gatti, E. Gaffeo, M. Gallegati, G. Giulioni, and A. Palestrini, Emergent Macroeconomics: An
Agent-Based Approach to Business Fluctuations, Springer: Berlin, 2008.
[26] D. Delli Gatti, S. Desiderio, E. Gaffeo, P. Cirillo, M. Gallegati, Macroeconomics from the Bottom-up, Springer: Berlin
(2011).
[27] L.Russo, The forgotten revolution: How Science Was Born in 300 BC and Why It Had to Be Reborn, Springer, Berlin
(2004); Italian-speaking readers might also consult the wonderful first chapter of L.Russo, Flussi e Riflussi: indagine
sull’origine di una teoria scientifica, Feltrinelli (2003), unfortunately out of print but available in many public libraries.
[28] C. Deissenberg, S. van der Hoog, H. Dawid, Eurace: A massively parallel agent-based model of the european economy,
Applied Mathematics and Computation, 204: 541-552 (2008);
[29] H. Dawid, S. Gemkow, P. Harting, S. van der Hoog, M. Neugarty; The Eurace@Unibi Model: An Agent-Based Macroeco-
nomic Model for Economic Policy Analysis, Working paper, Bielefeld University. 2011.
[30] G. Dosi, G. Fagiolo, A. Roventini, An evolutionary model of endogenous business cycles. Computational Economics, 27:
3-24 (2005)
[31] G. Dosi, G. Fagiolo, and A. Roventini, Schumpeter meeting Keynes: A policyfriendly model of endogenous growth and
business cycles, Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 34, 1748-1767 (2010); and [13].
[32] A. Mandel, S. Furst, W. Lass, F. Meissner, C. Jaeger; Lagom generiC: an agent-based model of growing economies, ECF
Working Paper 1 /2009.
[33] C. Metzig, M. Gordon, Heterogeneous Enterprises in a Macroeconomic Agent-Based Model, arXiv:1211.5575.
[34] The precise version of Mark I that we used as a reference is the one presented by J. Grazzini and D. Delli Gatti at the
Crisis Workshop in Milan, November 2012. Its transcription is given by the pseudo-code in Appendix A.
[35] Bank of England, Quarterly Bulletin, Q1 Vol. 54 No. 1 (2014).
[36] see e.g. S. P. Anderson, A. De Palma, J. F. Thisse, Discrete Choice Theory of Product Differentiation. MIT Press, New
York (1992), and [5] for a recent discussion and further references.
[37] R. M. Goodwin, A Growth Cycle, in Feinstein, C.H. (ed) Socialism, Capitalism and Economic Growth, Cambridge Uni-
versity Press (1967)
[38] P. Flaschel, The Macrodynamics of Capitalism, Springer, Berlin 2010.
[39] F.Caccioli,P.VivoandM.Marsili,ErodingMarketStabilitybyProliferationofFinancialInstruments,EuropeanPhysical
Journal B, 71: 467-479 (2009).
[40] G. B. Eggertsson and P. Krugman, Debt, Deleveraging, and the Liquidity Trap: A Fisher-Minsky-Koo Approach, The
Quarterly Journal of Economics 127, 1469-1513 (2012).
[41] B.C.GreenwaldandJ.E.Stiglitz,Financialmarketimperfectionsandbusinesscycles.TheQuarterlyJournalofEconomics
108, 77-114 (1993).
[42] M. Napoletano et al., Wage Formation, Investment Behavior and Growth Regimes: An Agent-Based Analysis Revue de
l’OFCE 5, 235-261 (2012).
[43] S. Gualdi, M. Tarzia, F. Zamponi, J.-P. Bouchaud, Policy experiments in simple macro-economic ABM, in preparation
(CRISIS project).
[44] K. Anand, P. Gai, M. Marsili, The rise and fall of trust networks, Progress in Artificial Economics. Lect. Notes Econ.
Math. Syst. 645: 77 (2010)
[45] T.Assenza,D.DelliGatti,EPluribusUnum: MacroeconomicModellingforMulti-agentEconomies,UCSCWorkingpaper
(2013).
[46] F. Patzelt and K. Pawelzik, Criticality of Adaptive Control Dynamics, Phys. Rev. Lett. 107: 238103 (2011)
[47] H. Minsky, Stabilizing an Unstable Economy, McGraw-Hill, New York (2008)
[48] M. W. L. Elsby et. al, The ins and outs of cyclical unemployment, American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 1.1
(2009): 84-110.
[49] R. Shimer, Reassessing the ins and outs of unemployment, Review of Economic Dynamics 15.2 (2012): 127-148.
[50] D. Challet, M. Marsili and Y. C. Zhang, Minority Games, Oxford University Press, 2005.
[51] D.Sornette,Endogenousversusexogenousoriginsofcrises.In: Albeverio,S.,Jentsch,V.,Kantz,H.(eds.)ExtremeEvents
in Nature and Society. Springer, Heidelberg (2005)
[52] K. Anand, A. Kirman, M. Marsili, Epidemics of rules, rational negligence and market crashes Eur. J. Financ. (2011)
[53] J. Lorenz, S. Battiston, F. Schweitzer, Systemic risk in a unifying framework for cascading processes on networks Eur.
Phys. J. B 71, 441 (2009)
[54] J.-P. Bouchaud The endogenous dynamics of markets: price impact, feedback loops and instabilities In: Berd, A. (ed.)
Lessons from the 2008 Crisis. Risk Books, Incisive Media, London (2011)
[55] see e.g. J. Geanakoplos, R. Axtell, D. J. Farmer, P. Howitt, B. Conlee, J. Goldstein, M. Hendrey, N. M. Palmer, C.-Y.
Yang, Getting at Systemic Risk via an Agent-Based Model of the Housing Market, Cowles Foundation Discussion Papers
1852, Cowles Foundation for Research in Economics, Yale University, 2012.
[56] S. Gualdi, M. Tarzia, F. Zamponi, J.-P. Bouchaud, On simple aggregate descriptions of ABMs (and the real economy),
unpublished report.
[57] see e.g. C. Hommes, Behavioral Rationality and Heterogeneous Expectations in Complex Economic Systems, Cambridge
University Press (2013) for a review on behavioral experiments.
[58] C.DiGuilmi,M.GallegatiandS.Landini,Economicdynamicswithfinancialfragilityandmean-fieldinteraction: Amodel
Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications 387.15 (2008): 3852-3861.
[59] M. Aoki and H. Yoshikawa, Reconstructing macroeconomics: a perspective from statistical physics and combinatorial
stochastic processes Cambridge University Press, 2011.