]hp-tnauq[
2v2023.5080:viXra
Topological cluster state quantum computing
Austin G. Fowler1 and Kovid Goyal2
1Centre for Quantum Computer Technology, University of Melbourne, Victoria, AUSTRALIA and
2Institute for Quantum Information, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125, USA
(Dated: October23, 2018)
Thequantumcomputingschemedescribed in[1,2],when viewedas aclusterstatecomputation,
featuresa3-Dclusterstate,noveladjustablestrengtherrorcorrection capableofcorrectinggeneral
errors through the correction of Z errors only, a threshold error rate approaching 1% and low
overhead arbitrarily long-range logical gates. In this work, we review the scheme in detail framing
thediscussion solely in terms of therequired 3-D cluster state and its stabilizers.
I. INTRODUCTION possibly just one or two, unmeasured at any given time.
Aparticularlyappropriatetechnologyforgeneratingand
measuringsucha3-Dclusterstateisthephotonicmodule
Classical computers manipulate bits that can be ex-
[13]. A detailed architecture making use of the photonic
clusively 0 or 1. Quantum computers manipulate quan-
module to explicitly implement 3-D topological cluster
tum bits (qubits) that can be placed in arbitrary su-
state quantum computing has been proposed [14]. An
perpositions α0 +β 1 and entangled with one another
| i | i independent ion trap architecture tailoredto topological
(00 + 11 )/√2 [3]. This additional flexibility provides
| i | i cluster states has also been proposed[15]. The existence
both additional computing power and additional chal-
of such architectures underscores the need for an acces-
lenges when attempting to correct the now quantum er-
sible introduction to the underlying computation model.
rors in the computer. An extremely efficient scheme
The discussion is organized as follows. In Section II,
for quantum error correction and fault-tolerant quan-
webrieflydescribedstabilizersandclusterstates. InSec-
tumcomputationisrequiredtocorrecttheseerrorswith-
tion III, we describe the topological cluster state and
outmakingunphysicaldemandsonthe underlyinghard-
give a brief overview of what topological cluster state
ware and without introducing excessive time overhead
quantum computing involves. Section IV describes log-
and thus wasting a significant amount of the potential
ical qubits in more detail and how to initialize them to
performance increase.
0 and + andmeasurethemintheZ andX bases.
This paper is a simplified review of the quantum com- | i | i Stateinjection,the non-fault-tolerantconstructionofar-
puting scheme of [1, 2]. This scheme has a number of
bitrary logical states, is covered in Section V. Logical
highlydesirableproperties. Firstly,itpossessesathresh-
gates, namely the logical identity gate and the logical
olderrorrateof0.75%,meaningarbitrarilylargecompu-
CNOT gate, are carefully discussed in Section VI along
tations canbe performed arbitrarilyaccuratelyprovided
with their byproduct operators. Section VII describes
the error rates of qubit initialization, measurement,one-
the error correction procedure. Section VIII concludes
andtwo-qubitunitarygatesarealllessthan0.75%. This
and discusses some open problems.
isparticularlyremarkablesinceonlynearest-neighborin-
teractionsbetweenqubitsarerequired. Furthermore,ar-
bitrarily distant pairs of logical qubits can be interacted
II. STABILIZERS AND CLUSTER STATES
with time overhead growing only logarithmically with
separation. This property enables quantum algorithms
to be implemented very efficiently [4]. A stabilizer [6] can be thought of as a convenient no-
We have previously reviewed this scheme in 2-D [5], tationfor representinga state. Insteadofwriting 0 , we
framing the discussion solely in terms of manipulating canwrite Z —shorthandfor the +1eigenstateofZ. In-
the stabilizers [6] of the surface code [7]. Here we review steadof ψ =(00 + 11 )/√2,wecanwriteZZ,XX —
| i | i | i
theschemeasapureclusterstatecomputation[8]in3-D, the simultaneous eigenstate of these operators. We will
again focusing on stabilizers, without making reference focus on states that are eigenstates of tenor products of
to the surface code or using the somewhat inaccessible I, X, Y, Z. Not all states can be described as simulta-
language of topology and homology. To further ensure neous eigenstates of lists of such tensor products, but a
broadaccessibility,nopriorfamiliaritywithclusterstate sufficiently wide range for our purposes can be.
quantum computation or stabilizers is assumed. TheresultofapplyingaunitarygateU toastate ψ is
There are many reasons to seriously consider a 3-D U ψ . If ψ isaneigenstateofM,thenewstateU ψ can
cluster state approach to quantum computing. Such an be | w i ritte | na i sUMU†U ψ ,implyingU ψ isaneige | n i state
approach is quite natural for optical [9, 10] and possi- of UMU†. Given a lis | t o i f stabilizers, | w i e can thus track
bly opticallattice [11, 12] basedquantumcomputing. In the effect of gates simply by manipulating this list. Of
both cases, for practical reasons, the 3-D cluster state particularinterestwillbethecontrolled-ZgateC Z which
would be generated and consumed slice by slice as the satisfies C† = C , C (I X)C = Z X, C (I
Z Z Z ⊗ Z ⊗ Z ⊗
computationproceeds,withjustasmallnumberofslices, Z)C =I Z,C (X I)C =X ZandC (Z I)C =
Z I. The action of C Z on any other stabilizer can be a.)
determined by multiplying these relations.
A cluster state [16], or more generally a graph state
[17], can be defined constructively as any state obtained
by starting with a collectionof qubits in + then apply-
ingC gatestooneormorepairsofqubits. Forexample,
given three qubits in + , or equivalently the three sta-
bilizers XII, IXI, IIX,we canforma 1-D cluster state
by applying two C gates to obtain the stabilizersXZI,
ZXZ, IZX. Note that C gates commute. In general,
a cluster state is characterized by stabilizers of the form
X Z , where X acts on qubit q , Z acts on
qj∈nghb(qi) j i i j
qubitq andnghb(q)denotesthesetofqubitsconnected
to q by C gates. b.)
III. TOPOLOGICAL CLUSTER STATES
Atopologicalclusterstateisa3-Dclusterstatewitha
specific underlying structure. Fig. 1a shows a single cell
of a topological cluster state. This cell is tiled in 3-D.
Fig.1bshowsa simplifiedpictureofan8-celltopological
cluster state. The wireframe cubes as well as the central
shaded region have exactly the same form as Fig. 1a.
A topological cluster state can thus be thought of as of
two interlocking cubic lattices. We arbitrarily label one
FIG. 1: a.) A 3-D 18 qubit cluster state. Circles denote
of these lattices the “primal” lattice and the other the qubits initialized to |+i, solid lines denote C Z gates. This
“dual” lattice. The boundaries of the lattice are also cellistiledin3-Dtoformthetopologicalclusterstate. b.) A
labeled primalordual accordingto whether they consist cubeofeightcells, whichwewillcallprimalcells, eachofthe
ofprimalordualcellfaces. Ifwecalltheeightwireframe formshowninparta(qubitssuppressedforclarity). Location
cells of Fig. 1b primal cells, then the lattice has only ofadualcell(shaded)relativetoitssurroundingprimalcells.
primal boundaries. A dual cell also contains exactly the arrangement of qubits
shown part a.
If we consider the product of the six stabilizers cen-
tered on the six face qubits of Fig. 1a, we find that all
Z operators cancel, leaving us with a cell stabilizer that
is the tensor product of X on each face qubit. This im- braided with other defects of the opposite type, corre-
plies that if we measure each of the face qubits in the X sponds to computation and the final U-shape or pair of
basis, with 0 corresponding to measurement of the +1 individual endings corresponds to read-out. Full details
eigenstates of X and 1 the -1 eigenstate, we will obtain will be givenin later sections. Logicaloperators X L and
six bits of information with even parity since the indi- Z L correspond to a ring or chain of single-qubit Z oper-
vidual X measurementscommute with the cellstabilizer ators encircling a single defect or connecting the pair of
and hence the state remains a +1 eigenstate of the cell defects. Examples of such rings and chains are shown in
stabilizer. A string of bits with odd parity tells us that Fig. 2. An important point that will become clearer in
one or more errors have occurred locally. This is how SectionIVisthattheseringsandchainsmustbeperiodi-
errorsare detected. Errorcorrectionwill be discussed in callychosenthroughoutthecomputation—they cannot
Section VII. For the moment we simply claim that er- be defined in a consistent manner as arbitrary rings and
roneous measurement results can be corrected arbitrar- chainssincedifferentringsandchainsarenotequivalent.
ily wellgivena sufficiently largetopologicalcluster state Furthermore, the logical operators cannot be defined at
and sufficiently low physical error rates. Errors are also allduringbraiding. WeshallalwayschooseprimalZ L to
defined to be primal or dual according to whether they be achainconnecting two primaldefects anddual Z L to
occur on primal or dual face qubits. be a ring encircling a single dual defect. The definitions
Logical qubits are associated with pairs of “defects” of primal and dual X L can be inferred from Fig. 2.
— regions of qubits measured in the Z basis. A defect Computation makes use of “correlation surfaces” —
must have a boundary of a single type. There are thus large cluster state stabilizers connecting logical opera-
two types of defects and logical qubits — primal and tors. Forexample,tworingsofZ operatorsencirclingthe
dual. Referring to Fig. 2, for both primal and dual logi- samedefectcanbeconnectedwithatubeofX operators
calqubits the initialU-shapeorpairofindividualbegin- such that a cluster state stabilizer is formed as shown in
nings corresponds to initialization, the middle section, Fig. 3. Similarly, two chains of Z operators connecting
XL XL XL a.) Z
primal ZL ZL ZL X
ZL ZL ZL ZL
dual XL XL XL XL
primal ZL ZL
FIG.2: Thedefinitionsofprimal anddualZ L andX L —all
ringsorchainsofZ operators. Notethatthelogicaloperators
are undefinedduringbraiding.
two defects can be connected with a surface of X op-
erators bordered by Z operators as shown in Figs. 4–5.
Morecomplicateddefectgeometriesleadtomorecompli- FIG.3: Correlation surfacesbeginningandendingwithrings
of Z operators. a.) Red qubits are associated with Z opera-
catedcorrelationsurfaces. Fig.6showstwologicalqubits
tors,bluequbitswithX operators. Thecollection ofredand
braidedin sucha waythat Z on the lowerlogicalqubit
L blue qubits and their associated operators is a cluster state
connects to Z Z on both logical qubits — one of the
L L stabilizer. Green highlighting indicates qubits measured in
fourmappingsassociatedwithlogicalCNOT.SectionVI the Z basis, forming a defect. b.) Schematic representa-
givesfulldetailsofthelogicalidentityandlogicalCNOT tion. Thesurface ofX operators can bearbitrarily deformed
gates. whereas we keep the initial and final rings of Z operators
fixed.
IV. LOGICAL INITIALIZATION AND
MEASUREMENT to be in the + state if in a single even time step it
is in the simultaneous +1 eigenstate of each of the two
operatorsconsisting ofa ringof single qubit Z operators
We now move on to the details of topological cluster
encirclingandonthe boundaryofeachdefect. Similarly,
state quantum computing, focusing on the initialization
the simultaneous 1 eigenstate of these two boundary
and measurement of logical qubits in this section. We
operators is defined to be .
wish to be able to initialize logical qubits to 0 and L
+ , the +1 eigenstates of Z and X . Take note that There is some redundancy in the way we have defined
deformingalogicaloperatordoesnot,ingeneral,givean + L and L . It would have been sufficient to focus
equivalent logical operator. For example, Fig. 7 shows on a single ring of Z operators around a single defect.
two different chain operators. If the lattice is in the +1 Indeed, applying both of these Z rings simultaneously is
eigenstate of the first chain, it will be in the ( 1)MX the logical identity operation — X L is just one of these
eigenstateofthe secondchain,whereM isthe resultof rings, although it does not matter which ring. For later
the indicated X basis measurement. This issue can only convenience, when we do not wish to specify which ring,
be avoided by periodically choosing, by hand, specific we will use the notation X L . When we need to discuss
rings and chains to represent primal and dual Z L and exactlywhichoperatorisbeingapplied,wewillwriteX 1
X L . The correlation surfaces connecting these logical or X 2 .
operators can, however, take any shape consistent with Primalqubits canbe initialized to + up to byprod-
the defects in the lattice. uct operators via a measurement pattern similar to that
To permit concrete discussion, we shall choose one di- shown in Fig. 9. Measuring the indicated qubits in
mensionof the topologicalcluster state to be “simulated the X basis leaves the defects in either the +1 or 1
time” and arrange the defects of logical qubits not cur- eigenstate of X and X depending on the parity of
rentlybeingbraidedtobeparallelandinthedirectionof the associated X measurements. If we denote the par-
simulatedtime asshowninFig.8. Note thatwe define a ity (sum mod 2) of the X measurements associated
single time step to correspond to the measurement of a with X by s , the state of the logical qubit after ini-
singlelayeroftheclusterstate. Wedefineaprimalqubit tialization will be Zs1Zs2 + , with Z = Z Z and
1 2 | L i L 1 2
FIG. 4: A correlation surface beginning and ending with chains of Z operators. Red qubits are associated with Z operators,
bluequbitswith X operators. Thecollection of redand bluequbitsandtheirassociated operators isacluster statestabilizer.
Green highlighting indicates qubitsmeasured in the Z basis, forming defects.
M Z primal Z Z
FIG.5: Schematicrepresentation ofFig.4. ThesurfaceofX
operators can be arbitrarily deformed provided the Z oper-
ators inside the defect remain in the defect. The initial and
final chains of Z operators are kept fixed.
FIG.6: Amorecomplicatedarrangementofdefectsandacor-
relationsurfaceconsistentwiththearrangement. Theconnec-
X ,Z = X ,Z = 0. The operators Z and Z ,
{ 1 1 } { 2 2 } 1 2 tionofZ LwithZ L Z LissuggestiveofaCNOTgate,described
while not physical unless at least one additional primal
in detail in Section VI.
boundary is presentin the system, areuseful for keeping
track of byproduct operators affecting a single defect. If
an additional primal boundary is present, these opera-
tors can be represented by chains of Z starting on each
defect and ending on this additional boundary.
Note that in the absence of errors all surfaces of X Z
measurementsbounded by either X orX will havethe
same parity, as the X stabilizer associated with the six
faces of a single cell can be used to arbitrarily deform a
surfacewithoutchangingitsparity. Thisimpliesthatthe b.)
initialization procedure is well-defined and fault-tolerant
when used in conjunction with the error correction de- M X
scribed in Section VII.
Primal qubits can also be initialized to 0 up to
byproduct operators via a measurement pattern similar
tothatshowninFig.10. WechooseZ tobeanyspecific
chain of Z in an odd time slice connecting two sections FIG.7: Twononequivalentchainoperators. Thesecondchain
of defect. The parity s of the X and Z measurements in operatorwillhaveaneigenvalue(−1) M X timestheeigenvalue
time slices earlierthanthe chosenlogicaloperatordeter- of the first chain operator.
mines the byproduct operator Xs.
FIG. 8: A primal qubit consisting of two primal defects with X L =X 1 =X 2 and Z L indicated.
X Y = Z s 1Z s 2 +
primal error chain L 1 2 L
Z Z X 1 X 2
Z X s 1 s 2
FIG. 9: Initializing a primal qubit to the |+Li state. After the indicated X measurements, the two defects are left in known
eigenstates of theirassociated X L operators, X 1 and X 2, which are both rings of single-qubit Z operators.
As drawn, Fig. 10 is not fault-tolerant. The defect can be discarded.
is too narrow to provide any information about errors
Dual qubit initialization, expressed in terms of dual
on the internal qubits measured in the Z basis. Fig. 11
cells, looks absolutely identical to primal qubit initial-
shows a larger defect and examples of odd parity five
ization. The only difference lies in the interpretation of
sideddualcellsresultingfromerrorsonqubitsinside the
what the initialization procedures mean. A dual mea-
defect. For operations to be fault-tolerant, defects must
surement pattern of the form shown in Fig. 9 initializes
have minimum cross-section2 2 cells.
× the dual qubit to 0 L . Similarly, a dual measurement
pattern of the form shown in Fig. 10 initializes the dual
Inadditiontodemonstratingthatprimalqubitinitial-
qubitto + . ThedefinitionsofallX andZ logicaland
ization to 0 L can be made fault-tolerant,Fig. 11 shows | L i
| i byproduct operators are also reversed.
how appropriate error information is extracted on the
surfaceofa primaldefectto permitdualerrorcorrection With logical qubits and logical operators defined, we
to continue and vice versa. Furthermore, note that Z can now discuss logical errors. In Fig. 9, any chain of
measurements deeper inside the defect than the outer- primalerrors,whichcanbethoughtofasZ errorsonthe
most layer are not used in any part of the computation underlying qubits before measurement or X basis mea-
or error correction procedure and as such their results surement errors, that connects the two defects is unde-
a.) dual error ring b.)
Z L X 1 Z L X 2
FIG. 10: Initializing a primal qubit to the |0Li state. After the indicated Z and X measurements, the U-shaped defect is left
in a known eigenstate of theZ L operator, which is a specific chosen chain of single-qubit Z operators.
FIG. 11: Three examples of X or M Z errors on qubits measured in the Z basis inside a defect. The leftmost examples are
errors on thefirst layer of qubitsinside thedefect which can be both detected and corrected by determining the parity of five
sided dual cells touching the error. The rightmost example is sufficiently deep inside the defect that no nontrivial stabilizers
intersect it and therefore theerror can be ignored.
tectable and changes the state of the logical qubit from the sign of the eigenvalue of the logical operator.
+ to . To make this unlikely, defects must be
kept well separated. In Fig. 10, any ring of dual Z and
M X errors encircling one of the defects is undetectable V. STATE INJECTION
and changes the state of the logical qubit from 0 to
1 . To make this unlikely, defects must have a suffi-
| i We have discussed logicalqubit initialization to states
ciently large perimeter. The situation is similar for dual
+ and 0 , measurement in the X and Z bases
qubits,withthemeaningofthetwotypesoflogicalerrors | L i | L i L L
and logical errors. We now turn our attention to state
interchanged.
injection, specifically the preparation of logical states
Now that we have initialization, logical measurement α0 L +β 1 L .
followsinastraightforwardmanner. Figs.9–10,reversed Consider Fig. 12. The first part of the figure shows a
intime canbe usedto measurethe logicaloperatorsofa single qubit in an arbitrary state. The logical operators
qubit. Theparityofthe measurementresultsdetermines X and Z correspond to single-qubit X and Z respec-
1. Y + + + a.)
2.
C Z C Z Z X
X X X Z X X
FIG.12: Injectinganarbitrarystateintoafour-qubitcluster c.)
state. Information about the original state can be obtained
from the parity of multiplesingle-qubit measurements.
tively. The second part shows the effect of applying a Z
single C Z gate. A two-qubit entangled state is created, X Z
howeverthe parityofthe twosingle-qubitmeasurements X
XZ gives the same information as the single-qubit mea-
surement X before the C gate — XZ is our new X
operator. The C Z gate transforms +1 eigenstates of X FIG. 13: Full form of a.) Z L, b.) X 1, c.) X 2 after state
into +1 eigenstates of XZ. The third part of the figure injection.
includes a further two qubits. The essential idea is that
clusterstatestabilizerscenteredonthesecond,thirdand
fourthqubits canbe usedto extendthe logicaloperators α0 +β 1 before being entangled with its neighboring
so they involve more qubits. qubits, an arbitrary logical state α0 +β 1 can be
ConsiderFig.13. Theenlargedqubitistheinitialloca- obtained. In practice, it is likely that the cluster state
tion of the arbitrary state. The three parts of the figure will be prepared first, implying that the enlarged qubit
show Z and X = X = X after state injection. The canonlyberotatedintheZ basisassuchrotationscom-
parity ofthe results ofmeasuringthe indicated qubits in mute with the controlled-Z operators used to construct
the indicated bases givesthe same informationas single- the cluster state. Rotation before measurement could
qubit measurements on the initial state. Note that the be replaced with measurement in a rotated basis. Ei-
forms of Z , X , X differ from those shown in Fig. 8, therway,thiswouldlimittheclassofinjectablestatesto
where they were simple rings and chains instead of the (0 +eiθ 1 )/√2.
sheets and socks shown in Fig. 13. This is acceptable as
allqubits associatedwith single-qubitoperatorsin black
are measured in the same basis during computation im- VI. LOGICAL GATES
plying application of these single-qubit operators would
have no effect. Nevertheless, the full form of the logical Onlytwologicalgates,theidentitygateandtheCNOT
operators is important as only from the full form can it gate, are required to complete the universal set of gates.
beseenthatthelogicaloperatorsanticommute. Further- Theselogicalgatescanbeunderstoodbyexaminingtheir
more, measuring the single-qubit operators in black in- actiononlogicaloperators. Forexample,anideallogical
troduces logicalbyproductoperators. Let λ Z , λ 1 , λ 2 de- identitygatewillhavethepropertyX L X L ,Z L Z L .
note the parities of the measurements indicated in black Consider Fig. 14. The upper row sh 7→ ows X , X 7→ fol-
in the three parts of Fig. 13. After measurement we will lowed by these same operators multiplied by a tubu-
be left with the state X L λZZ 1 λ1Z 2 λ2 | ψ L i . Note that since lar cluster state stabilizer. Measuring the indicated
state injection always begins with a single unprotected qubits in the X basis results in new logical operators
qubit,anystateinjectionprocedure,includingFig.13,is X′ = ( 1)s1X , X′ = ( 1)s2X . Similarly, the lower
inherently non-fault-tolerant. ro 1 w rela − tes inp 1 ut an 2 d ou − tput Z
.
If the enlarged qubit is prepared in an arbitrary state These logical operator mappings correspond to a logical
identitygatewithbyproductoperatorsthatmapslogical that begin and end on primal boundaries are thus unde-
states according to ψ′ =(I )Zs1Zs2XsZ ψ . tectable and have the potential to cause logical errorsas
| Li L 1 2 L | L i
LogicalCNOT operates in a similar manner. An ideal discussedinSectionIV. Fig.18containsexamplesofpri-
CNOT maps control and target operators according to malerrorchainsconnectedtoprimalboundaries. Fig.18
X X X , X X , Z Z , Z Z Z . Con- also contains dual boundaries — lattice boundaries that
c c t t t c c t c t
sider Fig. 15. The dual qubit is the control and the pri- pass through the centers of primal cells. A primal error
mal qubit is the target. From the figure it can be seen chainconnected to a dual boundary is alwaysdetectable
as it changes the parity of the boundary cell containing
, the endpoint.
Z − p ( 1)λZpZ 2d Z 7→ p . T − his correspondst 7→ o log − icalCNOT Dual cells are used in an identical manner to primal
with byproductoperatorsmapping logicalstates accord- cells, meaning they also detect the presence of Z or M
ing to errors on their face qubits. Fig. 19 shows a dual error
chain starting and ending on dual boundaries. In an
ψ′ =C ZλXdZ λX1pZ λX2pXλZ1dXλZ2dXλZp ψ . (1) analogous manner to primal error chains, the parity of
| Li X d 1p 2p 1d 2d p | L i
the dual boundary cells containing the chain endpoints
We do not yet quite have what we need — a logical remains unchanged.
CNOT between two primal qubits. Consider Fig. 16a Primaland dual errorcorrectionoccur independent of
[2]. Thisshowshowanadditionalprimalanddualancilla one another. It may seem strange that both appear to
qubitcanbeusedtosimulatelogicalCNOTbetweentwo only focus on Z and M errors. An X error that oc-
primalqubits. Essentially,thefirstCNOTandassociated curs just before an M measurement has no effect on
measurement converts the control primal qubit into a the measurement result or the underlying cluster state
dual qubit, the second CNOT performs the necessary after the measurement. An X error that occurs during
logical operation and the third CNOT converts the dual the preparationof the cluster state, as shown in Fig. 20,
qubitbackintoaprimalqubit. Fig.16bshowsabraiding is equivalent to one or more Z errors on the neighboring
ofdefectsequivalenttoFig.16aandasimplifiedbraiding qubitsaswellasanX errorjustbeforemeasurement. As
is shown in Fig. 16c [2]. before, we can ignore the X error, and the error correc-
tion scheme deals with Z errors.
We are now in a position to describe how correction
VII. TOPOLOGICAL CLUSTER STATE ERROR
proceeds. Note that only the classical measurement re-
CORRECTION
sults will be corrected, not any remaining unmeasured
qubits. Without loss ofgenerality,let us focus onprimal
Topological cluster state error correction is conceptu- errors. The procedure for correcting dual errors is anal-
ally simple. As discussed in Section III, measuring the ogous. Suppose we have a connected lattice of (primal)
six face qubits of a given cell in the X basis should yield cellswith bothprimalanddualboundaries. Identify one
six bits ofinformationwith evenparity. Oddparitycells dimension of the lattice as simulated time. Suppose we
indicate the presence of errors. If we have a pair of cells measure all qubits in the lattice up to some given sim-
with odd parity, we can connect the cells with a path ulated time t in the X basis and classically determine
running from face qubit to face qubit, then bit-flip the which cells in the measured region have odd parity. We
measurement results associated with the path. This will need an algorithm to match odd parity cells with each
ensureeverycellinthelatticehasevenparityoncemore. other and with primal boundaries such that there is a
If we have many cells with odd parity, we can use an ef- high probability the matching corresponds to the errors
ficient classical algorithm, namely the minimum weight that caused the odd parity cells. We have already men-
matching algorithm[18], to pair up the cells using paths tioned that the algorithm we will use is called the mini-
with minimum total length. Applying bit-flips to the mum weight matching algorithm [18].
measurement results along these paths again results in The minimum weight matching algorithm takes a
every cell having even parity. weightedgraphwithanevennumberofverticesandpro-
There are, however, many important issues left unan- duces a spanning list of disjoint edges with the property
swered by the above paragraph. Errors can occur in that no other list has lower total weight. The cells with
chains. A lattice with 64 cells and a number of errors odd parity become half the vertices we will feed into the
is shown in Fig. 17. Only cells at the endpoints of er- algorithm. For every vertex in this list we add a vertex
rorchains have oddparity (indicated by thick lines). No correspondingto the nearestpointonthe nearestprimal
informationaboutthepathoftheerrorchainisprovided. boundary. We make an almost complete graph of these
The boundaries of the lattice also require special con- vertices according to the following rules: all boundary
sideration. Fig. 17 shows a primal lattice of primal cells verticesareconnectedtoallotherboundaryverticeswith
with primal boundaries containing primal errors. If an edge weight zero, odd parity cell vertices are connected
endpointofachainofatleasttwoprimalerrorsislocated to all odd parity cell vertices with edge weight equal to
on a primal boundary, the boundary cell containing this the sum of the absolute value of the differences of their
endpoint will still have even parity. Primal error chains three coordinates measured in cells, and odd parity cell
X1 X2 X1=(-1)s1X1 X2=(-1)s2X2
FIG. 14: The logical identity gate. Red lines and dots indicate Z operators, blue lines indicate X operators. Measuring all
qubits in the middle panels in the indicated bases results in a mapping between logical operators with byproduct operators
dependenton theparity of themeasurement results.
dual Xd Xd
X1p X1p X1p
Z2d Z2d Z2d
FIG.15: Clusterstatestabilizersconsistentwiththeindicatedbraidingofdefectsandconnectingtheindicatedlogicaloperators
in a mannercorresponding to logical CNOT with byproductoperators.
vertices are connected to their nearest boundary vertex between pairs of vertices such that at least one vertex
with edge weight equal to the number of cells that need of the pair is located at a time earlier than some t t
to be passed through to reach the boundary plus one. wheret depends onthe size ofthe computation. This is
When this graph is processed by the minimum weight to ensure that odd parity cells close to t have a chance
matchingalgorithm,theresultingedgelistishighlylikely to be matched with appropriate partner cell, which may
to enable correction of the odd parity cells in a manner not yet have been measured.
thatdoesnotintroducelogicalerrors. Theclassicalmea-
surement results along an arbitrary path connecting the
relevantpairs ofcells arebit-flipped resulting inallmea-
sured cells having even parity. Note that in a large com-
putation such corrective bit-flips would only be applied
ancilla 0 control out
control in M
dualancilla + M
target in target out
ancilla 0 control out
control in M
dualancilla + M
target in target out
control in control out
target in target out
FIG. 18: A cluster state with both primal boundaries and
FIG. 16: a.) Circuit comprised of logical gates described in dualboundaries,whichconsistofprimalcellscutinhalf. Ex-
the text that simulates logical CNOT between two primal amples of the observable parity effects of primal error chains
qubits. b.) Equivalent braiding of defects. c.) Equivalent connected to the two types of boundaries are included with
simplified braiding of defects. odd parity cells indicated by thick boundinglines.
FIG. 19: An undetectable dual error chain connecting two
dualboundaries.
FIG. 17: A cluster state comprised of 64 primal cells of the
form shown in Fig. 1a. Three differentZ orM X error chains
of length 1,2 and3 areindicated bythicklines and enlarged
qubits. Cellswithoddparityareindicatedwiththickbound-
inglines. Mostofthequbitsintheclusterstatehavenotbeen
tialization of 0 and + , Z and X measurement,
drawn for clarity. | L i | L i L L
non-fault-tolerantpreparationof(0 +eiθ 1 )/√2,and
fault-tolerantimplementationsofthelogicalidentitygate
and logical CNOT. By making use of state distillation
VIII. CONCLUSION
[5, 19, 20], this set of gates is sufficient to enable univer-
sal fault-tolerant quantum computation.
We have presented a thorough review of [1, 2], dis-
cussing how a specific 3-D cluster state can be used to Furtherworkisrequiredtodeterminethelevelofqubit
performgeneralerrorcorrectiondespiteonlydetectingZ loss the scheme can tolerate and the dependence of the
and M errors directly and detailing fault-tolerant ini- threshold error rate on qubit loss.
X IX. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
FIG. 20: Quantum circuit showing how X errors occurring
at any point during the preparation of the cluster state are We are much indebted to Robert Raussendorf for ex-
equivalenttopotentiallymultipleZerrorsandanXerrorjust
tensiveandilluminatingdiscussions. KGissupportedby
before measurement in theX basis, which can beignored. DOE Grant No. DE-FG03-92-ER40701.
[1] R. Raussendorf and J. Harrington, Phys. Rev. Lett. 98, ph/9806021.
190504 (2007), quant-ph/0610082. [12] P. Jaksch, H.-J. Briegel, J. I. Cirac, C. W. Gardiner,
[2] R. Raussendorf, J. Harrington, and K. Goyal, New J. and P. Zoller, Phys. Rev. Lett. 82, 1975 (1999), quant-
Phys.9, 199 (2007), quant-ph/0703143. ph/9810087.
[3] M. A. Nielson and I. L. Chuang, Quantum Computation [13] S.J.Devitt,A.D.Greentree,R.Ionicioiu,J.L.O’Brien,
andQuantumInformation (CambridgeUniversityPress, W.J.Munro,andL.C.L.Hollenberg,Phys.Rev.A76,
Cambridge, 2000). 052312 (2007), arXiv:0706.2226.
[4] R. V. Meter and K. M. Itoh, Phys. Rev. A 71, 052320 [14] S.J.Devitt,A.G.Fowler,A.M.Stephens,A.D.Green-
(2005), quant-ph/0408006. tree, L.C.L.Hollenberg, W.J. Munro,and K.Nemoto,
[5] A. G. Fowler, A. M. Stephens, and P. Groszkowski, arXiv:0808.1782 (2008).
arXiv:0803.0272 (2008). [15] R. Stock and D. F. V. James, arXiv:0808.1591 (2008).
[6] D. Gottesman, Ph.D. thesis, Caltech (1997), quant- [16] H. J. Briegel and R. Raussendorf, Phys. Rev. Lett. 86,
ph/9705052. 910 (2001), quant-ph/0004051.
[7] S.B.BravyiandA.Y.Kitaev,quant-ph/9811052(1998). [17] W.Du¨r,H.Aschauer,andH.-J.Briegel,Phys.Rev.Lett.
[8] R. Raussendorf, D. E. Browne, and H. J. Briegel, Phys. 91, 107903 (2003), quant-ph/0303087.
Rev.A 68, 022312 (2003), quant-ph/0301052. [18] W. Cook and A. Rohe, INFORMS J. Comput. 11, 138
[9] E. Knill, R. Laflamme, and G. J. Milburn, Nature 409, (1999).
46 (2001), quant-ph/0006088. [19] S.BravyiandA.Kitaev,Phys.Rev.A71,022316(2005),
[10] W.J.Munro,K.Nemoto,andT.P.Spiller,NewJ.Phys. quant-ph/0403025.
7, 137 (2005), quant-ph/0507084. [20] B.W.Reichardt,Quant.Info.Proc.4,251(2005),quant-
[11] G. K. Brennen, C. M. Caves, P. S. Jessen, and I. H. ph/0411036.
Deutsch, Phys. Rev. Lett. 82, 1060 (1999), quant-