Towards Vision-Based Deep Reinforcement Learning
for Robotic Motion Control
Fangyi Zhang, Jürgen Leitner, Michael Milford, Ben Upcroft, Peter Corke
ARC Centre of Excellence for Robotic Vision (ACRV)
Queensland University of Technology (QUT)
fangyi.zhang@hdr.qut.edu.au
Thispaperintroducesamachinelearningbased
system for controlling a robotic manipulator
with visual perception only. The capability
to autonomously learn robot controllers solely
from raw-pixel images and without any prior
knowledgeofconfigurationisshownforthefirst
time. Webuilduponthesuccessofrecentdeep
reinforcement learning and develop a system
for learning target reaching with a three-joint
robot manipulator using external visual obser-
vation. ADeepQNetwork(DQN)wasdemon-
strated to perform target reaching after train- Figure 1: Baxter’s arm being controlled by a trained
ing in simulation. Transferring the network to deepQNetwork(DQN).Syntheticimages(ontheright)
real hardware and real observation in a naive arefedintotheDQNtoovercomesomeofthereal-world
approachfailed,butexperimentsshowthatthe issues encountered, i.e., the differences between training
network works when replacing camera images and testing settings.
with synthetic images.
and deep learning. One topical example of DRL is the
1 Introduction Deep Q Network (DQN), which, after learning to play
Atari2600gamesover38days,wasabletomatchhuman
Robots are widely used to complete various manipula-
performance when playing the game [Mnih et al., 2013;
tion tasks in industrial manufacturing factories where
Mnih et al., 2015]. Despite their promise, applying
environments are relatively static and simple. However,
DQNsto"perfect"andrelativelysimplecomputergame
theseoperationsarestillchallengingforrobotsinhighly
worlds is a far cry from deploying them in complex
dynamic and complex environments commonly encoun-
roboticmanipulationtasks,especiallywhenfactorssuch
tered in everyday life. Nevertheless, humans are able to
as sensor noise and image offsets are considered.
manipulate in such highly dynamic and complex envi-
This paper takes the first steps towards enabling
ronments. We seem to be able to learn manipulation
DQNs to be used for learning robotic manipulation. We
skills by observing how others perform them (learning
focus on learning these skills from visual observation of
from observation), as well as, master new skills through
the manipulator, without any prior knowledge of config-
trial and error (learning from exploration). Inspired by
urationorjointstate. Towardsthisend,asfirststeps,we
this, we want robots to learn and master manipulation
assess the feasibility of using DQNs to perform a simple
skills in the same way.
targetreachingtask,animportantcomponentofgeneral
To give robots the ability to learn from explo-
manipulationtaskssuchasobjectpicking. Inparticular,
ration, methods are required that are able to learn au-
we make the following contributions:
tonomously and which are flexible to a range of differ-
ing manipulation tasks. A promising candidate for au- • We present a DQN-based learning system for a tar-
tonomous learning in this regard is Deep Reinforcement get reaching task. The system consists of three
Learning(DRL),whichcombinesreinforcementlearning components: a 2D robotic arm simulator for target
2v19730.1151:viXra
reaching, a DQN learner, and ROS-based interfaces the issues with greedy policy search and gradient based
to enable operation on a Baxter robot. methods. How to generate the right reward is an ac-
tive topic of research. Intrinsic motivation and curiosity
• We train agents in simulation and evaluate them in
havebeenshowntoprovidemeanstoexplorelargestate
both simulation and real-world target reaching ex-
spaces, such as the ones found on complex humanoids,
periments. The experiments in simulation are con-
faster and more efficient [Frank et al., 2014].
ducted with varying levels of noise, image offsets,
initial arm poses and link lengths, which are com-
2.3 Deep Visuomotor Policies
monconcernsinroboticmotioncontrolandmanip-
ulation. To enable robots to learn manipulation skills with little
prior knowledge, a convolutional neural network (CNN)
• We identify and discuss a number of issues and op-
based policy representation architecture (deep visuo-
portunitiesforfutureworktowardsenablingvision-
motor policies) and its guided policy search method
based deep reinforcement learning in real-world
were introduced by Sergey et al. [Levine et al., 2015a;
robotic manipulation.
Levine et al., 2015b]. The deep visuomotor policies map
joint angles and camera images directly to the joint
2 Related Work
torques. Robot configurations are the only necessary
2.1 Vision-based Robotic Manipulation prior knowledge. The policy search method consists of
Vision-based robotic manipulation is the process by two phases, i.e., optimal control phase and supervised
which robots use their manipulators (such as robotic learning phase. The training consists of three proce-
arms) to rearrange environments [Mason, 2001], based dures, i.e., pose CNN training, trajectories pre-training,
on camera images. The early vision-based robotic ma- and end-to-end training.
nipulation was implemented using pose-based (position The deep visuomotor policies did enable robots to
and orientation) closed-loop control, where vision was learn manipulation skills with little prior knowledge
typically used to extract the pose of an object as an in- through supervised learning, but pre-collected datasets
put for a manipulation controller at the beginning of a werenecessary. Humaninvolvementsinthedatasetscol-
task [Kragic and Christensen, 2002]. lection made this method less autonomous. Besides, the
Mostcurrentvision-basedroboticmanipulationmeth- training method specifically designed to speed up the
odsareclosed-loopbasedonvisualperception. Avision- contact-rich manipulation learning made it less flexible
basedmanipulationsystemwasimplementedonaJohns for other manipulation tasks.
Hopkins “Steady Hand Robot” for cooperative manipu-
2.4 Deep Q Network
lation at millimeter to micrometer scales, using virtual
fixtures [Bettini et al., 2004]. With both monocular and The DQN, a topical example of DRL, satisfies both the
binocular vision cues, various closed-loop visual strate- autonomy and flexibility requirements for learning from
gies were applied to enable robots to manipulate both exploration. It successfully learnt to play 49 different
known and unknown objects [Kragic et al., 2005]. Atari 2600 games, achieving a human-level of control
Also, various learning methods have been applied to [Mnihet al., 2015]. TheDQNusedadeepconvolutional
implementcomplexmanipulationtasksintherealworld. neural network (CNN) [Krizhevsky et al., 2012] to ap-
With continuous hidden Markov models (HMMs), a hu- proximate a Q-value function. It maps raw pixel im-
manoid robot was able to learn dual-arm manipulation ages directly to actions. No pre-input feature extraction
tasksfromhumandemonstrationsthroughvision[Asfour is needed. The only one thing is to let the algorithm
et al., 2008]. However, most of these algorithms are for improve policies through playing games over and over
specific tasks and need much prior knowledge. They are again. It learnt playing 49 different games, using the
notflexibleforlearningarangeofdifferentmanipulation same network architecture with no modification.
tasks. TheDQNisdefinedbyitsinputs–rawpixelsofgame
video frames and received rewards – and outputs, i.e.,
2.2 Reinforcement Learning in Robotics
the number of available actions in a game [Mnih et al.,
Reinforcement Learning (RL) [Sutton and Barto, 1998; 2015]. This number of actions is the only prior knowl-
Kormushev et al., 2013] has been applied in robotics, as edge, which means no robot configuration information
it promises a way to learn complex actions on complex is needed to the agent, when using the DQN for motion
robotic systems by just providing informing the robot control. However,intheDQNtrainingprocess,theAtari
whether its actions were successful (positive reward) or 2600 game engine worked as a reward function, but for
not (negative reward). [Peters et al., 2003] reviewed robotic motion control, no such engine exists. To apply
someoftheRLconceptsintermsofapplicabilitytocon- itinroboticmotioncontrol, arewardfunctionisneeded
trol complex humanoid robots and highlighting some of to assess trials. Besides, sensing noise and higher com-
Outputs of 3 Convolutional Layers Rf Rs Rf
Outputs of 2 Fully
Rs Rf Rf Connected Layers
Figure 2: Schematic of the DQN layers for end-to-end learning and their respective outputs. Four input images are
reshaped (Rs) and then fed into the DQN network as grey-scale images (converted from RGB). The DQN, consists
of three convolutional layers with rectifier layers (Rf) after each, followed by a reshaping layer (Rs) and two fully
connectedlayers(againwitharectifierlayerinbetween). Thenormalizedoutputsofeachlayerarevisualized. (Note:
The outputs of the last four layers are shown as matrices instead of vectors.)
plexity and dynamics are inevitable issues for real-world
applications.
3 Problem Definition and System
Description
A common problem in robotic manipulation is to reach
fortheobjecttobeinteractedwith. Thistargetreaching
task is defined as controlling a robot arm, such that its
end-effector is reaching a specific target configuration.
We are interested in the case in which a robot performs
thetargetreachingwithvisualperceptiononly. Tolearn
such a task, we developed a system consisting of three
parts:
• a 2D simulator for robotic target reaching, creating
Figure 3: System overview
the visual inputs to the learner
• a deep reinforcement learning framework based on
When training or testing in simulation, the target
the DQN implementation by Google Deepmind
reaching simulator provides the reward value (R) and
[Mnih et al., 2015], and
image(I). Risusedfortrainingthenetwork. Theaction
• a component of ROS-based interfaces to control a output (A) of the DQN is directly sent to the simulated
Baxter robot according to the DQN outputs. robotic arm.
WhentestingonaBaxterrobotusingcameraimages,
3.1 DQN-based Learning System an external camera provides the input images (I). The
The DQN adopted here has the same architecture with action output (A) of the DQN is implemented on the
that for playing Atari games, which contains three con- robotcontrolledbyROS-basedinterfaces. Theinterfaces
volutional layers and two fully connected layers [Mnih control the robot by sending updated robot’s poses (q(cid:48)).
et al., 2015]. Its implementation is based on the Google
3.2 Target Reaching Simulator
Deepmind DQN code1 with minor modifications. Fig. 2
We simulate the reaching task to control a three-joint
shows the architecture and examplary output of each
robotic arm in 2D (Fig. 4). The simulator was imple-
layer. The inputs of the DQN include rewards and im-
mented from scratch. In the implementation, no simu-
ages. Its output is the index of the action to take. The
lation platform was used. As shown in Fig. 4(a), the
DQNlearnstargetreachingskillsintheinteractionswith
roboticarmconsistsoffourlinksandthreejoints,whose
the target reaching simulator. An overview of the sys-
configurations are consistent to the specifications of a
tem framework for both the learning in simulation and
Baxter arm, including joints constraints. The blue spot
testing on a real robot is shown in Fig. 3.
is the target to be reached. For a better visualization,
Algorithm 1: Reward Function
Completion Area input : P : the target 2D coordinates;
P : the end-effector 2D coordinates.
output: R: the reward for current state;
T: whether the game is terminal.
1 Dis = ComputeDistance(P t , P e );
S1 E1 W1 2 DisChange=Dis−PreviousDis;
3 if DisChange>0 then
5 else if DisChange<0 then
End Effector 7 else
(a) Schematic diagram (b) The robot simulator
during a successful reach 9 end
10 R acc =R t +R t−1 +R t−2 ;
Figure 4: The 2D target reaching simulator, providing 11 if R acc <−1 then
visual inputs to the DQN learner. It was implemented 12 T =True;
from scratch, no simulation platform was used. 13 else
14 T =False;
Thesimulatorcanbecontrolledbysendingspecificcom- 15 end
mandstotheindividualjoints“S1”,“E1” and“W1”. The
simulator screen resolution is 160×320.
is terminal. Its algorithm is shown in Algorithm 1. The
The corresponding real scenario that the simulator
rewardofeachactionisdeterminedaccordingtothedis-
simulates is: with appropriate constant joint angles of
tancechangebetweentheend-effectorandthetarget. If
other joints on a Baxter arm, the arm moves in a verti-
thedistancegetscloser,therewardfunctionreturns1;if
cal plane controlled by joints “S1”, “E1” and “W1”, and
gets further, returns -1; otherwise returns 0. If the sum
a controller (game player) observes the arm through an
of the latest three rewards is smaller than -1, the game
external camera placed directly aside it with a horizon-
terminates. This reward function was designed as a first
talpointofview. Thethreejointsareinpositioncontrol
step, more study is necessary to get an optimal reward
mode. The background is white.
function.
In the system, the 2D simulator is used as a target
reaching video game in connection with the DQN setup.
4 Experiments and Results
Itprovidesrawpixelinputstothenetworkandhasnine
optionsforaction,i.e.,threebuttonsforeachjoint: joint To evaluate the feasibility of the DQN-based system in
angle increasing, decreasing and hold. The joint angle learning performing target reaching, we did some exper-
increasing/decreasing step is constant at 0.02 rad. At iments in both simulation and real-world scenarios. The
the beginning of each round, joints “S1”, “E1” and “W1” experiments consist of three phases: training in simula-
will be set to a certain initial pose, such as [0.0, 0.0, 0.0] tion, testinginsimulation, andtestingintherealworld.
rad; and the target will be randomly selected.
In the game playing, a reward value will be returned 4.1 Training in Simulation Scenarios
for each button press. The reward value is determined To evaluate the capability of the DQN to adapt to some
by a reward function introduced in Section 3.3. When noise commonly concerned in robotic manipulation, we
satisfyingsomeconditions,thegamewillterminate. The trained several agents with different simulator settings.
game terminal is determined by the reward function as The different settings include sensing noise, image off-
well. Foraplayer,thegoalistogetanashighaspossible sets, variations in initial arm pose and link length. The
accumulated reward before the game terminates. For setting details for training the five agents are shown in
clarity, we name an entire trial from the start of the Table 1. Their screenshots are shown in Fig. 5, respec-
game to its terminal as one round. tively.
AgentAwastrainedinSettingAwherethe2Drobotic
3.3 Reward Function
arm was initialized to the same pose ([0.0, 0.0, 0.0] rad)
To keep consistent to the DQN setup, the reward func- at the beginning of each round. There was no image
tion has two return values: one for the reward of each noise in Setting A. To simulate camera sensing noise,
action;theothershowswhetherthetargetreachinggame random noise was added in Setting B, on the basis of
(a) Settings A: simula- (b) Setting B: simula- (c) SettingC:SettingB (d) SettingD:SettingC (e) SettingE:SettingD
tion images tion images + noise + random initial pose + random image offset + random link length
Figure 5: Screenshots highlighting the different training scenarios for the agents.
Table 1: Agents and training settings
Agent Simulator Settings 90
A constant initial pose 70
B Setting A + random image noise
C Setting B + random initial pose
D Setting C + random image offset 30
E Setting D + random link length 20
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80
Setting A. The random noise was with a uniform distri-
bution with a scale between -0.1 and 0.1 (for float pixel
values).
In Setting C, in addition to random image noise, the
initialarmposewasrandomlyselected. Inthetrainingof
Agent D, random image offsets were added on the basis
of Setting C. The offset ranges in u and v directions
were respectively [-23, 7] and [-40, 20] in pixel. Agent
E was trained with dynamic arm link lengths. The link
length variation ratio was [-4.2, 12.5]% with respect to
thelinklengthsettingsinthepreviousfoursettings. The
image offsets and link lengths were randomly selected
at the beginning of each round, and stayed unchanged
in the entire round (not vary at each frame). All the
parametersfornoisyfactorswereempiricallyselectedas
a first step.
All the agents were trained using more than 4 million
steps within 160 hours. Due to the difference in setting
complexity, the time-cost for the simulator to update
each game video frame varies in five different settings.
Therefore, within 160 hours, the exact numbers of used
training steps for the five agents are different. They are
6.475, 6.275, 5.225, 4.75 and 6.35 million, respectively.
The action Q-value converging curves are shown in
Fig. 6. The Q-value curves are respect to training
epochs. Each epoch contains 50,000 training steps. Fig.
Training Epoch
Figure6: ActionQ-valueconvergingcurves. Eachepoch
contains 50,000 training steps. The average maximum
action Q-values are the average of the estimated max-
imum Q-values for all states in a validation set. The
validation set has 500 frames.
6showstheconvergingcasebefore80epochs,i.e.,4mil-
lion training steps. The average maximum action Q-
values are the average of the estimated maximum Q-
values for all states in a validation set. The validation
setwasrandomlyselectedatthebeginningofeachtrain-
ing.
From Fig. 6, we can observe that all the five agents
converge towards to a certain Q-value state, although
their values are different. One thing we have to empha-
sizeisthisconvergingisjustforaveragemaximumaction
Q-values. A high value might but not necessarily indi-
cateahighperformanceofanagentinperformingtarget
reaching,sincethisvaluecannotcompletelyindicatethe
target reaching performance.
4.2 Testing in Simulation Scenarios
We tested the five agents in simulation scenarios with
the 2D simulator. Each agent was tested in all those
five settings in Table 1. Each test took 200 rounds, i.e.,
Table 2: Success rates (%) in different settings
terminated200times. Moretestingroundscanmakethe
testing results closer to the ground truth, but need too Setting
much time. A B C D E
In the testing, task success rates were evaluated. In
A 51.0 53.0 14.0 8.5 8.5
thecomputationofsuccessrates, itisregardedasasuc-
B 50.5 49.5 11.0 8.0 10.0
cess when the end-effector gets into a completion area
C 32.0 34.5 36.0 22.5 14.0
with a radius of 16 cm around a target, as shown in the
D 13.5 16.5 22.0 19.5 15.0
grey circle in Fig. 4(a), which is twice size of the target
E 13.0 16.5 20.0 16.5 19.0
circle. The radius of 16 cm is equivalent to 15 pixels in
the simulator screen. However, for the DQN, this com-
pletion area is a ellipse (a=8 pixels, b=4 pixels), since
Table 3: Success rates (%) after different training steps
the simulator screen will be resized from 160×320 to
84×84 before being input to the learning core. Training Steps / million
Agent/Setting
Table 2 shows the success rates of different agents 1 2 3 4 f
in different settings after 3 million training steps (60
A 36.0 43.0 51.0 36.0 36.5
epochs). The data in the diagonal (with a cell color
B 58.0 55.5 49.5 51.5 13.5
ofgray)showsthesuccessrateofeachagenttestedwith
C 30.5 33.0 36.0 48.0 13.5
the same setting in which it trained, i.e., Agent A was
D 16.5 17.5 19.5 26.5 14.0
tested in Setting A.
E 13.0 18.5 19.0 23.0 27.0
We also did some experiments for agents from differ-
ent training steps. Table 3 shows the success rates of
different agents after some certain training steps. The
tings. However, some goes down after a certain training
success rates of each agent were tested with the same
step, e.g., the success rate of Agent A goes down after 4
simulator setting in which it was trained, i.e., the case
million training steps. Theoretically, with a appropriate
in the diagonal of Table 2. In Table 3, “f” indicates the
reward function, the DQN should perform better and
finalnumberofstepsusedfortrainingeachagentin160
better, and the success rates should go up iteratively.
hours, as mentioned in Section 4.1.
Thegoingdowncasewasquitepossiblycausedbythe
What we will discuss regarding the data in Table 2
reward function, which has the possibility to guide the
and 3 is based on the assumption that some outliers
agent to a wrong direction. For the case in this pa-
of some conclusions appeared accidentally due to the
per, the evaluation is based on success rates, but the
limited number of testing rounds. Although 200 test-
reward function is based on distance changes. The rela-
ing rounds are already able to extract data changing
tion between success rates and distance changes is indi-
trends in success rates, they are insufficient to extract
rect. This indirect relation provides the incorrect guid-
the ground truth. Some minor success rate distortions
ance possibility. This should be considered carefully in
happenoccasionally. Tomaketheconclusionsmorecon-
future work.
vincing, more study is necessary.
Table 3 also shows that the success rate of the agent
From Table 2, we can find that Agent A and B can trainedinamorecomplicatedsettingisnormallysmaller
bothadapttoSettingAandB,butcannotadapttothe than that in a simpler setting, and needs more training
other three settings. This shows that these two agents time to get to a same level of success rate. For example,
arerobusttorandomimagenoise, butnotrobusttody- thesuccessrateofAgentEissmallerthanthatofAgent
namicarminitialposeandlinklength,andimageoffsets. D in each training episode, but is close to that of Agent
Therandomimagenoiseisnotakeyfeatureinthesetwo D in a latter training episode.
agents. In general, no matter whether the discussion assump-
In addition, other than the settings in which they are tionholdsornot,thedatainTable2and3atleastshows
trained, Agent C, D and E can also achieve relatively thattheDQNhasthecapabilitytoadapttothesenoisy
highsuccessratesinthesettingswithfewernoisyfactors factors, and is feasible to learn performing target reach-
than their training settings. This indicates that agents ingfromexplorationinsimulation. However,morestudy
trained with more noisy factors can adapt to settings is necessary to increase the success rates.
with fewer noisy factors.
4.3 Real World Experiment Using Camera
In Table 3, we can find that the success rate of each
agent normally goes up after more training steps. This
showsthat,inthetrainingprocess,allthefiveagentscan To check the feasibility of trained agents in the real
learntoadapttothenoisyfactorspresentedintheirset- world, we did a target reaching experiment in real sce-
ing target reaching. There were some kind of mapping
distortions between real and simulation scenarios. The
distortions might be caused by the differences between
real-scenario and simulation-scenario images.
4.4 Real World Experiment Using
Synthetic Images
To verify the analysis regarding the reason why Agent
B failed to perform target reaching, we did another real
worldexperimentusingsyntheticimagesinsteadofcam-
eraimages. Intheexperiment,thesyntheticimageswere
generated by the 2D simulator according to real-time
joint angles (“S1”, “E1” and “W1”) on a Baxter robot.
The real-time joint angles were provided by the ROS-
basedinterfaces. Inthiscase,therewasnodifferencebe-
(a) Real world experiment using (b) Asampleinputim-
tween real-scenario and simulation-scenario images. All
camera images age
other settings were the same with those in Section 4.3,
Figure 7: Testing scene and a sample input of the real as shown in Fig. 1.
world experiment using camera images. In the testing In this experiment, we used the same agent that was
scene, a Baxter arm moved on a vertical plane with a used in Section 4.3, i.e., Agent B trained with 3 million
white background. To guarantee that images input to steps. It achieved a consistent success rate with that in
the DQN have an as consistent as possible appearance the simulation-scenario testing.
to those in simulation scenarios, camera images were Accordingtotheresults,wecanconcludethattherea-
cropped and masked with a boundary. The boundary son why Agent B failed in completing the target reach-
is from the background of a simulator screenshot. ing task with camera images is the existence of input
image differences. These differences might come from
camera pose variations, color and shape distortions, or
narios using camera images, i.e., the second phase men-
some other factors. More study is necessary to exactly
tionedinSection3.1. Inthisexperiment,weusedAgent
figure out where the differences came from.
B trained with 3 million steps, which has relatively high
success rates for both Setting A and B in the testing in
5 Conclusion and Discussion
simulation.
The experiment settings were arranged to the case The DQN-based system is feasible to learn performing
that the 2D simulator simulated, i.e., a Baxter arm target reaching from exploration in simulation, using
moved on a vertical plane with a white background. A only visual observation with no prior knowledge. How-
grey-scalecamerawasplacedinfrontofthearm,observ- ever,theagent(AgentB)trainedinsimulationscenarios
ingthearmwithahorizontalviewofpoint(fortheDQN, failedtoperformtargetreachingintherealworldexperi-
the grey-scale camera is the same with a color camera, mentusingcameraimagesasinputs. Instead,inthereal
since even the images from Atari games and the 2D tar- world experiment using synthetic images as inputs, the
get reaching simulator are RGB-color images, they are agent got a consistent success rate with that in simula-
converted to grey-scale images prior to being input to tion. These two different results show that the failure
the network). The background was a white sheet. The in the real world experiment with camera images was
testing scene and a sample input to the DQN are shown caused by the input image differences between real and
in Fig. 7(a) and 7(b), respectively. simulation scenarios. To determine the causes of these
In the experiment, to make the agent work in the real more work is required.
world, we tried to match the arm position (in images) In the future, we are looking at either decreasing the
in real scenarios to that in simulation scenarios. The imagedifferencesormakingagentsrobusttothesediffer-
positionadjustmentwasmadethroughchangingcamera ences. Decreasing the differences is a trade-off between
pose and image cropping parameters. However, no mat- making the simulator more consistent to real scenarios
ter how we adjusted, it did not reach the target. The andpreprocessinginputimagestomakethemmorecon-
success rate is 0. sistent to those in simulation scenarios. If choose to in-
Other than the success rate, we also got a qualitative crease the fidelity of the simulator, it will most likely
result: Agent B mapped specific input images to certain resultinaslow-downofthesimulation,increasingtrain-
actions, but the mapping was ineffective for perform- ing time.
Regarding making agents robust to the differences, learning in robotics: Applications and real-world
there are four possible methods: adding variations of challenges. Robotics, 2(3):122–148, 2013.
the factors causing the image differences into simulation
[Kragic and Christensen, 2002] DanicaKragicandHen-
scenarios when training, adding a fine-tuning process in
rik I Christensen. Survey on visual servoing for ma-
real scenarios after the training in simulation scenarios,
nipulation. Technical report, Computational Vision
training in real scenarios directly, and designing a new
and Active Perception Laboratory, Royal Institute of
DRL architecture (still can be a DQN) which is robust
Technology, Stockholm, Sweden, 2002.
to the image differences.
[Kragic et al., 2005] Danica Kragic, Mårten Björkman,
Inadditiontosolvingtheproblemofimagedifferences,
Henrik I Christensen, and Jan-Olof Eklundh. Vi-
morestudyisnecessaryinthedesignofrewardfunction.
sion for robotic object manipulation in domestic set-
Agoodrewardfunctionisthekeytogeteffectivemotion
tings. Robotics and Autonomous Systems, 52(1):85–
controlorevenmanipulationskillsandalsospeedupthe
100, 2005.
learning process. The reward function used in this work
is just a first step. It is far less than enough to be a [Krizhevsky et al., 2012] Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya
good reward function. Other than the effectiveness and Sutskever, and Geoffrey E Hinton. Imagenet
efficiencyconcerns,agoodrewardfunctionneedsalsoto classification with deep convolutional neural net-
be flexible to a range of general purpose motion control works. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
or even manipulation tasks. Systems (NIPS), pages 1097–1105, 2012.
Besides, the visual perception in this work is from an
[Levine et al., 2015a] Sergey Levine, Chelsea Finn,
external monocular camera. An on-robot stereo camera
Trevor Darrell, and Pieter Abbeel. End-to-end train-
or RGBD sensor can be a more effective and practical
ingofdeepvisuomotorpolicies. Technicalreport,Uni-
solution for applications in the 3D real world. The joint
versity of California, Berkeley, CA, USA, 2015.
controlmodeinthisworkispositioncontrol,someother
[Levine et al., 2015b] Sergey Levine, Nolan Wagener,
control modes like speed control and torque control are
and Pieter Abbeel. Learning contact-rich manipula-
morecommonandappropriate for dynamicmotioncon-
tion skills with guided policy search. Proceedings of
trol and manipulation in real-world applications.
the IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
Acknowledgements Automation (ICRA), pages 156–163, 2015.
ThisresearchwasconductedbytheAustralianResearch [Mason, 2001] Matthew T Mason. Mechanics of robotic
CouncilCentreofExcellenceforRoboticVision(project manipulation. MIT Press, 2001.
number CE140100016). Computational resources and [Mnih et al., 2013] Volodymyr Mnih, Koray
servicesusedinthisworkwerepartiallyprovidedbythe Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Alex Graves, Ioannis
HPC and Research Support Group, Queensland Univer- Antonoglou, Daan Wierstra, and Martin Riedmiller.
sity of Technology (QUT). Playing atari with deep reinforcement learning.
Technical report, Google DeepMind, London, UK,