Towards the Recapitulation of Ancient History in the Laboratory:
Combining Synthetic Biology with Experimental Evolution
Betül Kaçar1,2 and Eric Gaucher2,3
1NASA Astrobiology Institute, USA
2School of Biology, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA, 30322, USA
3School of Chemistry, Parker H. Petit Institute of Bioengineering and Biosciences,
Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA, 30332, USA
betul@gatech.edu
Gould’s remark suggests that there are too many
One way to understand the role history plays on
solutions for life to be repeatable. Such a suggestion
evolutionary trajectories is by giving ancient life a second
opportunity to evolve. Our ability to empirically perform implies that historical contingency is a fundamental
such an experiment, however, is limited by current determinant of evolutionary outcomes. Others, such as
experimental designs. Combining ancestral sequence Simon Conway Morris, have argued that evolution is
reconstruction with synthetic biology allows us to resurrect actually highly constrained, with many available
the past within a modern context and has expanded our pathways to only a relatively few destinations (Morris
understanding of protein functionality within a historical 2003). Advances in the field of experimental evolution
context. Experimental evolution, on the other hand, and whole-genome sequencing now make it possible to
provides us with the ability to study evolution in action, empirically examine the role of historical contingency in
under controlled conditions in the laboratory. Here we evolution at both the organismal (Wichman et al. 2000;
describe a novel experimental setup that integrates two Counago et al. 2006; Blount et al. 2008; Pena et al.
disparate fields - ancestral sequence reconstruction and
2010; Meyer et al. 2012) and molecular levels
experimental evolution. This allows us to rewind and
(Weinreich et al. 2006; Poelwijk et al. 2007; Pennisi
replay the evolutionary history of ancient biomolecules in
2011; Salverda et al. 2011).
the laboratory. We anticipate that our combination will
provide a deeper understanding of the underlying roles that
While various experimental evolution approaches have
contingency and determinism play in shaping evolutionary
made much progress in dissecting the role of history in
processes.
evolution by directly observing evolution in action, less
Introduction
is known about the direct relationship between
Living organisms are the product of their histories. genotypes (modern or ancient) and their effect on
Evolutionary biology is therefore an inherently shaping an organism's evolutionary trajectory. Here we
historical science yet many details of this history are propose a novel synthesis of synthetic biology and
unobtainable: the fossil record is incomplete; ancestral experimental evolution that will further our
genomic sequence information has been over-written understanding by combining molecular and systems
via mutations; natural evolution occurs on long time evolution and provide an unprecedented means of
scales; and the connections between genotype and addressing how contingency and deterministic forces
phenotype are often intractable. Understanding these interact to guide evolutionary trajectories.
details is particularly difficult when one considers the
potential role that chance plays in evolutionary Rebuilding History
and Creating Novelty with Synthetic Biology
outcomes. Along these lines, Stephen Jay Gould once
remarked:
Synthetic biologists assemble DNA to construct novel
[H]istory includes too much contingency, or shaping
genes, metabolic pathways and even organisms (Benner
of present results by long chains of unpredictable
and Sismour 2005; Endy 2005; Gibson et al. 2010).
antecedent states, rather than immediate determination
These manipulations provide us with a level of control
by timeless laws of nature… (Gould 1994).
©© 22001122 MMaassssaacchhuusseettttss IInnssttiittuuttee ooff TTeecchhnnoollooggyy AArrttiifificciiaall LLiiffee 1133:: 1111--1188
Towards the Recapitulation of Ancient History in the Laboratory: Combining Synthetic Biology with Experimental Evolution
that natural systems cannot provide, and this level of organism at the exact same chromosomal location. In
control minimizes unknown variables/parameters that some instances, we expect this replacement to cause the
effect particular systems. A powerful and increasingly modern organism to be maladapted because the ancient
useful synthetic biological approach is the gene/protein is not functionally equivalent to its
computational reconstruction of ancient sequences of (modern) descendent homolog. This synthetic
biomolecules using Ancestral Sequence Reconstruction recombinant organism is then experimentally evolved in
(ASR), an approach sometimes referred to as the laboratory, and the subsequent adaptations are
paleogenetics. Initially proposed by Pauling and monitored using fitness measurements and whole-
Zuckerkandl (Pauling and Zuckerkandl 1963), ASR genome sequencing.
merges history with natural selection (Stackhouse et al.
1990). ASR involves the alignment of DNA or protein
sequences, followed by the construction of a
phylogenetic tree that is then used to infer sequences of TOP-DOWN
ancestral genes at interior nodes of a tree using
Systems Biology
likelihood and/or Bayesian statistics (Gaucher 2007).
biological analysis of systems as a whole
Recent advances in DNA synthesis now permit us to +
resurrect these ancient sequences in the laboratory and Experimental Evolution
monitoring evolution in action
recombinantly express the ancient genes using modern
organisms in vivo or reconstituted in vitro translation Engineer novel organisms to
systems. Through a bottom-up approach we can answer specific evolutionary questions
and to understand the mechanisms of adaptation
engineer novel artificial systems that can be
manipulated to better understand nature. The growing
list of resurrected biomolecules now includes hormone Synthetic Biology
construction of biological systems
receptors (Thornton et al. 2003), alcohol +
dehydrogenases (Thomson et al. 2005), elongation Ancestral Sequence Reconstruction (ASR)
identifying the sites and the history of mutations
factors (Gaucher et al. 2008), thioredoxins (Perez-
Jimenez et al. 2011), among others (Benner et al. 2007) BOTTOM-UP
and most recently, complex molecular machines
(Finnigan et al. 2012).
Figure 1: Artificial biology meets nature. In a novel paleo-
As ASR follows a bottom-up approach and utilizes experimental evolution system, descriptive evolutionary
modern sequences to infer the past states of biology (top-down) meets applied, engineered synthetic
biomolecules, experimental evolution pursues a top- biology (bottom-up) to further our understanding of
down approach that involves the real-time examination evolutionary mechanisms
of the evolution of microbial model systems (Figure 1).
A paleo-experimental evolution setup also allows us to
(in the present context, top-down refers to complex
cellular systems and/or to whole organisms).
rewind and replay the molecular tape of life (or more
precisely, one biomolecular component of life) to
Experimental evolution has been used to address
understand the role of chance and determinism in
important questions in evolutionary biology (Elena and
evolution, albeit in a laboratory setting. If evolutionary
Lenski 2003). The experimental evolution approach is
outcomes are deterministic, placing ancestral proteins
particularly powerful because of the high level of
within a modern context may result in the convergence
control it permits, the tractability of its microbial
of the ancient sequence towards the sequence of its
participants, and the capacity to create and maintain a
modern counterpart. Alternatively, were historical
viable frozen fossil record of the evolving populations
contingency to be a major determinant of organismal
that may then be used for highly detailed studies to
evolution, there should be a number of available fitness
address a variety of questions in evolutionary biology.
peaks that may or may not be equally optimal and
accessible via multiple trajectories. A major challenge,
Here we introduce for the first time a novel system in
however, lies in our ability to develop a system that
which ASR is combined with experimental evolution,
permits adaptation to occur along both deterministic and
we term paleo-experimental evolution. In this approach,
contingent paths if given equal a priori opportunity. Of
ASR is used to reconstruct an ancestral gene/protein.
course it is difficult to conceive of such an ideal system.
The synthetic ancestral gene is then used to precisely
However, we should be able to manage some aspects of
replace the endogenous form of the gene from a modern
12 Artificial Life 13
Towards the Recapitulation of Ancient History in the Laboratory: Combining Synthetic Biology with Experimental Evolution
such a system. For instance, if we choose to evolve an What is fascinating in this complex picture is the
ancient enzyme that binds to only a single substrate and harmonious dialect, a manner of language defined by
converts that substrate into a product subsequently used intermolecular interactions within the context of the cell
downstream in a metabolic pathway, then we are limited and that has the ability to respond and adapt to varying
in the trajectories that the ancient enzyme can adapt (the environments (Dennett 1995). Such a dialect can be a
enzyme can evolve or the substrate can change). On the fine-tuned product of millions of years of evolutionary
other hand, if we choose to evolve an ancient enzyme history both between and within the components of a
that has numerous substrates and binds many ancillary cellular system. This very point challenges our ability to
protein partners, then we can expect such a system to design new biological partners: fundamentally we are
evolve more contingently than the previous scenario restricted by an organism’s past.
because there is greater opportunity for compensatory
co-evolution to overcome the low fitness of the Interchanging a modern protein in a cell with its
ancestral protein when placed in a modern context. homologous counterpart from another species can
Again, the enzyme may evolve or the enzyme’s provide insight into the evolutionary paths and
substrate may change. Unique to this scenario, however, constraints that shape the evolution of homologous
is the potential for interacting protein partners to proteins. However, this intriguing experiment can fail to
accumulate mutations that restore interactions otherwise capture that the two homologs do not have a direct line
diminished by the ancestral protein. of descent that connects them in progressive, linear
time. Meaning, the evolutionary path that connects the
Ancient Hubs in Modern Times
two homologs requires that we travel back in time from
one descendent to the common ancestor and then
A paleo-experimental evolution system that combines forward in time to the other descendent. As such, the
synthetic and evolutionary biology requires a deep homologs share a common ancestor but the descendents
understanding of the interactions of cellular of that common ancestor traversed two separate (and
components, biological networks, and gene regulation possibly non-interchangeable) paths of adaptation and
and expression. These components are shaped by the random fixation. This raises the possibility that the
interplay between genotype and phenotype – the major homologs are not ‘functionally equivalent’ (Figure 2A).
determinants of natural selection.
Figure 2. (A) Paleo-experimental evolution consists of resurrecting an ancient gene, removing the modern form of the gene from an
extant organism, and then inserting the ancestral form into the extant organism. For instance, the ancient gene from the gray node on
the phylogeny can be resurrected and then inserted into the E. coli genome (red node) at the precise chromosomal location that the
extant gene was knocked out. This synthetic/engineered organism is then evolved in the laboratory. Our approach contrasts to other
approaches that are only able to use modern genes from an organism to replace its ortholog in a different extant organism (say,
13 Artificial Life 13
Towards the Recapitulation of Ancient History in the Laboratory: Combining Synthetic Biology with Experimental Evolution
inserting the gene from the extant organism at the green node into the E. coli, red, organism). Such an approach can be limiting if
adaptive or neutral mutations that prevent interoperability occurred along particular branches that connect the green and red nodes.
(B) Protein interaction network containing modern and ancient hubs. Consider a particular hub protein that interacts with seven
ancillary partners in E. coli (upper left). These interactions are fine-tuned over the course of evolution. Replacing the modern hub of
the network with a recent ancestor of E. coli (blue) may permit the interaction network to still function, likely in a diminished
capacity. Replacing the modern hub of the network with an ancient ancestor of E. coli (gray) may prevent the ancillary proteins
from interacting with the hub altogether. Similarly, replacing the modern hub of the network with a divergent modern counterpart
may prevent the interaction network from functioning despite that the same network exists in both modern organisms.
One manner in which homologs can become 1) The ancient protein repeatedly adapts to the
functionally nonequivalent is if a protein is part of a modern network in a manner identical or
highly integrated molecular network in which the different to how its modern counterpart evolved
protein interacts with numerous ancillary partners. (determinism).
Sufficient co-adaptation or compensatory co-evolution
amongst the protein and its ancillary partners along any 2) The ancient protein adapts to the modern
phylogenetic lineage may prevent that particular protein network in a manner different than how its
from binding its necessary ancillary partners when descendent did (contingency).
interchanged in a different species (Figure 2B).
3) The modern network adapts to the ancient
Replacing network partners with their ancestors would protein in a manner identical to the ancient
permit us to rewire a network within the historical network - thus resurrecting the ancient network.
context from which the mutational differences between
the modern and ancestral proteins share a direct 4) The modern network adapts to the ancient protein
connection in evolutionary time. In a scenario where the in a manner never evolved before in nature – thus
hub (center) and nodes (terminal) of an interaction creating an entirely new dialect.
network have adapted to a particular lineage-specific
dialect, replacing a component of such a network with The ability to differentiate these scenarios will
its ancient counterpart may be analogous to resurrecting determine the value of our paleo-experimental evolution
an old dialect that can be understood by it descendant system.
speakers. As expected, the ability of the rest of the
network to communicate (function) with this component An example paleo-experimental
from an ancient dialect would be limited by the manner evolution system
in which the network changed between the ancestor and
its modern form. The question of interest to us is
Among the various proteins so far studied by
whether the different components are capable of
paleogeneticists, Elongation Factor-Tu (EF) is an ideal
communicating or whether they will fail to
candidate for use in paleo-experimental evolution. EF is
communicate and thus be functionless – whoa is the
a GTP-binding protein that functions to deliver
Tower of Babel. We anticipate that ancestral
aminoacylated-tRNAs to the A-site of the ribosome and
components will in fact be able to communicate in the
is thus an essential component of ribosome-based
hub better than modern components from different
protein biosynthesis (Czworkowski and Moore 1996). In
species as long as the ancestor lies along the
addition to binding all ~47 different tRNAs (at least in
evolutionary path that directly connects the two modern
E. coli), EFs also bind to other classes of proteins such
proteins.
as chaperones, metabolic enzymes, structural proteins,
and others (Figure 3). EFs are one of the most abundant
Despite our optimism, we suspect that the ancestral
proteins in bacteria. In addition to being a universal
component will trigger a stress or strain on the modern
protein found in all known cellular life, deletion of EF is
network since the ancestral protein comes from an
lethal (Schnell et al. 2003).
ancient dialect. If so, this creates an ideal scenario to
watch the ancient component adapt within a modern
Previous studies using large protein datasets have
network. Four possible scenarios may arise from such a
calculated a correlation coefficient of 0.91 between
system:
environmental temperature of a host organism and the
melting temperatures of a subset of a host’s globular
proteins (Gromiha et al. 1999). Among this subset of
14 Artificial Life 13
Towards the Recapitulation of Ancient History in the Laboratory: Combining Synthetic Biology with Experimental Evolution
proteins, EFs are known to adapt to the environmental gene using DNA recombineering technology (Datsenko
temperature of their host organisms - EFs from and Wanner 2000). E. coli is unique among most
thermophilic microorganisms are thermostable whereas bacteria in that it contains two genomic copies of EF
EFs from mesophilic organisms are mesostable; (tufA and tufB, that differ from one another by a single
supporting the notion that proteins are marginally stable amino acid). We elected to insert the ancient EF at the
(Taverna and Goldstein 2002). This suggests that a tufB genomic location since this region of the
strong selective constraint shapes the thermostability chromosome is less populated with open reading frames
profile of EF proteins. of other genes compared to the tufA location. As such,
we first knocked out tufA and measured this effect on
All these properties make EF-Tu an ideal protein for a growth (Figure 4). As a control for comparative
system that combines experimental evolution with purposes, we also knocked out tufB in a separate strain
synthetic biology. The combination of EF’s role in to measure its effect on growth (Figure 4). Next, we
cellular networks and the strong constraints acting on precisely swapped tufB for an ancestral EF gene in the
EF’s thermostability, creates an ideal situation to tufA knockout strain.
knockout endogenous EF from a modern organism and
replace it with an ancestral form of the protein whereby Our ancestral EF represents an ancestral γ-
the ancestral protein shares a direct evolutionary history proteobacteria that is estimated to be on the order of 500
with the modern form of the protein. We therefore set million years old (Battistuzzi et al. 2004) and has 21 out
out to generate a strain of modern bacteria (E. coli) in of 394 amino acids differences with E. coli’s tufB. This
which we replaced the endogenous EF with an ancestral marks the first time an ancient gene has been
EF at the precise genomic location of the modern gene – genomically integrated in place of its modern
thus using the modern promoter to drive expression. counterpart within a contemporary organism. We next
measured the cellular doubling time of the synthetic
recombinant organism hosting the ancestral gene. Figure
4 shows that when replaced with the modern EF gene,
the ancient EF gene extended the doubling time by
approximately two-fold.
Figure 4: Precise replacement of a modern bacterial EF-Tu
gene with its ~500 million year old ancestor extends the
Figure 3: Bacterial EF-Tu (tufA node in center of hub)
bacterial doubling time by two-fold. Two genes, tufA and
interacts with >100 cellular partners, including the ribosome,
tufB, (varying by just one amino acid) code for EF-Tus in E.
tRNAs, amino acids, GTP, EF-Ts (EF-Tu’s nucleotide
coli. Precise replacement of endogenous EF-Tu requires both
exchange factor) and more. This graph shows the >50 protein
chromosomal tufA and tufB to be disrupted (Schnell et al.
binding partners to EF-Tu that have been experimentally
2003). Deletions of tufA or tufB in the E. coli B strain have
validated (binding to nucleic acids not shown). Network
similar effects (~ 34 minutes) when deleted individually. The
dataset rendered using Bacteriome.org.
ancient EF (AnEF) has 21 (out of 392) amino acid differences
with the modern EF-Tu protein. Measurements are performed
To fulfill our paleo-experimental evolution objective in in LB media at 37oC in triplicate. Modern E. coli B strain
the laboratory, we have replaced the modern
REL606 was obtained courtesy of R. E. Lenski (Michigan
endogenous EF-Tu gene with a resurrected form of the State University).
15 Artificial Life 13
Towards the Recapitulation of Ancient History in the Laboratory: Combining Synthetic Biology with Experimental Evolution
Historical contingency and the control the factors of an evolving system; will life
unpredictability of life follow an unpredictable path?
Conclusion
A paleo-experimental evolution system in the laboratory
permits us to travel back in time to some approximation.
In this article, we introduce and describe a novel
By exploiting paleogenetics, we effectively go back in
experimental setup that we term paleo-experimental
time through the history of a single component of life,
evolution. This setup weds synthetic biology with
capture that component, and transport it with us back to
experimental evolution. The goal of this combination is
the present. In its most abstract manner, we have
to identify the historical stops along the evolutionary
rewound a section of the tape of life and are giving it
tracks that gave rise to modern genotypes and to explore
another opportunity to ‘evolve’ (albeit in a modern
the accessible peaks in evolutionary history, thus
context). This approach therefore allows us to
helping us determine the role of chance vs. necessity in
experimentally carryout Gould’s thought experiment on
evolution. Despite the unnatural properties of our
“replaying the tape of life” at the molecular level. We
laboratory system, we anticipate that our unique system
anticipate that our novel system will enable us to
will advance our ability to understand both evolutionary
address long-standing questions in evolutionary and
mechanisms and how genotype is connected to
molecular biology:
phenotype even when phenotype arises in a synthetic
system.
• Does an organism’s history constrain its future? It should be noted that our system is not limited to
• Does evolution always lead to a single and ancient genes. De novo genes can be engineered and
defined point or are there multiple solutions? placed in organisms as well and the evolutionary
• How does a gene network adapt (as a whole or patterns that arise from their adaptation can be tested in
individual nodes)? vivo. Further, synthetic genes can be evolved in
• Are compensatory mutations predictable? additional genomic backgrounds (e.g., a thermophilic
• How do gene networks affect the evolutionary and a mesophilic species) for a deeper understanding of
trajectory of a whole genome? the role that a genome’s history has in shaping a
• How does selection act at the level of gene synthetic gene’s evolutionary trajectory when placed in
regulation vs. protein behavior? a modern organism.
• What is the impact of epistasis in shaping
adaptive landscapes? We anticipate that our ability to combine the two
• Do universal biological laws govern evolution? disparate fields of synthetic biology and experimental
evolution will enhance our understanding of the
In addition to the points above, we anticipate that our
constraints that shape biological evolution. If we are
system will enable us to address issues regarding the
able to demonstrate that aspects of evolution are
predictability of evolution. Along these lines, three
predictable regardless of whether this is due to strong
important factors necessary to predict evolutionary
selective constraints or due to historical events, this
outcomes are evolutionary dynamics, evolutionary rates
insight will be valuable in our ultimate attempts to
and understanding the constraints acting on an evolving
generate artificial life and our ability to maintain (and
system. Changing the connectivity of a protein
when necessary, constrain) this life form.
interaction network by swapping the network’s hub with
its various evolutionary ancestors provides us with an
Acknowledgements
opportunity to control some of these factors and may
lead to predictability at some level. For instance, we can This work was funded by National Aeronautics and
control the amount of stress or strain on our synthetic Space Agency Astrobiology: Exobiology and
recombinant organism by controlling the ancestral hub Evolutionary Biology grant NNX08AO12G to E.A.G
we introduce into the system. Older, more ancient EFs and by the NASA Astrobiology Institute through a
are expected to be a greater burden when placed in a NASA Postdoctoral Fellowship to B.K.
modern organism compared to an ancient EF resurrected
from a node closer on a tree to the modern organism. In References
a system where evolutionary stressors can be controlled,
how much of evolution will follow random paths? If the Battistuzzi, F. U., Feijao, A. and Hedges, S. B. (2004). A
evolutionary trajectories are dependent on evolutionary genomic timescale of prokaryote evolution: insights
starting points (different ancestral states), and if we can
16 Artificial Life 13
Towards the Recapitulation of Ancient History in the Laboratory: Combining Synthetic Biology with Experimental Evolution
into the origin of methanogenesis, phototrophy, and the Gromiha, M. M., Oobatake, M. and Sarai, A. (1999). Important
colonization of land. BMC Evol Biol 4: 44. amino acid properties for enhanced thermostability
Benner, S. A., Sassi, S. O. and Gaucher, E. A. (2007). Molecular from mesophilic to thermophilic proteins. Biophysical
paleoscience: systems biology from the past. Adv Chemistry 82(1): 51-67.
Enzymol Relat Areas Mol Biol 75: 1-132, xi. Meyer, J. R., Dobias, D. T., Weitz, J. S., Barrick, J. E., Quick, R.
Benner, S. A. and Sismour, A. M. (2005). Synthetic biology. T. and Lenski, R. E. (2012). Repeatability and
Nature Reviews Genetics 6(7): 533-543. contingency in the evolution of a key innovation in
Blount, Z. D., Borland, C. Z. and Lenski, R. E. (2008). Historical phage lambda. Science 335(6067): 428-432.
contingency and the evolution of a key innovation in an Morris, S. C. (2003). Life's Solution: Inevitable Humans in a
experimental population of Escherichia coli. Lonely Universe, Cambridge University Press.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the Pauling, L. and Zuckerkandl, E. (1963). Chemical Paleogenetics
United States of America 105(23): 7899-7906. Molecular Restoration Studies of Extinct Forms of Life.
Counago, R., Chen, S. and Shamoo, Y. (2006). In vivo molecular Acta Chemica Scandinavica 17: 9-&.
evolution reveals biophysical origins of organismal Pena, M. I., Van Itallie, E., Bennett, M. R. and Shamoo, Y.
fitness. Molecular Cell 22(4): 441-449. (2010). Evolution of a single gene highlights the
Czworkowski, J. and Moore, P. B. (1996). The elongation phase complexity underlying molecular descriptions of
of protein synthesis. Prog Nucleic Acid Res Mol Biol fitness. Chaos 20(2): -.
54: 293-332. Pennisi, E. (2011). Evolutionary biology. Evolutionary time
Datsenko, K. A. and Wanner, B. L. (2000). One-step inactivation travel. Science 334(6058): 893-895.
of chromosomal genes in Escherichia coli K-12 using Perez-Jimenez, R., Ingles-Prieto, A., Zhao, Z. M., Sanchez-
PCR products. Proceedings of the National Academy of Romero, I., Alegre-Cebollada, J., Kosuri, P., Garcia-
Sciences of the United States of America 97(12): 6640- Manyes, S., Kappock, T. J., Tanokura, M., Holmgren,
6645. A., Sanchez-Ruiz, J. M., Gaucher, E. A. and Fernandez,
Dennett, D. C. (1995). Darwin's dangerous idea : evolution and J. M. (2011). Single-molecule paleoenzymology probes
the meanings of life. New York, Simon & Schuster. the chemistry of resurrected enzymes. Nature
Elena, S. F. and Lenski, R. E. (2003). Evolution experiments with Structural & Molecular Biology 18(5): 592-U599.
microorganisms: the dynamics and genetic bases of Poelwijk, F. J., Kiviet, D. J., Weinreich, D. M. and Tans, S. J.
adaptation. Nat Rev Genet 4(6): 457-469. (2007). Empirical fitness landscapes reveal accessible
Endy, D. (2005). Foundations for engineering biology. Nature evolutionary paths. Nature 445(7126): 383-386.
438(7067): 449-453. Salverda, M. L., Dellus, E., Gorter, F. A., Debets, A. J., van der
Finnigan, G. C., Hanson-Smith, V., Stevens, T. H. and Thornton, Oost, J., Hoekstra, R. F., Tawfik, D. S. and de Visser, J.
J. W. (2012). Evolution of increased complexity in a A. (2011). Initial mutations direct alternative pathways
molecular machine. Nature 481(7381): 360-364. of protein evolution. Plos Genetics 7(3): e1001321.
Gaucher, E. A. (2007). Ancestral sequence reconstruction as a Schnell, R., Abdulkarim, F., Kalman, M. and Isaksson, L. A.
tool to understand natural history and guide synthetic (2003). Functional EF-Tu with large C-terminal
biology : realizing and extending the vision of extensions in an E-coli strain with a precise deletion of
Zuckerkandl and Pauling. Oxford, Oxford University both chromosomal tuf genes. Febs Letters 538(1-3):
Press: 20-33. 139-144.
Gaucher, E. A., Govindarajan, S. and Ganesh, O. K. (2008). Stackhouse, J., Presnell, S. R., McGeehan, G. M., Nambiar, K. P.
Palaeotemperature trend for Precambrian life inferred and Benner, S. A. (1990). The ribonuclease from an
from resurrected proteins. Nature 451(7179): 704-707. extinct bovid ruminant. FEBS Lett 262(1): 104-106.
Gibson, D. G., Glass, J. I., Lartigue, C., Noskov, V. N., Chuang, Taverna, D. M. and Goldstein, R. A. (2002). Why are proteins
R. Y., Algire, M. A., Benders, G. A., Montague, M. G., marginally stable? Proteins-Structure Function and
Ma, L., Moodie, M. M., Merryman, C., Vashee, S., Genetics 46(1): 105-109.
Krishnakumar, R., Assad-Garcia, N., Andrews- Thomson, J. M., Gaucher, E. A., Burgan, M. F., De Kee, D. W.,
Pfannkoch, C., Denisova, E. A., Young, L., Qi, Z. Q., Li, T., Aris, J. P. and Benner, S. A. (2005).
Segall-Shapiro, T. H., Calvey, C. H., Parmar, P. P., Resurrecting ancestral alcohol dehydrogenases from
Hutchison, C. A., 3rd, Smith, H. O. and Venter, J. C. yeast. Nat Genet 37(6): 630-635.
(2010). Creation of a bacterial cell controlled by a Thornton, J. W., Need, E. and Crews, D. (2003). Resurrecting the
chemically synthesized genome. Science 329(5987): ancestral steroid receptor: ancient origin of estrogen
52-56. signaling. Science 301(5640): 1714-1717.
Gould, S. J. (1994). The Evolution of Life On Earth. Scientific Weinreich, D. M., Delaney, N. F., DePristo, M. A. and Hartl, D.
American. 271: 85-86. L. (2006). Darwinian evolution can follow only very
17 Artificial Life 13
Towards the Recapitulation of Ancient History in the Laboratory: Combining Synthetic Biology with Experimental Evolution
few mutational paths to fitter proteins. Science
312(5770): 111-114.
Wichman, H. A., Scott, L. A., Yarber, C. D. and Bull, J. J.
(2000). Experimental evolution recapitulates natural
evolution. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci
355(1403): 1677-1684.
18 Artificial Life 13