Toward Designing Intelligent PDEs for Computer
Vision: An Optimal Control Approach
RishengLiua,ZhouchenLinb,WeiZhangc,KeweiTanga,ZhixunSua
aSchoolofMathematicalSciences,DalianUniversityofTechnology,Dalian,China.
bMicrosoftResearchAsia,Beijing,China,e-mail: zhoulin@microsoft.com.
cDepartmentofInformationEngineering,TheChineseUniversityofHongKong,China.
Many computer vision and image processing problems can be posed as solving
partialdifferentialequations(PDEs). However,designingPDEsystemusuallyre-
quires high mathematical skills and good insight into the problems. In this paper,
we consider designing PDEs for various problems arising in computer vision and
imageprocessinginalazymanner: learningPDEsfromrealdataviadata-based
optimal control. We first propose a general intelligent PDE system which holds
thebasictranslationalandrotationalinvarianceruleformostvisionproblems. By
introducingaPDE-constrainedoptimalcontrolframework,itispossibletousethe
trainingdataresultingfrommultipleways(groundtruth,resultsfromothermeth-
ods,andmanualresultsfromhumans)tolearnPDEsfordifferentcomputervision
tasks. The proposed optimal control based training framework aims at learning a
PDE-based regressor to approximate the unknown (and usually nonlinear) map-
pingofdifferentvisiontasks. TheexperimentalresultsshowthatthelearntPDEs
can solve different vision problems reasonably well. In particular, we can obtain
PDEs not only for problems that traditional PDEs work well but also for prob-
lems that PDE-based methods have never been tried before, due to the difficulty
indescribingthoseproblemsinamathematicalway.
PreprintsubmittedtoIVC May26,2018
1v7501.9011:viXra
Keywords: OptimalControl,PDEs,ComputerVision,ImageProcessing.
1. Introduction
Thewideapplicationsofpartialdifferentialequations(PDEs)incomputervi-
sionandimageprocessingcanbeattributabletotwomainfactors[1]. First,PDEs
in classical mathematical physics are powerful tools to describe, model, and sim-
ulatemanydynamicssuchasheatflow,diffusion,andwavepropagation. Second,
many variational problems or their regularized counterparts can often be effec-
tivelysolvedfromtheirEuler-Lagrangeequations. Therefore,ingeneralthereare
two types of methods for designing PDEs for vision tasks. For the first kind of
methods, PDEs are written down directly (e.g., anisotropic diffusion [2], shock
filter [3], based on some understandings on the properties of mathematical oper-
ators and the physical natures of the problems, and curve-evolution-based equa-
tions [4]). The second kind of methods basically define an energy functional and
thenderivetheevolutionequationsbycomputingtheEuler-Lagrangeequationof
the energy functional (e.g., total-variation-based variational methods [5][6][7]).
In either way, people have to heavily rely on their intuition on the vision tasks.
Therefore,traditionalPDE-basedmethodsrequiregoodmathematicalskillswhen
choosing appropriate PDE forms and predicting the final effect of composing re-
lated operators such that the obtained PDEs roughly meet the goals. If people do
not have enough intuition on a vision task, they may have difficulty in acquiring
effective PDEs. For example, although there has been much work on PDE-based
image segmentation [8][9][10][11], the basic philosophy is always to follow the
strongedgesintheimageandalsorequiretheedgecontourtobesmooth. Canwe
have a PDE system for objective detection (Fig. 1) that locates the object region
Figure1: CanwedesignaPDEsystemwhichcandetecttheobjectofinterest(e.g.,thehelicopter
intheleftimage)anddoesnotrespondiftheobjectisabsent(e.g.,therightimage)?
if the object is present and does not respond if the object is absent? We believe
that this is a big challenge to human intuition and is much more difficult than
traditional segmentation tasks if a PDE-based method is required, because it is
hard to describe an object class, which may have significant variation in shape,
texture and pose. Without using additional information to judge the content, the
existing PDEs for segmentation, e.g., [10], always output an “object region” for
any non-constant image. In short, current PDE design methods greatly limit the
applications of PDEs to a wider and more complex scope. This motivates us to
explore whether we can acquire PDEs that are less artificial yet more powerful.
Inthispaper,wegiveanaffirmativeanswertothisquestion. Wedemonstratethat
learning particular coefficients of a general intelligent PDE system from a given
training data set might be a possible way of designing PDEs for computer vision
in a lazy manner. Furthermore, borrowing this learning strategy from machine
learningcangeneralizePDEstechniquesformorecomplexvisionproblems.
Inspired by the electromagnetic field theory and Maxwell’s equations [12],
weassumethatthevisualprocessinghastwocoupledevolutionsindifferentscale
spaces: oneisintheimagescalespace,whichcontrolstheevolutionoftheoutput,
and the other is in the indicator scale space that helps collect the global informa-
tion to guide the evolution in the image scale space. In this way, our general
intelligent PDE system consists of two coupled evolutionary PDEs. Both PDEs
are coupled equations between the image and indicator, up to their second order
partial derivatives. Another key idea of our general intelligent PDE system is to
assumethatthePDEsthataresoughtcouldbewrittenascombinationsof“atoms”
which satisfy the general properties of vision tasks. As a preliminary investiga-
tion, we utilize all the translational and rotational invariants as such“atoms” and
propose the general intelligent PDE system as a linear combination of all these
invariants [13]. Then the problem boils down to determining the combination
coefficientsamongsuch“atoms”.
Thetheoryofoptimalcontrol[14]hasbeenwelldevelopedforoverfiftyyears.
With the enormous advances in computing power, optimal control is now widely
usedinmulti-disciplinaryapplicationssuchasbiologicalsystems,communication
networksandsocio-economicsystemsetc[15]. Optimaldesignandparameteres-
timation of systems governed by PDEs give rise to a class of problems known
as PDE-constrained optimal control [16]. In this paper, a PDE-constrained opti-
mal control technique as the training tool is introduced for our PDE system. We
further propose a general framework for learning PDEs to accomplish a specific
vision task via PDE-constrained optimal control, where the objective functional
istominimizethedifferencebetweentheexpectedoutputsandtheactualoutputs
of the PDEs, given the input images. Such input-output image pairs are provided
in multiple ways (e.g., ground truth, results from other methods or manually gen-
erated results by humans) for different tasks. Therefore, we can train the general
intelligent PDE system to solve various vision problems which traditional PDEs
mayfinddifficultorevenimpossible.
Insummary,ourcontributionsareasfollows:
1. Our intelligent PDE system provides a new way to design PDEs for com-
puter vision. Based on this framework, we can design particular PDEs for
differentvisiontasksusingdifferentsourcesoftrainingimages1. Thismay
be very difficult for traditional PDE design methods. However, we would
like to remind the readers that we have no intention to beat all the existing
approachesforeachtask,becausetheseapproacheshavebeencarefullyand
speciallytunedforthetask.
2. Weproposeageneraldata-basedoptimalcontrolframeworkfortrainingthe
PDEsystem. Fedwithpairsofinputandoutputimages,theproposedPDE-
constrainedoptimalcontroltrainingmodelcanautomaticallylearnthecom-
bination coefficients in the PDE system. Unlike previous design methods,
our approach requires much less human wits and can solve more difficult
problemsincomputervision.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. We first introduce in Section 2
the general intelligent PDE system. In Section 3 we utilize the PDE-constrained
optimal control technique as the training framework for our intelligent PDE sys-
tem. Then in Section 4 we evaluate our intelligent PDE system with optimal
control training framework by a series of computer vision and image processing
problems. Finally, we give concluding remarks and a discussion on the future
workinSection5.
1Similar idea also appeared in [17]. But in that work, the authors only train special PDEs
involving the curvature operator for basic image restoration tasks. In contrast, our work here
proposesamoreunifiedandelegantframeworkformoreproblemsincomputervision.
2. GeneralPDESystemforComputerVision
2.1. ElectromagneticFieldvs. ImageEvolution
Electromagnetism is the force that causes the interaction among electrically
charged particles. The areas in which electromagnetic interaction happens are
calledtheelectromagneticfields. Butinphysics,electricallychargedobjectswere
first thought to produce two types of fields associated with their charge property:
An electric field and a magnetic field. Over time, it was realized that the electric
and magnetic fields are better thought of as two parts of a greater whole – the
electromagnetic field [12]. It affects the behavior of charged objects in the vicin-
ity of the field. The electromagnetic field extends infinitely throughout space and
describestheelectromagneticinteraction. Thetheoreticalimplicationsofelectro-
magnetism also led to the development of special relativity by Albert Einstein in
1905.
In this paper, inspired by this fundamental force of nature, we consider the
image evolution in a similar way. For a target image signal u(t), different from
mosttraditionalways,whichonlyconsidertheevolutionintheimagescalespace,
we define a companion signal v(t) named the indicator signal. It changes with
time and guides the evolution of u(t) by collecting large scale information in the
image. Inthisway,thesetwosignalsevolveintwocoupledscalespaces.
2.2. TheIntelligentPDESystem
Similar to Maxwell’s equations [12], which are a set of PDEs describing how
the electric and magnetic fields relate to their sources and how they develop with
time,weproposeageneralPDEsystemfortheevolutionofourcoupledsignals.
ThespaceofallPDEsisinfinitelydimensional. Tofindtherightform,westart
withthepropertiesthatourPDEsystemshouldhave,inordertonarrowdownthe
search space. We notice that translationally and rotationally invariant properties
are very important for computer vision, i.e., in most vision tasks, when the input
image is translated or rotated, the output image is also translated or rotated by
the same amount. So we require that our PDE system is translationally and ro-
tationally invariant. According to the differential invariant theory [13], the form
of our PDEs must be functions of the fundamental differential invariants under
the group of translation and rotation. The fundamental differential invariants are
invariantundertranslationandrotationandotherinvariantscanbewrittenastheir
functions. We list those up to second order in Table 1, where some notations can
be found in Table 2. In the sequel, we shall use {inv (u,v)}16 to refer to them
in order. Note that those invariants are ordered with u going before v. We may
reorderthemwithv goingbeforeu. Inthiscase,thej-thinvariantwillbereferred
to as inv (v,u). So the simplest choice of our general PDE system is the linear
combinationofthedifferentialinvariants,leadingtothefollowingform:
 ∂u −F(u,v,{a }16 ) = 0, (x,y,t) ∈ Q,
  u(x,y,t) = 0, (x,y,t) ∈ Γ,
 ∂v −F(v,u,{b }16 ) = 0, (x,y,t) ∈ Q,
 v(x,y,t) = 0, (x,y,t) ∈ Γ,
F(u,v,{a }16 ) = (cid:80)16 a (t)inv (u,v),
j j=0 j=0 j j
F(v,u,{b }16 ) = (cid:80)16 b (t)inv (v,u),
j j=0 j=0 j j
Ω is the rectangular region occupied by the input image I, T is the time that the
PDE system finishes the visual information processing and outputs the results,
and f and f are the initial functions of u and v, respectively. The meaning of
other notations in (1) can be found in Table 2. For computational issues and the
ease of mathematical deduction, I will be padded with zeros of several pixels
width around it. As we can change the unit of time, it is harmless to fix T =
1. {a (t)}16 and {b (t)}16 are sets of functions defined on Q that are used to
j j=0 j j=0
control the evolution of u and v, respectively. As ∇u and H change to R∇u
and RH RT, respectively, when the image is rotated by a matrix R, it is easy
to check the rotational invariance of those quantities. So the PDE system (1)
is rotationally invariant. Furthermore, the following proposition implies that the
controlfunctionsa (t)andb (t)canbefunctionsoftonly.
Proposition 2.1. Suppose the PDE system (1) is translationally invariant, then
thecontrolfunctions{a }16 and{b }16 mustbeindependentof(x,y).
j j=0 j j=0
TheproofofProposition2.1ispresentedinAppendix A.
3. TrainingthePDESystemviaData-basedOptimalControl
In this section, we propose a data-based optimal control framework to train
theintelligentPDEsystemforparticularvisiontasks.
3.1. TheObjectiveFunctional
Given the forms of PDEs shown in (1), we have to determine the coeffi-
cientfunctionsa (t)andb (t). Wemaypreparetrainingsamples{(I ,O )}M ,
j j m m m=1
where I is the input image and O is the expected output image, and compute
Table 1: Translationally and rotationally invariant fundamental differential invariants up to the
secondorder.
j inv (u,v)
0,1,2 1,v,u
3,4 (cid:107)∇v(cid:107)2 = v2 +v2,(cid:107)∇u(cid:107)2 = u2 +u2
5 (∇v)T∇u = v u +v u
6,7 tr(H ) = v +v ,tr(H ) = u +u
v xx yy u xx yy
8 (∇v)TH ∇v = v2v +2v v v +v2v
v x xx x y xy y yy
9 (∇v)TH ∇v = v2u +2v v u +v2u
u x xx x y xy y yy
10 (∇v)TH ∇u = v u v +(v u +v u )v +v u v
v x x xx x y y x xy y y yy
11 (∇v)TH ∇u = v u u +(v u +v u )u +v u u
u x x xx x y y x xy y y yy
12 (∇u)TH ∇u = u2v +2u u v +u2v
v x xx x y xy y yy
13 (∇u)TH ∇u = u2u +2u u u +u2u
u x xx x y xy y yy
14 tr(H2) = v2 +2v2 +v2
v xx xy yy
15 tr(H H ) = v u +2v u +v u
v u xx xx xy xy yy yy
16 tr(H2) = u2 +2u2 +u2
Table2: Notations.
Ω AnopenboundedregioninR2 ∂Ω BoundaryofΩ
(x,y) (x,y) ∈ Ω,spatialvariable t t ∈ (0,T),temporalvariable
|·| Theareaofaregion XT Transposeofmatrix(orvector)
(cid:107)·(cid:107) L2 norm tr(·) Traceofmatrix
∇u Gradientofu H Hessianofu
℘ ℘ = {(0,0),(0,1),(1,0),(0,2),(1,1),(2,0)},indexsetforpartialdifferentiation
thecoefficientfunctionsthatminimizethefollowingfunctional:
m m=1 j j=0 j j=0
= 1 (cid:80)M (cid:82) [u (x,y,1)−O ]2dΩ (3)
2 m=1 Ω m m
+1 (cid:80)16 λ (cid:82)1 a2(t)dt+ 1 (cid:80)16 µ (cid:82)1 b2(t)dt,
2 j=0 j 0 j 2 j=0 j 0 j
where u (x,y,1) is the output image at time t = 1 computed from (1) when
the input image is I , and λ and µ are positive weighting parameters. The first
termrequiresthatthefinaloutputofourPDEsystembeclosetothegroundtruth.
The second and the third terms are for regularization so that the optimal control
problemiswellposed,astheremaybemultipleminimizersforthefirstterm.
3.2. SolvingtheOptimalControlProblem
ThenwehavethefollowingoptimalcontrolproblemwithPDEconstraints:
argmin J({u }M ,{a }16 ,{b }16 )
m m=1 j j=0 j j=0
 ∂u −F(u,v,{a }16 ) = 0, (x,y,t) ∈ Q,
  u(x,y,t) = 0, (x,y,t) ∈ Γ,
s.t.
 ∂v −F(v,u,{b }16 ) = 0, (x,y,t) ∈ Q,
 v(x,y,t) = 0, (x,y,t) ∈ Γ,
By introducing the adjoint equation of (4), the Gaˆteaux derivative of J can be
computedandconsequently,the(local)optimal{a }16 and{b }16 canbecom-
j j=0 j j=0
puted via gradient-based algorithms (e.g., conjugate gradient). Here, we give the
adjointequationandGaˆteauxderivativedirectly:
3.2.1. AdjointEquation
  ∂t m m m m
  ∂t m m m m
E(u ,v ,ϕ ,φ )
E(v ,u ,φ ,ϕ )
pq ∂upq j=0 j ∂upq pq ∂xp∂yq
pq ∂vpq j=0 j ∂vpq pq ∂xp∂yq
3.2.2. GaˆteauxDerivativeoftheFunctional
Withthehelpoftheadjointequation,ateachiterationthederivativeofJ with
respecttoa (t)andb (t)areasfollows:
∂J = λ a − (cid:80) (cid:82) ϕ inv (u ,v )dΩ, j = 0,...,16,
∂aj j j Ω m j m m
∂J = µ b − (cid:80) (cid:82) φ inv (v ,u )dΩ, j = 0,...,16,
∂bj j j Ω m j m m
wheretheadjointfunctionsϕ andφ arethesolutionsto(5).
3.2.3. Initialization
Good initialization increases the approximation accuracy of the learnt PDEs.
In our current implementation, we simply set the initial functions of u and v as
theinputimage:
u (x,y,0) = v (x,y,0) = I (x,y), m = 1,2,...,M.
Then we employ a heuristic method to initialize the control functions. At each
time step, ∂um is expected to be d (t) = Om−um(t) so that u (t) moves towards
∂t m 1−t m
theexpectedoutputO andbytheformof(1)wemaysolve{a (t)}16 suchthat
M (cid:90)
m m j j=0 m
is minimized2. In this way, we initialize a (t) successively in time while fixing
b (t) = 0,j = 0,1,...,16.
3.2.4. FiniteDifferenceMethodforNumericalSolution
TosolvetheintelligentPDEsystemnumerically,wedesignafinitedifference
scheme[18]forthePDEs. WediscretizethePDEs,i.e. replacethederivatives ∂f,
∂f and ∂2f withfinitedifferencesasfollows:
The discrete forms of ∂f, ∂2f and ∂2f can be defined similarly. In addition, we
discretizetheintegrationsas
 (cid:82) f(x,y)dΩ = 1 (cid:80) f(x,y),
Ω N Ω (10)
(cid:80)Tm
where N is the number of pixels in the spatial area, ∆t is a properly chosen time
step size and T = (cid:98) 1 +0.5(cid:99) is the index of the expected output time. Then we
useanexplicitschemetocomputethenumericalsolutions.
3.3. TheOptimal-Control-BasedTrainingFramework
We now summarize in Algorithm 1 the data-based optimal control training
framework for the intelligent PDE system. After the PDE system is learnt, it can
be applied to new test images by solving (1), whose inputs f and f are both the
testimageandthesolutionu(t)| isthedesiredoutputimage.
2Itistominimizethedifferencebetweentheleftandtherighthandsidesof(1).
Algorithm 1 (Data-based optimal control framework for training the PDE
Input: Trainingimagepairs{(I ,O )}M .
1: Initialize a (t), t = 0,∆t,...,1 − ∆t, by minimizing (8) and fix b (t) = 0,
j = 0,1,...,16.
2: whilenotconvergeddo
3: Compute ∂J and ∂J ,j = 0,...,16,using(7).
4: Decidethesearchdirectionusingtheconjugategradientmethod[19].
5: Perform golden search along the search direction and update a (t) and
b (t),j = 0,...,16.
6: endwhile
Output: Thecoefficientfunctions{a (t)}16 and{b (t)}16 .
j j=0 j j=0
4. ExperimentalResults
In this section, we apply our data-based optimal control framework to learn
PDEs for four groups of basic computer vision problems: Natural image denois-
ing, edge detection, blurring and deburring, and image segmentation and object
detection. As our goal is to show that the data-based optimal control framework
could be a new approach for designing PDEs and an effective regressor for many
computer vision tasks, NOT to propose better algorithms for these tasks, we are
not going to fine tune our PDEs and then compare it with the state-of-the-art al-
gorithmsineverytask.
4.1. LearningfromGroundTruth: NaturalImageDenoising
Image denoising is one of the most fundamental low-level vision problems.
Forthistask,wecompareourlearntPDEswiththeexistingPDE-baseddenoising
methods, ROF [5] and TV-L1 [6], on images with unknown natural noise. This
task is designed to demonstrate that our method can solve problems by learning
fromthegroundtruth. Thisisthefirstadvantageofourdata-basedoptimalcontrol
model. We take 240 images, each with a size of 150 × 150 pixels, of 11 objects
using a Canon 30D digital camera, setting its ISO to 1600. For each object, 30
images are taken without changing the camera settings (by fixing the focus, aper-
ture and exposure time) and without moving the camera position. The average
imageofthemcanberegradedasthenoiselessgroundtruthimage. Werandomly
choose 8 objects. For each object we randomly choose 5 noisy images. These
noisy images and their ground truth images are used to train the PDE system.
ThenwecompareourlearntPDEswiththetraditionalPDEsin[5]andTV-L1 [6]
onimagesoftheremaining3objects.
Fig.2showsthecomparisonresults. OnecanseethatthePSNRsofourintelli-
gentPDEsaredramaticallyhigherthanthoseoftraditionalPDEs. Thisisbecause
our data-based PDE learning framework can easily adapt to unknown types of
noiseandobtainPDEformstofitforthenaturalnoisewell,whilemosttraditional
PDE-based denoising methods were designed under specific assumptions on the
types of noise (e.g., ROF is designed for Gaussian noise [5] while TV-L1 is de-
signed for impulsive noise [20]). Therefore, they may not fit for unknown types
of noise as well as our intelligent PDEs. The curves of the learnt coefficients for
imagedenoisingareshowninFig.3.
4.2. LearningfromOtherMethods: EdgeDetection
The image edge detection task is used to demonstrate that our PDEs can be
learntfromtheresultsofdifferentmethodsandachieveabetterperformancethan
all of them. This is another advantage of our data-based optimal control model.
Figure 2: The results of denoising images with natural noise. (a) original noiseless image. (b)
noisy image with real noise. (c)-(e) denoised images using the ROF, TV-L1, and our intelligent
PDEsystem,respectively. ThePSNRsarepresentedbeloweachimage.
Figure3:LearntcoefficientsoftheintelligentPDEsystemforthenaturalnoisedenoisingproblem.
(a) the coefficients {a (t)}16 for the image evolution. (b) the coefficients {b (t)}16 for the
j j=0 j j=0
indicatorevolution.
For this task, we use three simple first order edge detectors [21] (Sobel, Roberts
Cross, and Prewitt) to generate the training data. We randomly choose 7 images
from the Berkeley image database [22] and use the above three detectors to gen-
erate the output images3, together with the input images, to train our PDE system
foredgedetection.
Fig.4showspartoftheedgedetectionresultsonotherimagesintheBerkeley
image database. One can see that our PDEs respond selectively to edges and
basically produce visually significant edges, while the edge maps of other three
detectors are more chaotic. Note that the solution to our PDEs is supposed to
be a more or less smooth function. So one cannot expect that our PDEs produce
an exactly binary edge map. Instead, an approximation of a binary edge map is
produced. The curves of the learnt coefficients for edge detection are shown in
Fig.5.
4.3. Learning to Solve Both Primal and Inverse Problems: Blurring and Deblur-
The traditional PDEs for solving different problems are usually of very dif-
ferent appearance. The task of solving both blurring and deblurring is designed
to show that the same form of PDEs can be learnt to solve both the primal and
inverse problems. This is the third advantage of our data-based optimal control
model.
Fortheimageblurringtask(theprimalproblem),theoutputimageisthecon-
volution of the input image with a Gaussian kernel. So we generate the output
3Thisimpliesthatweactuallyuseakindofcombinationoftheresultsfromdifferentmethods
totrainourPDEsystem.
Figure4: Theresultsofedgedetection. (a)originalimage. (b)-(e)edgedetectionresultsusingthe
Sobel,RobertsCross,Prewitt,andourintelligentPDE,respectively.
Figure5: LearntcoefficientsoftheintelligentPDEsystemfortheedgedetectionproblem. (a)the
coefficients{a (t)}16 fortheimageevolution. (b)thecoefficients{b (t)}16 fortheindicator
j j=0 j j=0
evolution.
images by blurring high resolution images using a Gaussian kernel with σ = 1.
The original images are used as the input. As shown in the third row of Fig. 6,
the output is nearly identical to the ground truth (the second row of Fig. 6). For
the image deblurring task (the inverse problem), we just exchange the input and
outputimagesfortraining. OnecanseeinthebottomrowofFig.6thattheoutput
is very close to the original image (first row of Fig. 6). The curves of the learnt
coefficientsforimagedeblurringareshowninFig.7.
Figure6: Theresultsofimageblurringanddeblurring. Thetoprowaretheoriginalimages. The
secondrowaretheblurringresultsofaGaussiankernel. Thethirdrowaretheblurringresultsof
ourIntelligentPDE.ThebottomrowarethedeblurringresultsofourIntelligentPDE.ThePSNRs
arepresentedbeloweachimage.
Figure7:LearntcoefficientsoftheintelligentPDEsystemforimageblurring(toprow)anddeblur-
ring(bottomrow)problems. (a)and(c)arethecoefficients{a (t)}16 fortheimageevolutions.
(b)and(d)arethecoefficients{b (t)}16 fortheindicatorevolutions.
4.4. LearningfromHumans: ImageSegmentationandObjectDetection
Imagesegmentationandobjectdetectionaredesignedtodemonstratethatour
PDE system can learn from the human behavior directly (learn the segmentation
anddetectionresultsprovidedbyhumans,e.g.,manuallysegmentedmasks).
For image segmentation, it is a highly ill-posed problem and there are many
criteria that define the goal of segmentation, e.g., breaking an image into regions
with similar intensity, color, texture, or expected shape. As none of the current
image segmentation algorithms can perform object level segmentation well out
of complex backgrounds, we choose to require our PDEs to achieve a reasonable
goal, namely segmenting relatively darker objects against relatively simple back-
grounds, where both the foreground and the background can be highly textured
and simple thresholding cannot separate them. So we select 60 images from the
Corel image database [23] that have relatively darker foregrounds and relatively
simplebackgrounds,buttheforegroundisnotofuniformlylowergraylevelsthan
thebackground,andalsopreparethemanuallysegmentedbinarymasksastheout-
putsofthetrainingimages,wheretheblackregionsarethebackgrounds(Fig.8).
Figure8: Examplesofthetrainingimagesforimagesegmentation. Ineachgroupofimages,on
theleftistheinputimageandontherightisthegroundtruthoutputmask.
Part of the segmentation results are shown in Fig. 9, where we have set a
threshold for the output mask maps of our learnt PDEs with a constant 0.5. We
seethatourlearntPDEsproducefairlygoodobjectmasks. Wealsotesttheactive
contour method by Li et al. [10]4 and the normalized cut method [24]5. One can
see from Fig. 9 that the active contour method cannot segment object details due
to the smoothness constraint on the object shape and the normalized cut method
cannot produce a closed foreground region. To provide a quantitative evaluation,
weusetheF-measuresthatmergetheprecisionandrecallofsegmentation:
(1+α)·recall·precision
F = , where
α·precision+recall
recall = , precision = ,
in which A is the ground truth mask and B is the computed mask. The most
common choice of α is 2. On our test images, the F measures of our PDEs, [10]
and [24] are 0.90±0.05, 0.83±0.16 and 0.61±0.20, respectively. One can see
that the performance of our PDEs is better than theirs, in both visual quality and
quantitativemeasure. Thecurvesofthelearntcoefficientsforimagesegmentation
areshowninFig.10.
Wealsopresenttheevolutionprocessofthemaskmapsacrosstime(Fig.11).
Onecanseethatalthoughtheforegroundisrelativelydarkerthanthebackground,
the PDEs correctly detect the most salient points/edges and then propagate the
informationacrosstheforegroundregion,resultinginabrighter outputregionfor
theforeground.
NowweapplyourintelligentPDEsforamorecomplextask: Objectdetection.
Namely, the PDEs should respond strongly to the object of interest while not
responding(orrespondingmuchmoreweakly)iftheobjectisabsentintheimage.
It should be challenging enough for one to manually design PDEs to perform
Figure9: Theresultsofimagesegmentation. Thetoprowarethesegmentationresultsofactive
contour [10] on the original images. The bottom row are the results obtained by our Intelligent
PDE.
Figure 10: Learnt coefficients of the intelligent PDE system for image segmentation problems.
(a) the coefficients {a (t)}16 for the image evolution. (b) the coefficients {b (t)}16 for the
j j=0 j j=0
indicatorevolution.
Figure11: Theevolutionofthemaskmaps. Foreachrow,thefirstimageistheinputimage,the
second to the fifth are the mask maps at time t = 0.25,0.50,0.75,1.0, respectively, and the last
imageisthefinalmaskmapwithathresholdof0.5.
such a problem. As a result, we are unaware of any PDE-based method that can
accomplish this task. The existing PDE-based segmentation algorithms always
outputan“objectregion”eveniftheimagedoesnotcontaintheobjectofinterest.
Incontrast,wewillshowthatasdesiredourPDEsareabletorespondselectively.
We choose the “plane” data set in Corel [23]. We select 30 images from this data
set as positive samples and also prepare 30 images without the object of interest
as negative samples. We also provide their ground truth object masks6 in order to
completethetrainingdata.
InFig.12,onecanseethatourlearntPDEsrespondwelltotheobjectsofinter-
est(firstthreeimages),whiletheresponsetoimageswithouttheobjectsofinterest
isrelativelylowacrossthewholeimages(lasttwoimages). ItseemsthatourPDEs
automatically identify that the concurrent high-contrast edges/junctions/corners
are the key features of planes. The above examples show that our learnt PDEs
are able to differentiate the object/non-object regions, without requiring the user
6For the positive samples, we manually segment binary masks as the output images. For the
negativesamples,thegroundtruthoutputmasksareall-zeroimages.
to teach them what features are and what factors to consider. The curves of the
learntcoefficientsforobjectdetectionareshowninFig.13.
Figure12: Theresultsof“plane”detection. Thetoprowaretheoriginalimages,thefirstthreeare
images containing planes and the last two are without planes. The bottom row are the detection
resultsofourintelligentPDEforimageswithandwithoutplanes,respectively.
Figure 13: Learnt coefficients of the intelligent PDE system for the plane detection problem.
(a) the coefficients {a (t)}16 for the image evolution. (b) the coefficients {b (t)}16 for the
j j=0 j j=0
indicatorevolution.
5. Conclusion
In this paper, we have presented a framework for using data-based optimal
control to learn PDEs as a general regressor to approximate the nonlinear map-
pingsofdifferentvisualprocessingtasks. Theexperimentalresultsonsomecom-
puter vision and image processing problems show that our framework is promis-
ing. However, the current work is still preliminary, so we plan to improve and
enrich our work in the following aspects. First, more theoretical issues should be
addressed for this PDE system. For example, we will try to apply the Adomian
decompositionmethod[25]toexpresstheexactanalyticalsolutionto(1)andthen
analyze its physical properties. Second, we would like to develop more com-
putationally efficient numerical algorithms to solve our PDE-constrained optimal
control problem (4). Third, we will apply our framework to more vision tasks to
findouttowhatextentitworks.
Appendix A. ProofofProperty2.1
We prove that the coefficients {a }16 and {b }16 must be independent of
j j=0 j j=0
(x,y).
Proof. WeproveforF(u,v,{a }16 )in(1)only. Wemayrewrite
F(u,v,{a }16 ) = F ˜ (u,v,x,y,t).
ThenitsufficestoprovethatF isindependentof(x,y).
By the definition of translational invariance, when I(x,y) changes to I(x −
x ,y−y )byshiftingwithadisplacement(x ,y ),u(x,y)andv(x,y)willchange
tou(x−x ,y−y )andv(x−x ,y−y ),respectively. Sothepairu(x−x ,y−y )
0 0 0 0 0 0
andv(x−x ,y −y )fulfils(1),i.e.,
−F(u(x−x ,y −y ),v(x−x ,y −y ),x,y,t) = 0.
Next,wereplace(x−x ,y −y )intheaboveequationwith(x,y)andhave:
−F(u(x,y),v(x,y),x+x ,y +y ,t) = 0.
Ontheotherhand,thepair(u(x,y),v(x,y))alsofulfils(1),i.e.,
−F(u(x,y),v(x,y),x,y,t) = 0.
Therefore, F(u,v,x+x ,y +y ,t) = F(u,v,x,y,t), ∀(x ,y ) that confines the
inputimageinsideΩ. SoF isindependentof(x,y).
Acknowledgment
ThisworkwaspartiallysupportedbythegrantsoftheNationalScienceFoun-
dationofChina,No. U0935004and60873181.