Towards Crowdsourcing and Cooperation in
Linguistic Resources
Dmitry Ustalov1,2,3
1 Krasovsky Institute of Mathematics and Mechanics, Ekaterinburg, Russia,
2 Ural Federal University, Ekaterinburg, Russia,
3 NLPub, Ekaterinburg, Russia
dau@imm.uran.ru
Abstract. Linguisticresourcescanbepopulatedwithdatathroughthe
use of such approaches as crowdsourcing and gamification when mo-
tivated people are involved. However, current crowdsourcing genre tax-
onomieslacktheconceptofcooperation,whichistheprincipalelementof
modernvideogamesandmaypotentiallydrivetheannotators’interest.
This survey on crowdsourcing taxonomies and cooperation in linguis-
ticresourcesprovidesrecommendationsonusingcooperationinexistent
genresofcrowdsourcingandanevidenceoftheefficiencyofcooperation
usingapopularRussianlinguisticresourcecreatedthroughcrowdsourc-
ing as an example.
Keywords: games with a purpose, mechanized labor, wisdom of the
crowd, gamification, crowdsourcing, cooperation, linguistic resources.
1 Introduction
Crowdsourcing has become a mainstream and well-suited approach for solving
manylinguisticdatagatheringproblemssuchassenseinventorycreation[1],cor-
pus annotation [2], information extraction [3], etc. However, its most effective
usestillremainsaproblembecausehumanannotators’motivationandavailabil-
ity are tantalizingly constrained and it is crucial to get the most of performance
from the effort interested people can make.
Another extremely popular term nowadays is gamification. The origin of the
gamification concept is, of course, video game industry. The idea of gamifica-
tion is in embedding interactive and game-based techniques into application to
strengthen user engagement and increase the time spent annotating. Due to the
insufficiency of exploration, gamification is more rarely used in academia when
compared to the industry.
Cooperation is a major, if not principal, element of today’s video games,
which is confirmed by the presentations made in recent years at E3 — the
largest video game exposition and event. Initially, multiplayer mode in video
games was focused on player versus player competitions, but a few years ago
the focus has changed to cooperated human players versus AI and guild versus
guild games.
2v5424.8041:viXra
2 Dmitry Ustalov
The work, as described in this paper, makes the following contributions: 1)
it presents a survey on crowdsourcing taxonomies and cooperation in linguistic
resources, 2) makes recommendations on using cooperation in existent genres of
crowdsourcing,and3)providesanevidenceoftheefficiencyofcooperationrepre-
sented by a popular Russian linguistic resource created through crowdsourcing.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 focuses on related
work towards crowdsourcing genres and cooperation in linguistic resources. Sec-
tion3isdevotedtothecooperativeaspectofcrowdsourcing.Section4discusses
cooperation using OpenCorpora as the example, which is a sufficiently popular
Russian linguistic resource created through crowdsourcing. Section 5 interprets
and explains the obtained results. Section 6 concludes with final remarks and
directions for the future work.
2 Crowdsourcing Genres & Activities
Early studies on crowdsourcing genres in their wide definition were conducted
in 2009. Quinn & Bederson in their technical report [4] proposed the term of
distributedhumancomputation alongwiththetaxonomyofsevendifferentgenres
ofthesecomputationssuchasgameswithapurpose,mechanizedlabor,wisdom
ofcrowds,crowdsourcing,dual-purposework,grandsearch,human-basedgenetic
algorithms, and knowledge collection from volunteer contributions.
In the same year Yuen et al. also presented [5] another taxonomy of five
crowdsourcing genres: initiatory human computation, distributed human com-
putation,socialgame-basedhumancomputationwithvolunteers,paidengineers
and online players, which is similar to the previously mentioned.
Manystudiesfollowingtheearlyonesarefocusedonclassificationofwhether
acrowdsourcedprojectbelongstoaspecificclassofthegiventaxonomy.Forin-
stance,Sabouetal.studyofcorrelationbetweencrowdsourcinggenres[6],qual-
ity assessment [7], and guidelines on corpus annotation through crowdsourcing
[2] align various best practices among the established genres.
There are other attempts to create a taxonomy of crowdsourcing genres.
Zwass investigated the phenomena of co-creation [8] and proposed a taxonomy
of user-created digital content which includes the following: knowledge compen-
dia, consumer reviews, multimedia content, blogs, mashups, virtual worlds. The
resultedtaxonomyappearstobetoogeneraland,sinceitwasnotintended,does
not fit the natural language processing field perfectly.
Erickson presented four quadrant model [9] composed of two orthogonal di-
chotomies to classify crowdsourcing projects: “same place–different places” and
“same time–different times”. The resulted taxonomy tends to assign all the
mentionedabovecrowdsourcedprojectstothe“differentplaces–differenttimes”
quadrant also called Global Crowdsourcing.
Some studies propose much narrower dichotomies. This is the case of the
research conducted by Suendermann & Pieraccini [10], which introduces a con-
cept of private crowd being a trade-off between two extremes: an inexpensive,
highlyavailableyetuncontrolledpubliccrowd suchastheAmazon’sone,andthe
Towards Crowdsourcing and Cooperation in Linguistic Resources 3
expensive to hire, high-quality and professional expert annotators. The private
crowd term can be referred to as controlled crowd.
2.1 Three Genres of Crowdsourcing
In 2013, Wang et al. aggregated most of the previous studies in their very well-
done survey. The mentioned work emphasizes three intuitive and well-separated
genres of crowdsourcing [11]:
Games with a purpose (GWAPs),whenaplayerwithoutanyspecialknowl-
edge is put into a gaming environment and have to make right decisions to
winthegameunderthepressureoftimeoranygamemechanics’constraints.
Phrase Detectives4 and JeuxDeMots5 can be considered as good examples
of such games.
Mechanized labor (MLab), when an annotator who meet the preliminary
requirements is asked to answer a questionnaire on a centralized platform
and is rewarded for their work by micropayments. The most well-recognized
examples of MLab are Amazon Mechanical Turk6 and CrowdFlower7.
Wisdom of the crowd (WotC),whenmotivatedvolunteerssharetheirknowl-
edge on the given topic in the free form in order to answer some question,
to explain something to other people, and so on. The obvious examples of
WotC are Wikipedia8 and Yahoo! Answers9.
Observationsrevealthatresearchpapersoftendonotspecifytheexactcrowd-
sourcinggenre andtreat thecrowdsourcing termas asynonym to MLab dueto
extreme popularity of the Amazon’s product.
2.2 Cooperation in Linguistic Resources
Cooperation, derived from to cooperate, is to work actively with rather than
against others [12, p. 435]. Unfortunately, cooperative crowdsourcing in linguis-
tic resources is less explored in the literature, but present studies show that
considering the concept of cooperation in crowdsourcing is a trending topic de-
serving attention.
An early study of Wikipedia and its quality by Wilkinson & Huberman [13]
found a statistically significant correlation between page edits, talkpage conver-
sations and the quality of these pages. The study revealed the fact that pages
withmoreintensediscussionactivityoftenhavebetterqualitythanlessdiscussed
ones.
4 Dmitry Ustalov
A study by Arazy & Nov [14] pays a special attention to local inequality —
inequality of editors’ contribution in a particular article, and global inequality
— inequality in overall Wikipedia activity for the same set of editors. As a
result,theyfoundthatglobalinequalityhasanimpactonlocalinequality,which
influences editors’ coordination in a positive way, which in its turn contributes
to quality.
Budzise-Weaver et al. [15] consider several cases of multilingual digital li-
braries and their collaboration both with state institutions and crowdsourced
projectsinordertoprovidemultilingualinformationaccessforusers.Thepaper
does not describe how exactly crowdsourcing can help digital libraries in doing
their job, but does demonstrate significant interest to crowdsourcing from an
interdisciplinary point of view.
RanjBar&Maheswaran[16]intheircasestudyonWikipediaconcludedthat
newmechanismsareneededtocoordinatetheactivitiesincrowdsourcingdueto
the fact that high quality articles are controlled by small groups of permanent
editors, and supporting these articles is a huge burden for the editors.
3 Crowdsourcing Genres and Cooperation
Each of the three crowdsourcing genres has its own identities; and the principle
ofparitipants’cooperationchangeswitheachparticularcrowdsourcinginstance.
However, it seems possible to denote three common points:
– attractiveness, the degree of how a participant can find a crowdsourcing
process attractive,
– usefulness, the degree of how a participant can find his activity results
useful to their own purposes,
– difficulty, the degree of how it is difficult to embed cooperative elements
into a process.
When specific case studies are available, the correspondent details are pro-
vided.
3.1 Games with a purpose
The main advantage of GWAPs is their high attractiveness, because people
love video games and it is easier to get new participants than in other genres
of crowdsourcing. One may find low usefulness in these games, but the more
attractive the game is, the less other factors are becoming important.
Itisnecessarytomentionthatvideogamesareaverycostlykindofsoftware
and producing GWAPs requires not only creating a game, but also designing
innovative game mechanics allowing a player to both enjoy the game and to
implicitlyproducevaluabledata.Thus,gameswithapurposehavehighdifficulty
to be realized.
Authors of Phrase Detectives say that the cost of data gathering using their
means is lower than using other approaches [17], but they did not consider the
Towards Crowdsourcing and Cooperation in Linguistic Resources 5
total cost of the game design and development. Elements of real-time players’
cooperation may enhance GWAPs attractiveness even more. The evidence of
this is the fact that modern cooperative multiplayer video games like Dota 2
or Destiny have substituted traditional free for all (deathmatch) multiplayer
games.
3.2 Mechanized labor
SinceMLabprojectsareoftendeployedonspecializedplatformsavailableonthe
WorldWideWeb,themainadvantageof MLabisitslow difficulty:cooperative
elements may be embedded supplementarily to the annotation process through
allowing annotators to join teams and making them participate in the team-
based activity.
Inordertocoverasmuchdomainsaspossible,platforms’ownersprovideonly
very utilitarian and generic interfaces allowing one to answer a questionnaire
without exposing them to any domain-specific features.
Since MLab participants are often rewarded for their work that may be or
may not be interesting for them, the mechanized labor projects have medium
usefulness and usually low attractiveness.
3.3 Wisdom of the crowd
The strong side of WotC projects is, indeed, high usefulness due to the fun-
damental principle of such a genre, when volunteers make efforts to make their
resource better for everyone. WotC have low attractiveness for the same rea-
sons, however it depends on every particular instance.
The above mentioned study by Arazy & Nov also touches upon a typical
regulation problem called “edit warring” in Wikipedia [14], when “editors who
disagree about the content of a page repeatedly override each other’s contribu-
tions, rather than trying to resolve the disagreement through discussion”.
The phenomena of “edit warring” was later studied by Yasseri et. al [18].
Such a problem may be partially resolved by using the controlled crowd instead
of the public one when volunteers have a mentor and responsibility for their
actions [19]. Therefore, such projects have medium difficulty.
4 Evidence
An evidence that cooperation does work and really stimulates participants to
do more assignments is the case of OpenCorpora, which is a project focused on
creation of a large annotated Russian corpus through crowdsourcing [20].
Currently, OpenCorpora participants have to annotate morphologically am-
biguous examples in the MLab manner. One can annotate examples individu-
ally,buthasanopportunitytojointeamsandannotateexamplesincooperation
withtheirteammates.Ateamcanbecreatedandjoinedbyeveryone,andteams
6 Dmitry Ustalov
Fig.1.Annotatedexamples’densitiesbythreeusergroups:theindividuals,theteam-
mates,andthelargestteam;thehighlightedregioncorrespondstotheintervalbetween
50 and 350 examples.
challenge each other by means of active collaborators, annotated examples, and
error rates.
As according to the full-scale pilot study conducted on one of the largest
Russianinformationtechnologies’websites10,volunteerswereverypositiveabout
theirparticipationinthecooperativeannotation.Thestudywasfollowedbythe
creationofthelargestteamuniting170participants.Theteamgotthe2nd place
in the total rank11 based on the number of the annotated examples.
Thepossibleexplanationofsucharesultwouldbefoundinwhathavedriven
theparticipants’motivation.Itwasnotonlytheiraltruismandreadinesstohelp,
but the possibility for their team to get the leading places in the total rank, as
well as their personal participation being one of the keys to the team’s possible
success.
4.1 “Is there a relationship?”
To make it possible to study the present result more thoroughly, the OpenCor-
pora team has kindly provided us with the dataset consisted of user ID, the
group’s name, and various activity information including total number of the
annotated examples per user. Hereafter participants who joined a team are re-
ferred to as teammates, and those who did not join a team are referred to as
individuals.
Towards Crowdsourcing and Cooperation in Linguistic Resources 7
Fig.2. Simulated differences in number of annotated examples, the vertical dashed
lines represent observed differences: the upper plot (a) corresponds to H, the middle
plot (b) corresponds to H(cid:48), and the lower (c) corresponds to H(cid:48)(cid:48).
The initial dataset contains information on 2642 users: 2219 of them are
individuals and 423 are teammates. The distributions’ densities are depicted at
Fig.1andseemtoberight-skewed.Inordertoremoveoutliersfromthedataset,
userswhoannotatedlessthan50examplesormorethan350exampleshavebeen
excluded. As a result, the dataset has been reduced to 579 individuals and 195
teammates, 71 of those are the members of the largest team.
In general, the individuals annotated 801531 examples and the teammates
annotated 970650, while in the dataset the individuals annotated 71150 exam-
ples and the teammates annotated only 29049 examples.
Hence, the research question is “Is there a relationship between being a team
memberandthenumberofannotatedexamplesforaregularOpenCorporauser?”
4.2 Inference
Since the dataset is right-skewed and such hypothesis tests as t-test may be un-
reliable, a randomization test was implemented in the R programming language
and executed for 25000 times under the significance level of α=.05 in order to
estimate the unbiased p-value.
The true difference in means of the numbers of annotated examples among
the teammates (µ ) and the individuals (µ ) has been examined. The following
hypothesisH wasevaluatedinordertofindarelationshipbetweenbeingateam
member and the number of annotated examples:
H : µ −µ =0, the teammates and the individuals on average have no differ-
ence in their annotation activity,
8 Dmitry Ustalov
H : µ −µ > 0, the teammates tend to annotate more examples on average
than the individuals.
The density of differences in the number of annotated examples is demon-
strated at Fig 2(a): the observed difference in means for this one-tailed test is
x¯ −x¯ =26.085, and the p-value is p=0. Thus, p<α and the null hypothesis
H hasbeenrejected,suggestingthatµ >µ :theteammatestendtoannotate
more examples than the individuals.
5 Discussion
The obtained result can also be explained by a teammate being more loyal and
attached to the resource than an individual. Therefore, it is reasonable to study
the performance of a particular team.
5.1 The Largest Team vs. The Individuals
Inordertocomparethebehavioroftheindividualsandthelargestteammembers
instead of all the teammates, the true difference in means of the numbers of
annotated examples among the teammates of the largest team (µ ) and the
individuals (µ ) was examined. The following hypothesis H(cid:48) was evaluated in
the similar way as the previous one:
H(cid:48) : µ −µ = 0, the teammates of the largest team and the individuals on
average have no difference in their annotation activity,
H(cid:48) : µ −µ >0, the teammates of the largest team annotate more examples
on average than the individuals.
The simulation results for this one-tailed test are presented at Fig. 2(b): the
observed difference in means is x¯ −x¯ = 29.552 and the p-value is p = .001.
Sincep<α,thenullhypothesisH(cid:48) hasbeenrejected,suggestingthatµ >µ :
theteammatesofthelargestteamannotatemoreexamplesthantheindividuals.
This result agrees well with the H hypothesis and can be explained by
the fact that the largest team is still relatively small and consists of only 170
teammates who were highly motivated for a short time due to news rotation on
the website where they came from. Their activity decreased significantly when
the announcement of the OpenCorpora disappeared from the news headline.
Their team took the 2nd place on the leaderboard; they lost to the the leading
team as the latter had annotated approximately seven times more examples
(501963 versus 76559).
5.2 The Largest Team vs. Other Teams
Statistical testing of teams’ performance based on comparison of their impact
is complicated due to lack of participants in other teams. For instance, the 2nd
largest team is comprised of 36 users only, the 3rd largest — 24, the 4th —
Towards Crowdsourcing and Cooperation in Linguistic Resources 9
13, which is insufficient for any meaningful test. However, it is indeed possible
to compare the performance of the largest team with the performance of other
teams considered together.
The true difference in means of the numbers of annotated examples among
the teammates of the largest team (µ ) and other teams (µ ) was examined,
and the following hypothesis H(cid:48)(cid:48) has been evaluated:
H(cid:48)(cid:48) : µ −µ =0, the teammates of the largest team and other teammates on
average have no difference in their annotation activity,
H(cid:48)(cid:48) : µ −µ (cid:54)=0, the teammates of the largest team and other teammates on
average have the difference in their annotation activity.
The simulation results for this two-tailed test are presented at Fig. 2(c): the
observeddifferenceinmeansisx¯ −x¯ =5.453andthep-value isp=.629.Since
p>α, the null hypothesis H(cid:48) has not been rejected, suggesting that µ =µ :
the teammates of the largest team annotate the same number of examples as
other teammates do.
6 Conclusion
According to the obtained results, there is a correlation between being a team
memberandthenumberofannotatedexamplesforaregularOpenCorporauser.
The use of team-based cooperation can improve the user activity on crowd-
sourced linguistic resources. However, since the study is observational, it was
impossible to establish causal relationships between the variables.
When organized in teams, users do provide more annotations comparing
with those who are not organized in teams. Thus, it is highly recommended for
acrowdsourcedresourcetoprovideuserswiththeopportunitytojointeamsand
annotate examples in cooperation with their teammates.
Thestatisticalhypotheseshavebeenevaluatedwithuseoftherandomization
test with the significance level of .05. The present dataset is available12 in an
depersonalized form under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0
license. The source code of the above mentioned simulation program is included
under the MIT License.
Further work may be focused on assessing the quality of team-based cooper-
ation results and on studying the patterns of cooperation and the efficiency of
their use in other popular linguistic resources created through crowdsourcing.
Acknowledgments. This work is supported by the Russian Foundation for
the Humanities, project no. 13-04-12020 “New Open Electronic Thesaurus
for Russian”, and by the Program of Government of the Russian Federation
02.A03.21.0006 on 27.08.2013.
10 Dmitry Ustalov
The author would like to thank Dmitry Granovsky for the extended statis-
grateful to the anonymous referees who offered very useful comments on the
present paper.