Toy Models and Statistical Mechanics of Subgraphs and Motifs of Genetic and Protein
S. Bumble, Department of Physics, Philadelphia Community College,
Philadelphia, PA 19130
Theoretical physics is used for a toy model of molecular biology to assess conditions that lead to
the edge of chaos (EOC) in a network of biomolecules. Results can enhance our ability to
understand complex diseases and their treatment or cure.
Network motifs in biological networks are recurring, significant patterns of interconnections.
They have excited more interest lately for their function in determining gene expression and for
their basic computational design principles. Thus, earlier work1,2 that had been done in other
applications of statistical mechanics is recalled and applied to their possible use in biological
networks. Such work did consider a gas adsorbed on a triangular lattice as an order-disorder
problem of statistical mechanics. Lateral interactions were examined between nearest and next-
nearest neighbors to find the region where the isotherm becomes critical. Subgraphs of a
triangular network include the point, the bond, the triangle and the rhombus (Figure 1). Each of
these was examined as representative of the whole network and conditions leading to critical
isotherms or the EOC were considered. These were then characterized by their chemical
potential (or eigenpotential) for specific values of the interactive energy and coordination
number for each subgraph. The eigenpotential is proposed as defining the structure of the motif
and as the communication or signaling entity with other motifs in other networks that lead to
expressions of the biological networks.
A paper in the literature1 studies the adsorption of a gas on to a solid lattice using statistical
mechanics as formulated by Hijmans and DeBoer3. In this method the lattice is broken up into
basic subfigures, such as the point, bond, triangle and rhombus. Constraining relations of
normalization, consistency and equilibrium among these basic figures are maintained. By this
method, isotherms of pressure versus coverage can be calculated and plotted for each degree of
approximation. The present paper assumes that the reader is familiar with the above treatment
and continues the method for the rhombus after the three constraining sets of relations were used
and selected for the probability of occurrence of each degree of occupation of the rhombus.
Consider the subgraph below. It has six different energies of interaction. Four of them are the
same when the proteins on sites 1 through 4 are identical. They are 1—2, 2—3, 3—4, and 4—1.
Bonds 2—4 and 1—3 are internal bonds and they are different from each other as the distance
1—3 is greater than the distance 4—2. They are also different from the bonds 1—2, 2—3, 3—4,
and 4—1. When this motif is placed into its global perspective the 1 and 3 proteins are next-
nearest neighbors, whereas the 2 and 4 proteins are nearest neighbors. Now suppose the four
sites are empty and will be filled by a pool of indistinguishable proteins that are in a reservoir.
They will observe site preference when they occupy sites of the motif. Let us consider each step
as if they proceed from the completely empty motif towards the completely occupied state.
Using statistical mechanics2, we will find that proceeding from the state of being completely
unoccupied to any state of occupancy can be formulated by the equation shown below:
where p is the probability of the completely empty rhombus and p is the probability for the
rhombus where i sites are occupied in the s manner. Also,
where x is for occupied sites 1 and 3, x’ is for occupied sites 2 and 4, y is for interaction 1—3,
y’ is for interaction 2—4 and z is for interactions 1—2, 2—3, 3—4 or 4—1. In equation 2, g is
the number of sites in the equivalent positions 1 and 3 that are occupied, h is the number of sites
in the equivalent position 2 and 4 that are occupied, r is for the bond formed in the position 1—3,
s is for the bond formed in the position 2—4 and t is the number of bonds in the 1—2, 2—3,
3—4 and 4—1 positions. The values for the unknowns are found through complex algebra to be:
where τ and σ are functions of K,C and C’. The superscripts in equation 1 can be found by
simply counting in the diagrams but the values for K, τ, and σ must be found algebraically. Also
the pathways between rhombi of different occupancy can then be found.
Symbolizing an occupied site by + and an unoccupied site by o, we then find the occupied sites
An occupied site is indicated by + and an unoccupied site by o. We then find the occupied sites
It would seem from the above that symmetry is obeyed except for the symmetry between d and
d . This is false because one contains the short diagonal of the rhombus while the other
contains the long diagonal of the rhombus.
There are six pathways between the probabilities of rhombi with succession occupation numbers
as follows:
p Tp Tp Tp Tp
o 12 22 32 4
p Tp Tp Tp Tp
o 12 212 32 4
p Tp Tp Tp Tp
o 12 212 31 4
p Tp Tp Tp Tp
o 11 212 32 4
p Tp Tp Tp Tp
o 11 211 31 4
p Tp Tp Tp Tp
o 11 212 31 4
and the factors that provide the transitions between these probabilities are readily seen from the
set of equations that precede this last set of equations. The word explosion in reference 16 can be
expressed better by the word nucleation. The factors for the transitions in the last set of equations
will be seen to be λ = eu/kT when each new protein appears on the rhombus and C = e-w/kT,
appears when nearest-neighbor proteins interact with each other, while C’ = e-w’/kT, appears when
next-nearest neighbors react with each other. Here u is the chemical potential, T is the absolute
temperature, k is the Boltzmann constant and w and w’ are the interaction energies of the
respective neighbors.
In order to obtain the foregoing, the assumptions had to be made that C’-1 = 0, although in
certain cases, C’-1 was as high as 0.04. Also, the assumption was made that K-1 < 1, which
indeed was always obeyed when interactions were attractive rather than repulsive. Those who
wish to see results when these assumptions were not made can refer to the literature1.
Now the normalizing and equilibrium relationships for each subfigure and the consistency
relationships among all the subfigures lead to similar values for the variables s and t.
The point, bond and triangle are subfigures of the rhombus and are related through consistency
relations. Thus, the probability of occupation of these subfigures are a function of K, σ and τ.
Also, the normalizing relations of all occupation states of the subfigures are also in effect and so
we can obtain values for b and b which are the probabilities of the sites 1, and both sites 1 and
2, resp., to be occupied divided by the probability of both sites 1 and 2 to be empty.
Now the fraction of sites occupied n the whole network is Ө so that
Leads to the polynomial:
K4 – a K3 + a K2 – a K + a = 0,
and the isotherm equation can be derived from the quartic equation, as
And then the plots of eu/kT versus Ө can be made for varying values of C and Z. We then adjust
these two parameters until the isotherm becomes critical. We then find that when the subfigure
(or subgraph) becomes larger, the isotherm becomes “stiffer”. Thus the EOC is obtained at
higher C and/or Z, but then becomes less prone to cross over to chaos. Thus functionality is more
robust. Figure 2 is a graph of the isotherms when c = 3.0 and Z = 6. Notice the large loops for the
bond isotherm, the slight loops for the triangle isotherm and the fact that the rhombus isotherm is
just about at its critical point. The exact value for the critical isotherm when Z = 6 is c = 3.001.
Lamda exp(u/kT) vs. Theta
0 0.5 1 1.5
)Tk/u(pxe(
Discussion
In a working paper by Stuart A. Kauffman et alia4 of the Santa Fe Institute6, the interactions
within a small group of people in a business environment is explored for the connections
between (externalities) that are tuned independently. By controlling which groups have
externalities with which other groups, the topology of the problem can be manipulated-the web
of interactions within and between groups. Optimization of this system with time leads to a
border of chaotic behavior. This model has been adopted in the present study using some
statistical mechanics and thermodynamic relations from physical chemistry and applied in the
field of molecular biology.
When two phases are in equilibrium, their chemical potentials are equal. If a motif or a module is
in its critical region, its chemical potential is constant and it is at its EOC. We define λ which is
exp(u /kT) for a particular temperature and call it an eigenpotential. We can now find the eigen
potential for a motif or module signified by the geometrical figure of the point, bond, triangle or
rhombus and have delineated the method for obtaining it for the hexagon, etc. However each of
these eigenpotentials are for (λ ) = (exp(u /kT)) , at a particular temperature, interaction
c T, w, Z c T,w, Z
energy and coordination number. If we consider this motif or module as a phase with a particular
critical eigenpotential, it would be in equilibrium with another phase that has the same
eigenpotential. We know that if these motifs or eigenpotentials are within a network of genes or
proteins confined within a chromosome then the motif or module may be very close to another
motif or module that can have the same eigenpotential. It may also be true that this critical motif
or module of constant chemical potential is able to send a signal to another biochemical cluster
and modulate its composition and shape to correspond to the signal sender and form either a
receptor, or similar geometric molecular form, to the signal sender so that the motif or module is
propagated in a new network and is an emissary for a functionality of the global set of modules
or motifs.
Some of these questions concern the Gibbs Phase Rule. Do we consider each distinguishable
protein (or component) a different phase? Also, is each vertex or position of the protein
distinguishable as well as each bond or interaction between adjacent proteins? These questions
arise when we attempt to place this motif into a global concept. The other questions of
importance are what factors make the system difficult or easy to reach the system’s EOC, which
facilitates functionality.
A paper by Sear5 indicates that motifs containing many proteins may not exist because of all the
coding necessary for its existence. However, the present paper presupposes the existence of at
least a quartet of associated proteins. Another paper by Sole6, states that real proteome maps
when tuned close to a sharp transition point, separating a highly connected graph from a
disconnected system, display scale-free hierarchical organization, behave as small worlds and
exhibit modularity. These results can occur for cellular networks as a result of a duplication-
diversication process.
Motifs are a set of genes or gene products with specific molecular functions arranged together so
that they perform some useful behavior but they are not separable from the rest of the system7.
Motifs are only part of a systems-level function (such as a feedback loop or a logical operation).
Motifs that were widely used for sequence analysis were generalized to the level of networks.8
Network motifs are likely to be also found on the level of protein signal networks. Finding a
network motif in a new network may help explain what systems-level function the network
performs, and how it performs it. One can unite related groups of motifs of different sizes into
families termed motif generalizations9. This allows generalizations from small motifs to the
larger complexes in which they occur, using efficient algorithms. Motifs can define universal
classes of networks. They may be interpreted as structures that arise because of the special
constraints under which the network evolved10.
Modules are defined as discrete units of function separable from the whole. A module of genes
may comprise common motifs arranged in new ways to produce different phenotypes. A module
is a set of nodes that have strong interactions and a common function. They can be a set of
design principles common both to circuits of human design and result from evolution7.
The emergence of the hierarchical topology11 through copying and reusing existing modules and
motifs is a process reminiscent of gene duplication. Work has been described that visualize
connections between subgraphs and for highlighting many similar subgraphs12. Evolution is a
tinkerer not an engineer. There is a similarity between the creations of tinkerer and engineer13.
We must understand the laws of nature that unite evolved and designed systems. Biological
entities perform computations14. There is an evolutionary payoff placed on being able to predict
the future. Complex organisms can better cope with environmental uncertainty because they can
.
Graph theoretical quantities in biological networks consider degree distribution, degree-degree
correlation function, assortativity, average clustering coefficient and the local clustering
coefficient. Robustness under evolution, gene duplication, divergence and mutation are very
important. Subgraphs in random networks and their influence on scaling15 is discussed. Also,. the
concept of protein families16 in protein networks is emphasized.
Conclusions
The coordination number of each protein and gene in a network is very important to motif
formation as are the interaction energies of the nearest and next-nearest neighbors in the
network17,18. Also important is the chemical potential of the molecules of the motif. To
understand the expression of these biological network’s functions, as well as design efficient
drugs, these factors can be very helpful. When one considers an assembly of molecules that
defines a motif, a chemical potential can be assigned. This is the particular chemical potential at
which the EOC is established. The EOC cluster is considered as a phase and is in equilibrium
with other clusters of molecular assemblies whose chemical potential is equal to the original
phase. This second motif phase grows in steps by preferential attachment of molecules, each of
which is at the EOC for its size, until the size of the original or earliest motif is duplicated and
this duplication can occur repeatedly in different networks until the final expression or
phenotype is achieved. A vertex can be occupied by proteins that are rigidly docked in its
preferred binding mode, occupied by proteins that first attach to the target and then fold19,or
occupied by unfolded proteins. In the last case, disease may follow, and the EOC will be more
difficult to attain. Such proteins must not be allowed in a network.
Acknowledgement: I thank Laszlo Papp for applying his computer acumen.