1v4921140/hp-ortsa:viXra
Nonlinear Processes in Geophysics, v. 11, 343-350 (2004)
TURBULENT THERMAL DIFFUSION OF AEROSOLS IN GEOPHYSICS AND IN
LABORATORY EXPERIMENTS
Alexander Eidelman, Tov Elperin, Nathan Kleeorin, Alexander Krein, and Igor Rogachevskii
The Pearlstone Center for Aeronautical Engineering Studies, Department of Mechanical Engineering,
The Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, POB 653, Beer-Sheva 84105, Israel
Julia Buchholz and Gerd Gru¨nefeld
Faculty of Mechanical Engineering, RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, Germany
(Dated: September11, 2018)
Wediscussanewphenomenonofturbulentthermaldiffusionassociated withturbulenttransport
of aerosols in the atmosphere and in laboratory experiments. The essence of this phenomenon
is the appearance of a nondiffusive mean flux of particles in the direction of the mean heat flux,
which results in the formation of large-scale inhomogeneities in the spatial distribution of aerosols
that accumulate in regions of minimum mean temperature of the surrounding fluid. This effect of
turbulent thermal diffusion was detected experimentally. In experiments turbulence was generated
by two oscillating grids in two directions of the imposed vertical mean temperature gradient. We
usedParticleImageVelocimetrytodeterminetheturbulentvelocityfield,andanImageProcessing
TechniquebasedonananalysisoftheintensityofMiescatteringtodeterminethespatialdistribution
of aerosols. Analysis of the intensity of laser light Mie scattering by aerosols showed that aerosols
accumulateinthevicinityoftheminimummeantemperatureduetotheeffectofturbulentthermal
diffusion.
I. INTRODUCTION ture inversions and the aerosollayers (pollutants) in the
vicinityofthe temperatureinversions(see,e.g.,Seinfeld,
1986; Flagan and Seinfeld, 1988). Moreover, turbulent
Aerosols are a universal feature of the Earth’s atmo-
thermal diffusion can cause the formation of large-scale
sphere. They can significantly affect the heat balance
aerosollayersinthe vicinity oftemperatureinversionsin
and dynamics of the atmosphere, climate, atmospheric
atmospheric turbulence (Elperin et al. 2000a;2000c).
chemistry, radiative transport and precipitation forma-
tion(see,e.g.,Twomey,1977;Seinfeld,1986;Flaganand The main goal of this paper is to describe the experi-
Seinfeld,1988;PruppacherandKlett1997;Lohmannand mentaldetectionofanewphenomenonofturbulentther-
Lesins,2002;Kaufmanetal. 2002;Andersonetal. 2003; mal diffusion. To accomplish this, we constructed an
andreferencestherein). Formationofaerosolcloudsisof oscillating grids turbulence generator (for details see Ei-
fundamentalsignificanceinmanyareasofenvironmental delman et al. 2002). Recent studies by De Silva and
sciences,physicsoftheatmosphereandmeteorology(see, Fernando (1994); Srdic et al. (1996), Shy et al. (1997)
e.g., Seinfeld, 1986; Flagan and Seinfeld, 1988; Paluch have demonstrated the feasibility of generating nearly
and Baumgardner, 1989; Shaw et al. 1998; Shaw 2003; isotropic turbulence by two oscillating grids. Turbulent
andreferences therein). It is wellknownthat turbulence diffusion in oscillating grids turbulence was investigated
causesdecayofinhomogeneitiesinspatialdistributionof by Ott and Mann (2000). In order to study turbulent
aerosols due to turbulent diffusion (see, e.g., Csanady, thermal diffusion we used Particle Image Velocimetry to
1980; McComb 1990; Stock 1996), whereas the opposite characterizeaturbulentvelocityfield,andanImagePro-
effect, the preferentialconcentrationofaerosolsin atmo- cessing Technique based on Mie scattering to determine
spheric turbulence is not well understood. thespatialdistributionoftheparticles. Ourexperiments
Elperinetal. (1996;1997;1998;2000b;2001)recently were performed in two directions of the vertical mean
foundthatin aturbulentfluid flowwith anonzeromean temperaturegradient: anupwardmeantemperaturegra-
temperaturegradientanadditionalmeanfluxofaerosols dient(formedbyacoldbottomandahottopwallofthe
appearsinthedirectionoppositetothatofthemeantem- chamber) and a downward mean temperature gradient.
peraturegradient,whichis knownas the phenomenonof We found that in a flow with a downwardmean temper-
turbulent thermal diffusion. This effect results in the aturegradient,particlesaccumulateinthevicinityofthe
formation of large-scale inhomogeneities in the spatial topwallofthechamber(wherebythemeanfluidtemper-
distribution of the aerosol particles. ature is minimal), and in a flow with an upward mean
temperature gradient particles accumulate in the vicin-
The phenomenon of turbulent thermal diffusion is im-
ity of the bottom wall of the chamber due to the effect
portantforunderstandingatmosphericphenomena(e.g.,
of turbulent thermal diffusion.
atmospheric aerosols, smog formation, etc.). There ex-
ists a correlation between the appearance of tempera- The paper is organizedas follows. Section II discusses
thephysicsofturbulentthermaldiffusion,andSectionIII fluid pressure. Coefficient κ depends on particle inertia
describes the experimental set-up for a laboratory study (m /m ), the parameters of turbulence (Reynolds num-
of this effect. The experimental results are presented ber)andthemeanfluidtemperature(Elperinetal. 1996;
in Section IV, and a detailed analysis of experimental 1997; 1998; 2000b; 2001). Here m is the particle mass
detection of turbulent thermal diffusion is performed in andm isthemassofmoleculesofthesurroundingfluid.
Section V. Finally, conclusions are drawn in Section VI. The turbulent flux of particles (3) can be rewritten as
II. TURBULENT THERMAL DIFFUSION T − T(cid:20) T T¯ (cid:21)
where k = (1 + κ)N¯. The first term in the RHS of
Evolutionof the number density n(t,r) of small parti- T
Eq. (6) describes turbulent thermal diffusion, while the
cles in a turbulent flow is determined by
secondtermintheturbulentfluxofparticles(6)describes
∂n turbulent diffusion. Parameter k can be interpreted as
∂t · p − · M theturbulentthermaldiffusionratio,andD T k T istheco-
efficient of turbulent thermal diffusion. Turbulent ther-
where J is the molecular flux of the particles and v
M p mal diffusion causes the formation of a large-scale pat-
is the velocity of the particles in the turbulent fluid ve-
tern wherein the initial spatial distribution of particles
locity field. Averaging Eq. (1) over the statistics of the
in a turbulent fluid flow evolves into a large-scale inho-
turbulent velocity field yields the following equation for
mogeneous distribution, i.e., particles accumulate in the
the mean number density of particles N¯ n :
vicinity of the minimum mean temperature of the sur-
∂N¯ rounding fluid (Elperin et al. 1996; 1997; 1998; 2000b;
∂t · p − · T M
The mechanism responsible for the occurrence of tur-
bulentthermaldiffusionforparticleswithρ p ρ canbe
where D = (τ/3) u2 is the turbulent diffusion coeffi- described as follows. Inertia causes particles inside the
T h i turbulenteddies to driftoutto the boundary regionsbe-
cient, τ is the momentum relaxation time of the turbu-
lent velocity field, v =V¯ +u, V¯ = v is the mean tween the eddies (i.e., regions with low vorticity or high
h i strainrateandmaximumoffluidpressure). Thus,parti-
particle velocity, and the effective velocity is
clesaccumulateinregionswithmaximumpressureofthe
Veff = τu(∇ u) . (4) turbulent fluid. For simplicity, let us consider a pure in-
−h · i ertialeffect, i.e., we assume that ∇ v=0. This inertial
Here J¯ M = − D(∇N¯ +k t ∇T¯/T¯) is the mean molecular effect results in ∇ v p τ p ∆P =0. · On the other hand,
flux of particles, D is the coefficient of molecular diffu- Eq.(1) for largePe · clet ∝ numbers 6 yields ∇ v dn/dt.
sion, k is the thermal diffusion ratio, and T¯ = T is · p ∝−
t The latter formula implies that dn/dt τ ∆P, i.e.,
the mean fluid temperature. Equations (2) and (3) were ∝ −
inertial particles accumulate (dn/dt > 0) in regions
previously derived by different methods (see Elperin et
with maximum pressure of the turbulent fluid (where
al. 1996;1997;1998;2000b;2001;PandyaandMashayek
∆P < 0). Similarly, there is an outflow of particles
2002).
from regions with minimum pressure of fluid. In ho-
For noninertial particles advected by a turbulent fluid
mogeneous and isotropic turbulence without large-scale
flow, particle velocity v coincides with fluid velocity v,
p external gradients of temperature, a drift from regions
withincreasedor decreasedconcentrationofparticlesby
T are the density and temperature of the fluid. Thus,
a turbulent flow of fluid is equiprobable in all directions,
the effective velocity (4) for noninertial particles can be
and pressure and temperature of the surrounding fluid
given by Veff =
(∇T¯)/T¯, which takes into account
do not correlate with the turbulent velocity field. Thus
the equation of state for an ideal gas but neglects small
only turbulent diffusion of particles takes place.
gradients of the mean fluid pressure.
Inaturbulentfluidflowwithameantemperaturegra-
Forinertialparticles,velocityv dependsontheveloc-
p dient, the mean heat flux uΘ is not zero, i.e., the fluc-
ity of the surrounding fluid v. Velocity v p can be deter- tuationsoffluidtemperatu h reΘ i =T T¯ andthevelocity
mined by the equation of motion for a particle. Solving −
of the fluid correlate. Fluctuations of temperature cause
the equation of motion for a small solid particle with
fluctuationsoffluidpressure. Thesefluctuationsresultin
ρ ρ yields: v = v τ dv/dt+O(τ2) (see Maxey
p ≫ p − p p fluctuations of the number density of particles. Indeed,
1987),where τ is the Stokes time and ρ is the material
p p anincreaseinpressureofthesurroundingfluidisaccom-
density of the particles. In that case
panied by an accumulation of particles. Therefore, the
directionofthemeanfluxofparticlescoincideswiththat
∇ · v p =∇ · v+τ p ρ +O(τ p 2 ), (5) of the heat flux, h v p n i ∝ h uΘ i ∝ − ∇T¯, i.e., the mean
flux of particles is directed to the area with minimum
and the effective velocity of the inertial particles can be mean temperature, and the particles accumulate in that
given by Veff =
(1 + κ)(∇T¯)/T¯, where P is the region.
flow was formed by attaching two aluminium heat ex-
changers to the bottom and top walls of the test section
(see Fig. 2). The experiments were performed in two
directions of the mean temperature gradient: anupward
meantemperaturegradient(acoldbottomandahottop
wallofthe chamber)andadownwardmeantemperature
gradient (a heated bottom and a cold top wall of the
chamber). In order to improve the heat transfer in the
boundary layers at the walls we used a heat exchanger
with rectangular pins 3 3 15 mm. This allowed us
to support a mean temp
ure gradient in the core of
the flow up to 200 K/m in the upward direction and up
to 110 K/m in the downward direction at a mean tem-
peratureofabout300K.Thetemperaturewasmeasured
with a high-frequency response thermocouple.
The velocity field was measured using a Particle Im-
age Velocimetry (PIV), see Raffel et al. (1998). A digi-
talPIVsystemwith LaVisionFlowMaster III wasused.
A double-pulsed light sheet was provided by a Nd-YAG
laser source (Continuum Surelite 2 170 mJ). The light
sheetopticsincludessphericalandcylindricalGalileitele-
FIG. 1: The experimental set-up.
scopes with tuneable divergence and adjustable focus
length. We used a progressive-scan 12 bit digital CCD
camera (pixel size 6.7µm 6.7µm each) with a dual-
frame-technique for cross-correlation processing of cap-
tured images. A programmable Timing Unit (PC inter-
face card) generated sequences of pulses to control the
laser, camera and data acquisition rate. The software
packageDaVis6wasappliedtocontrolallhardwarecom-
ponents and for 32 bit image acquisition and visualiza-
tion. This software package contains PIV software for
calculating the flow fields using cross-correlation analy-
sis. Velocity maps and their characteristics, e.g., statis-
tics and PDF, were analyzed with this package plus an
additionaldevelopedsoftwarepackage. Anincensesmoke
with sub-micron particles (with ρ /ρ 10
) as a tracer
was used for the PIV measurements. Smoke was pro-
duced by high temperature sublimation of solid incense
FIG. 2: The test section of the oscillating grids turbulence
particles. Analysisofsmokeparticlesusingamicroscope
generator.
(Nikon,Epiphotwithanamplificationof560)andaPM-
300portablelaserparticulateanalyzershowedthatthese
particles have a spherical shape and that their mean di-
III. EXPERIMENTAL SET-UP ameter is 0.7µm.
Meanandr.m.s. velocities,two-pointcorrelationfunc-
InthisSectionweinvestigateexperimentallytheeffect tions and an integral scale of turbulence from the mea-
of turbulent thermal diffusion. The experiments were sured velocity fields were determined. A series of 100
conducted in an oscillating grids turbulence generator pairs of images acquired with a frequency of 4 Hz were
in air flow (see Fig. 1). The test section consisted of storedforcalculatingthevelocitymapsandforensemble
a rectangular chamber of dimensions 29 29 58 cm and spatial averaging of turbulence characteristics. The
(see Fig. 2). Pairs of vertically oriented grids with bars centerofthe measurementregioncoincideswiththe cen-
arranged in a square array were attached to the right ter of the chamber. We measured the velocity for flow
andlefthorizontalrods. Bothgridsweredrivenindepen- areas from 60 60 mm2 up to 212 212 mm2 with a
dently with speed-controlledmotors. The grids were po- spatial resoluti × on of 1024 1024 pixe × ls. This size of the
sitionedatadistance oftwo-gridmeshesfromthe cham- probed area corresponds t × o a spatial resolution from 58
ber walls parallel to them. A two-grid system can oscil- µm/ pixel upto 207µm / pixel. These regionswere an-
late at a controllable frequency up to 20 Hz. The grid alyzedwithinterrogationwindowsof32 32and16 16
stroke was adjusted within a range of 1 to 10 cm. pixels. A velocity vector was determin × ed in every × in-
Averticalmeantemperaturegradientintheturbulent terrogation window, allowing us to construct a velocity
map comprising 32 32 or 64 64 vectors. The veloc- IV. EXPERIMENTAL DETECTION OF
ity maps were determined in two planes. In the one-grid TURBULENT THERMAL DIFFUSION
experiments the plane was parallel to the grid, while in
the two-grid experiments the plane was normal to the
The turbulent flow parameters in the oscillating grids
grids. The mean and r.m.s. velocities for each point of turbulencegeneratorare: r.m.s. velocity u2 =4 14
the velocity map (1024 points) were determined by av- h i −
cm/sdepending onthefrequencyofthegpridoscillations,
eraging over 100 independent maps, and then over 1024
integral scale of turbulence L = 1.6 2.3 cm, and the
points. The two-point correlation functions of the ve- −
Kolmogorov length scale η = 380 600µm. Other pa-
locity field were determined for each point of the cen- −
rametersaregiveninSection5(Tables1-2). Theseflows
tral part of the velocity map (16 16 vectors) by av-
involve a wide range of scales of turbulent motions. In-
eraging over 100 independent velocity maps, and then
terestingly, a flow with a wide range of spatial scales is
over 256 points. An integral scale L of turbulence was
already formed at comparatively low frequencies of grid
determined from the two-point correlation functions of
oscillations. We found a weak mean flow in the form
thevelocityfield. Thesemeasurementswererepeatedfor
of two large toroidal structures parallel and adjacent to
different distances from the grid, and for various tem-
the grids. The interaction of these structures results in
perature gradients,Reynolds numbers and particle mass
a symmetric mean flow that is sensitive to the param-
loadings. ThePIVmeasurementsperformedintheoscil-
eters of the grid adjustments. We particularly studied
latinggridsturbulencegeneratorconfirmedearlierresults
the parameters that affect a mean flow such as the grid
(Thompson and Turner 1975; Hopfinger and Toly 1976;
distance to the walls of the chamber and partitions, and
Kit et al. 1997) for the dependence of varies character-
the angles between the grid planes and the axes of their
istics of the turbulent velocity field on the parametersof
oscillations. Varying these parameters allowed us to ex-
the oscillating grids turbulence generator.
pand the central region with a homogeneous turbulence.
We found that the measured r.m.s. velocity was several
To determine the spatial distribution of the particles,
times higher than the mean velocity in the core of the
we used an Image Processing Technique based on Mie
flow.
scattering. The advantages of this method have been
The temperature measurements were taken in the os-
demonstrated by Guibert et al. (2001). The light ra-
cillating grids turbulence generator. The temperature
diation energy flux scattered by small particles is E
E˜Ψ(πd /λ;a;n),whereE˜ πd2/4is the energyflux in ∝ - difference between the heat exchangers varied within a
p ∝ p rangeof25to 50K.The meantemperatureverticalpro-
cidentattheparticle,d istheparticlediameter,λisthe
files at a frequency of grids oscillations f = 10.5 Hz in
wavelength,aistheindexofrefractionandΨisthescat-
turbulent flows with downward and upward mean tem-
tering function. In the general case, Ψ is given by Mie
perature gradients are shown in Fig. 3. Here Z is a di-
equations. Forwavelengthsλ,whicharesmallerthanthe
mensionless vertical coordinate measured in units of the
particlesize,Ψtendstobeindependentofd andλ. The
height of the chamber, and Z = 0 at the bottom of the
scattered light energy flux incident on the CCD camera
chamber. Hereafter,weusethefollowingsystemofcoor-
probe is proportional to the particle number density n,
i.e., E E˜n(πd2/4). dinates: Z is the vertical axis, the Y-axis is perpendicu-
s ∝ p lar to the grids andthe XZ-plane is parallelto the grids
plane.
Mie scattering does not change from temperature ef-
fectssinceitdependsonthepermittivityofparticles,the Measurements performed using different concentra-
particle size and the laser light wavelength. The effect tions ofincense smokeshowedthatin anisothermalflow
of the temperature on these characteristics is negligibly the distribution of the average scattered light intensity
small. Note that in each experiment before taking the overaverticalcoordinateisindependentofthemeanpar-
measurements, we let the system run for some time (up ticle number density. In orderto characterizethe spatial
to 30 minutes after smoke injection into the flow with distribution of particle number density N¯ ET/E in
a steady mean temperature profile) in order to attain a a non-isothermal flow, the distribution of the scattered
stationary state. lightintensityE forthe isothermalcasewasusedtonor-
malizethescatteredlightintensityET obtainedinanon-
We found that the probability density function of the isothermalflowunderthesameconditions. Thescattered
particle size measured with the PM300 particulate ana- light intensities ET and E in each experiment were nor-
lyzer was to the mostextent independent of the location malized by corresponding scattered light intensities av-
in the flow for incense particle size of 0.5 1µm. Note eraged over the vertical coordinate. The ratios ET/E of
that since the number density of the particles is small the normalized average distributions of the intensity of
(about 1 mm apart), it can be assumed that a change scattered light as a function of the normalized vertical
in particle number density will not affect their size dis- coordinate Z in turbulent flows with a downward mean
tribution. Therefore, the ratio of the scattered radiation temperaturegradientandwithanupwardmeantemper-
fluxes attwo points andat the image measuredwith the ature gradient are shown in Fig. 4. The figure demon-
CCD camera remains equal to the ratio of the particle stratesthatparticlesareredistributedinaturbulentflow
mean number densities at these two locations. withameantemperaturegradient. Particlesaccumulate
280 300 320
0.95 1.00 1.05 1.10
FIG. 3: Vertical temperature profiles at frequency of grid
oscillations f = 10.5 Hz in turbulent flows with an upward
meantemperaturegradient(filledsquares) andwithadown-
ward mean temperature gradient (unfilled triangles). Here
Z is a dimensionless vertical coordinate measured in unitsof
the height of the chamber, and Z = 0 at the bottom of the
chamber.
in regions of minimum mean temperature (in the lower
part of the chamber in turbulent flows with an upward
mean temperature gradient), and there is an outflow of
particles from the upper part of the chamber where the
mean temperature is larger. On the other hand, in a
flowwithadownwardmeantemperaturegradient(ahot
bottom and a cold top wall of the test section) particles
accumulateinthevicinityofthetopwallofthechamber,
i.e., in the vicinity where the mean fluid temperature is
minimum.
Todetermine the turbulentthermaldiffusionratio,we
plotted the normalized particle number density N
N¯/N¯ 0versusthenormalizedtemperaturedifferenceT
(T¯ T¯ 0)/T¯ 0, where T¯ 0 is the reference temperature an ≡ d
N¯ 0 − =N¯(T¯ =T¯ 0).ThefunctionN r (T r )isshowninFig.5
for a turbulent flow with an upward mean temperature
gradient and in Fig. 6 for a turbulent flow with a down-
ward mean temperature gradient.
Weprobedthecentral20 20cmregioninthechamber
by determining the mean intensity of scattered light in
32 16 interrogationwindows with a size of 32 64 pix-
els. The verticaldistribution ofthe intensity of the scat-
FIG.4: Ratios E /E of normalized average distributionsof
theintensity of scattered light versusthenormalized vertical
coordinate Z in turbulent flows with an upward mean tem-
peraturegradient(filledsquares)andwithadownwardmean
temperaturegradient(unfilledtriangles). HereZ =0isatthe
bottomofthechamber. Thefrequencyofgridsoscillations is
f =10.5 Hz.
teredlightwasdeterminedin16verticalstrips,whichare
composedof 32interrogationwindows. Variations ofthe
obtained vertical distributions between these strips were
very small. Therefore in Figs. 4-6 we used spatial aver-
ageoverstripsandtheensembleaverageover100images
of the vertical distributions of the intensity of scattered
light. Figures 5-6 were plotted using the mean temper-
ature vertical profiles shown in Fig. 3. The normalized
localmeantemperatures[therelativetemperaturediffer-
ences(T¯ T¯ 0)/T¯ 0]inFigs.5-6correspondtothedifferent
− points inside the probed region. In particular, in Fig. 5
the location of the point with reference temperature T¯ 0
is Z =0.135 (the lowest point of the probed region with
a maximum N¯ in turbulent flows with an upward mean
temperature gradient), and the point with a maximum
normalizedtemperaturedifferenceisthe highestpointof
the probed region at Z = 0.865. The size of the probed
region did not affect our results.
V. DISCUSSION
The vertical profiles of the mean number density of
particles obtained in our experiments can be explained
0.00 0.02 0.04 0.06 T r
0.00 0.02 0.04 0.06
FIG. 5: Normalized particle number density Nr ≡ N¯/N¯ 0
versusnormalizedtemperaturedifferenceTr ≡(T¯−T¯ 0)/T¯ 0in
aturbulentflowwithanupwardmeantemperaturegradient.
The frequency of grid oscillations is f =10.5 Hz.
byconsideringEqs.(2)and(3). Ifonedoesnottakeinto
account the term N¯Veff in Eq. (2) for the mean number
densityofparticles,theequationreads∂N¯/∂t=D ∆N¯,
whereweneglectedasmallmeanfluidvelocityV¯ anda
small molecular mean flux of particles (that corresponds
to the conditions of the experiment). The steady-state
solution of this equation is N¯ = const. However, our
measurements demonstrate that the solution N¯ = const
is valid only for an isothermal turbulent flow, i.e., when
T¯ = const. By taking into account the effect of turbu-
lentthermaldiffusion,i.e.,thetermN¯Veff inEq.(2),the
steady-statesolutionofthisequationfornon-inertialpar-
ticles is: ∇N¯/N¯ = ∇T¯/T¯. The latter equation yields
N¯/N¯ 0 =1 (T¯ T¯ 0 − )/T¯ 0, where T¯ T¯ 0 T¯ 0. In the ex- − − − ≪
perimentsusingparticlesofthesize0.5 2µm,wefound
N¯ T¯ T¯ 0
N¯ 0 − T¯ 0
where the coefficient α = 1.33 1.79 (depending on
the frequency of the grid oscillations) in a turbulent
flow with an upward mean temperature gradient, and
α=1.29 1.87inaturbulentflowwithadownwardmean
temperature gradient (see Tables 1-2). The deviation of
coefficientαfrom1 iscausedbya smallyetfinite inertia
FIG. 6: Normalized particle number density Nr ≡ N¯/N¯ 0
versusnormalizedtemperaturedifferenceTr ≡(T¯−T¯ 0)/T¯ 0 in
aturbulentflowwithadownwardmeantemperaturegradient.
The frequency of grid oscillations is f =10.4 Hz.
of the particles and by the dependence of coefficient α
on the mean temperature gradient. The exact value of
parameterαforinertialparticlescannotbefoundwithin
the framework of the theory of turbulent thermal diffu-
sion (Elperin et al. 1996; 1997; 1998; 2000b; 2001) for
the conditions of our experiments (i.e., for strong mean
temperature gradients). However, in all the present ex-
periments performed for different ranges of parameters
and different directions of a mean temperature gradient,
the coefficient ofturbulent thermal diffusion α was more
than 1, which does agree with the theory. In particular,
the theory predicts α = 1 for noninertial particles, and
α > 1 for inertial particles. As can be seen in Tables 1-2, parameter α slightly decreases when the Reynolds
number increases.
There are other factors that can affect the spatial dis-
tributionof particles. The contributionof the meanflow
tothe spatialdistributionofparticlesisnegligiblysmall.
Indeed,thenormalizeddistributionofthescatteredlight
intensity measured in the different vertical strips in the
regionswherethemeanflowvelocityandthecoefficientof
turbulentdiffusionvarystronglyarepracticallyidentical
(the difference being only about 1 %). Due to the effect
ofturbulentthermaldiffusion,particlesareredistributed
in the vertical direction in the chamber. In turbulent
the particle collision rate using the Saffman-Turner for-
f (Hz) hu2i (cm/s) L (cm) Re α mula (Saffman and Turner 1956) confirmed this finding.
p Consequently,wedidnotobserveanycoalescenceofpar-
ticles. The effect of the gravitational settling of small
particles (0.5 1µm) is negligibly small (the terminal
6.5 3.6 1.9 46 1.79 −
fallvelocityofthese particlesbeing lessthan0.01cm/s).
Thus, we may conclude that the two competitive mech-
10.5 7.2 2.1 101 1.65 anisms of particle transport, i.e., mixing by turbulent
diffusion and accumulation of particles due to turbulent
14.5 10.7 2.3 164 1.43 thermaldiffusion,existsimultaneouslyandthereisavery
small effect of gravitationalsettling of the particles.
16.5 12.4 2.0 165 1.33 In regard to the accuracy of the performed measure-
ments, we found that uncertainties in optics adjustment
and errors in measuring a CCD image backgroundvalue
TABLE I: Parameters of turbulence and the turbulent ther- are considerably less than the observed effect of a 10%
mal diffusion coefficient for a turbulent flow with an upward change of normalized intensity of the scattered light in
mean temperature gradient. Here Re=L hu2i/ν, L is the the test section in the presence of an imposed mean
integral scale of turbulence,and ν is thekipnematic viscosity. temperature gradient. In the range of the tracer con-
centrations used in the experiments the particle-air sus-
pension can be considered as an optically thin medium,
from which we can infer that the intensity of the scat-
f (Hz) hu2i (cm/s) L (cm) Re α
tered light is proportional to the particle number den-
sity. The total error in our measurements was deter-
8.4 8.8 1.85 109 1.87 where δT¯ = 0.1K is the accurac ≈ y of the temperature
measurements; δN¯/N¯ = 0.8% is the accuracy of the
10.4 9.7 1.75 113 1.60 mean number density measurements; and Q = 8 is the
number of experiments performed for each direction of
the meantemperature gradientandfor eachvalue ofthe
12.4 11.1 1.65 122 1.69
frequency of the grid oscillations. The total variation of
the normalized particle number density due to the ef-
14.4 11.7 1.84 144 1.34
fectofturbulentthermaldiffusionis morethan10%(see
Figs.4-6). The relativeerrorofthe measurementsis less
16.4 14.0 1.64 153 1.29 than 3% of the total variation of the particle number
density. Thus, the accuracy of these measurements is
considerably higher than the magnitude of the observed
TABLEII:Parameters of turbulenceand theturbulentther-
effect. As such, our experiments confirm the existence
maldiffusioncoefficientforaturbulentflowwithadownward
of an effect of turbulent thermal diffusion, as predicted
mean temperature gradient.
theoretically by Elperin et al. (1996; 1997).
flows with an upward mean temperature gradient parti-
clesaccumulatedinthelowerpartofthechamber,andin VI. CONCLUSIONS
flows with a downward mean temperature gradient par-
ticles accumulated in the vicinity of the top wall of the A new phenomenon of turbulent thermal diffusion has
chamber, i.e., in regions with a minimum mean temper- beendetectedexperimentallyinturbulencegeneratedby
ature. The spatial-temporal evolution of the normalized oscillatinggridswithanimposedverticalmeantempera-
numberdensityofparticlesN r isgovernedbytheconser- ture gradient in air flow. This phenomenon implies that
vation law of the total number of particles (see Eqs. (2) there exists an additional mean flux of particles in the
and (3)). Some fractionof particles sticks to the wallsof direction opposite to that of the mean temperature gra-
the chamber, and the total number of particles without dient,thatresultsintheformationoflarge-scaleinhomo-
feeding fresh smoke slowly decreases. The characteristic geneitiesinthespatialdistributionofparticles. Thepar-
time of this decrease is about 15 minutes. However, the ticles accumulated in the vicinity of the minimum mean
spatial distribution of the normalized number density of fluid temperature. In the experiments in two directions
particles does not change over time. of the vertical mean temperature gradient, it was found
Thenumberdensityofparticlesinourexperimentswas that in a flow with a downward mean temperature gra-
ofthe orderof1010 particlesper cubic meter. Therefore, dient particles accumulate in the vicinity of the top wall
the distance between particles is about 1 mm, and their of the chamber. In a flow with an upwardmean temper-
collision rate is negligibly small. Indeed, calculation of ature gradientparticles accumulate in the vicinity of the
bottomwallofthechamber. Turbulentthermaldiffusion nober for illuminating discussions. We also thank A.
canexplainthelarge-scaleaerosollayersthatforminside Markovich for his assistance in processing the exper-
atmospheric temperature inversions. imental data. This work was partially supported by
the German-Israeli Project Cooperation (DIP) adminis-
trated by the Federal Ministry for Education and Re-
Acknowledgments search (BMBF) and by the Israel Science Foundation
governedby the Israeli Academy of Science.
We are indebted to F. Busse, H. J. S. Fernando,
J. Katz, E. Kit, V. L’vov, J. Mann, S. Ott and A. Tsi-
[1] Anderson, L., Charlson, R. J., Schwartz, S. E., Knutti, view ofaerosols in theclimate system, Nature, 419, 215-
R., Boucher, O., Rodhe, H. and Heintzenberg, J., Cli- 223, 2002.
mate forcing by aerosols - a hazy picture, Science, 300, [16] Kit, E., Strang, E. J. and Fernando, H. J. S., Measure-
1103-1104, 2003. ment of turbulence near shear-free density interfaces, J.
[2] Csanady,G.T.,TurbulentDiffusionintheEnvironment, Fluid Mech., 334, 293-314, 1997.
Reidel, Dordrecht,1980. [17] Lohmann,U.andLesins,G.,Strongerconstraintsonthe
[3] DeSilva,I.P.D.andFernandoH.J.S.,Oscillatinggrids anthropogenicinderectaerosoleffect.Science,298,1012-
as a source of nearly isotropic turbulence, Phys. Fluids, 1015, 2002.
6:,2455-2464, 1994. [18] Maxey, M. R., The gravitational settling of aerosol par-
[4] Eidelman, A., Elperin, T., Kapusta, A., Kleeorin, N., ticles in homogeneous turbulenceand random flow field,
Krein, A. and Rogachevskii, I., Oscillating grids turbu- J. Fluid Mech., 174, 441-465, 1987.
lencegeneratorforturbulenttransportstudies,Nonlinear [19] McComb, W. D., The Physics of Fluid Turbulence,
Processes in Geophysics, 9, 201-205, 2002. Clarendon, Oxford, 1990.
[5] Elperin,T.,Kleeorin,N.andRogachevskii,I.,Turbulent [20] Ott, S. and Mann, J., An experimental investiga-
thermal diffision of small inertial particles, Phys. Rev. tion of the relative diffusion of particle pairs in three-
Lett., 76, 224-228, 1996. dimensionalturbulentflow,J.FluidMech.,422,207-234,
[6] Elperin,T.,Kleeorin,N.andRogachevskii,I.,Turbulent 2000.
barodiffusion,turbulentthermaldiffusionandlarge-scale [21] Pandya, R. V. R. and Mashayek, F., Turbulent thermal
instability in gases, Phys. Rev. E, 55, 2713-2721, 1997. diffusionandbarodiffusionofpassivescalaranddispersed
[7] Elperin,T.,Kleeorin,N.andRogachevskii,I.,Formation phaseofparticlesinturbulentflows,Phys.Rev.Lett.,88,
of inhomogeneities in two-phase low-mach-number com- 044501 (1-4), 2002.
pressible turbulent flows, Int. J. Multiphase Flow, 24, [22] Paluch,I.R.,andBaumgardner,D.G.,Entrainmentand
1163-1182, 1998. fine-scalemixinginacontinentalconvectivecloud,J.At-
[8] Elperin, T., Kleeorin, N. and Rogachevskii, I., Mech- mos. Sci.,46, 261-278, 1989.
anisms of formation of aerosol and gaseous inhomo- [23] Pruppacher, H. R. and Klett, J. D., Microphysics of
geneities in the turbulent atmosphere, Atmosph. Res., Clouds and Precipitation, Kluwer Acad. Publ., Dor-
53, 117-129, 2000a. drecht, 1997.
[9] Elperin, T., Kleeorin, N., Rogachevskii, I. and Sokoloff, [24] Raffel,M.,Willert,C.andKompenhans,J.,ParticleIm-
D.,Passivescalartransportinarandomflowwithafinite age Velocimetry. Springer, 1998.
renewal time: mean-field equations, Phys. Rev. E, 61, [25] Saffman,P.G.andTurner,J.S.,Onthecollisionofdrops
2617-2625, 2000b. in turbulentclouds, J. Fluid Mech., 1, 16-30, 1956.
[10] Elperin, T., Kleeorin, N., Rogachevskii, I. and Sokoloff, [26] Seinfeld, J. H., Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics of
D.,Turbulenttransport ofatmosphericaerosols andfor- Air Pollution, John Wiley, New York,1986.
mation of large-scale structures, Physics and Chemistry [27] Shaw, R. A., Reade, W. C., Collins L. R. and Verlinder
of the Earth, A25, 797-803, 2000c. J., Preferential concentration of cloud droplets by tur-
[11] Elperin, T., Kleeorin, N., Rogachevskii, I. and Sokoloff, bulence: effects on the early evolution of cumulus cloud
D., Mean-field theory for a passive scalar advected by droplet spectra. J. Atmosph. Sci., 55, 1965-1976, 1998.
a turbulent velocity field with a random renewal time, [28] Shaw, R. A., Particle-turbulence interactions in atmo-
Phys. Rev. E, 64, 026304 (1-9), 2001. spheric clouds, Ann. Rev. Fluid Mech, 35, pp. 183-227,
[12] Flagan, R. and Seinfeld, J. H., Fundamentals of Air 2003.
Pollution Engineering, Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, [29] Shy,S.S.,Tang,C.Y.andFann,S.Y.,Anearlyisotropic
1988. turbulence generated by a pair of vibrating grids, Exp.
[13] Guibert, P., Durget, M. and Murat, M., Concentration Thermal Fluid Sci., 14, 251-262, 1997.
fieldsinaconfinedtwo-gasmixtureandengineincylinder [30] Srdic,A.,Fernando,H.J.S.andMontenegro,L.,Gener-
flow: lasertomographymeasurementsbyMiescattering., ation of nearly isotropic turbulenceusing two oscillating
Exp. Fluids, 31, 630-642, 2001. grids. Exper. in Fluids,20, 395-397, 1996.
[14] Hopfinger, E. J. and Toly, J.-A., Spatially decaying tur- [31] Stock, D., Particle dispersion in flowing gases, ASME J.
bulence and its relation to mixing across density inter- Fluids Engineering, 118, 4-17, 1996.
faces, J. Fluid Mech., 78, 155-175, 1976. [32] Telford, J. W., Clouds with turbulence: the role of en-
[15] Kaufman, Y. J., Tanre, D. and Boucher, O., A satellite trainment. Atmos. Res., 40, 261-282, 1996.
[33] Thompson, S. M. and Turner, J. S., Mixing across an [34] Twomey, S., Atmospheric Aerosols, Elsevier, Amster-
interface due to turbulence generated by an oscillating dam, 1977.
grid, J. Fluid Mech., 67, 349-368, 1975.