1v1440.9031:viXra
Undecidability in number theory
Jochen Koenigsmann
Introduction 3
1 Decidability, Turing machines and Gödel’s 1st Incomplete-
ness Theorem 6
1.1 Turing machines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
1.2 Coding 1st-order -formulas and Turing machines . . . . . 7
1.3 Proof of Gödel’s 1st Incompleteness Theorem (sketch) . . . . . 8
2 Undecidability of number rings and fields 9
2.1 The field Q of p-adic numbers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
2.2 The Local-Global-Principle (LGP) for quadratic forms over Q 14
2.3 Julia Robinson’s definition for Z in Q and in other number fields 14
2.4 Totally real numbers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
2.5 Large algebraic extensions of Q and geometric LGP’s . . . . . 19
3 Hilbert’s 10th Problem and the DPRM-Theorem 20
3.1 The original problem and first generalisations . . . . . . . . . 20
3.2 Listable, recursive and diophantine sets . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
3.3 The Davis-Putnam-Robinson-Matiyasevich
(= DPRM)–Theorem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
3.4 Consequences of the DPRM-Theorem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
4 Defining Z in Q 27
4.1 Key steps in the proof of Theorem 4.1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
4.2 More diophantine predicates in Q . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
4.3 Why Z should not be diophantine in Q . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
5 Decidability and Hilbert’s 10th Problem over other rings 37
5.1 Number rings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
5.2 Function fields . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
5.3 Open problems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
Introduction
These lectures are variations on a theme that is faintly echoed in the follow-
ing loosely connected counterpointing pairs:
Euclid versus Diophantos
geometry versus arithmetic
decidability versus undecidability
Tarski versus Gödel
Hilbert versus Matiyasevich
Let me explain how.
With his Elements which in the Middle Ages was the most popular ‘book’
after the bible, Euclid laid a foundation for modern mathematics already
around 300 BC. He introduced the axiomatic method according to which
every mathematical statement has to be deduced from (very few) first prin-
ciples (axioms) that have to be so evident that no further justification is
required. The paradigm for this is Euclidean geometry.
It wasn’t quite so easy for arithmetic (for good reasons as we know now).
Inthe 3rdcentury AD, Diophantos of Alexandria, oftenconsidered thegreat-
est (if not only) algebraist of antique times, tackled what we call today dio-
phantine equations, that is, polynomial equations over the integers, to be
solved in integers. Diophantos was the first to use symbols for unknowns, for
differences and for powers; in short, he invented the polynomial. He was the
first to do arithmetic in its own right, not just embedded into geometry (like,
e.g., Pythagorean triples). The goal was to find a systematic method, a pro-
cedure, an algorithm by which such diophantine equations could be solved
(like the well known formulas for quadratic equations). One of the oldest,
very efficient such algorithm is the Euclidean (!) algorithm for finding the
greatest common divisor gcd(a,b) for two integers a,b. This is a diophantine
problem: for any intergers a,b,c,
the three diophantine equations
c = gcd(a,b) cu = a, cv = b and c = ax+by
are solvable
(for even more surprising examples of mathematical problems that are dio-
phantine problems ‘in disguise’, see section 3.4).
In his 10th problem from the famous list of 23 problems presented to
the Congress of Mathematicians in Paris in 1900, David Hilbert, rather than
asking for an algorithm to produce solutions to diophantine equations, asked
for a more modest algorithm that decides whether or not a given diophantine
equation has a solution. In modern logic terminology, such an algorithm
would mean that the existential 1st-order theory of Z (in the language of
rings, := +, ;0,1 ) would be decidable (cf. section 3.1).
It would have been even more challenging — and quite in Hilbert’s spirit
— to show that the full 1st-order theory of Z, often simply called arithmetic,
would be decidable. However, in 1931, Gödel showed in the first of his two
Incompleteness Theorems that this is not the case: no algorithm can answer
every arithmetic YES/NO-question correctly. It is called ‘Incompleteness
Theorem’becauseitsaysthateveryeffectively(=algorithmically)producible
listofaxiomstrueinZisincomplete, i.e., cannotaxiomatizethefull1st-order
theory of Z (section 1).
This undecidability result generalises to other number theoretic objects,
like all number fields (= finite extensions of Q) and their rings of integers, by
showing — following Julia Robinson — that Z is 1st-order definable in any
of these (section 2.3). The key tools are the field Q of p-adic numbers (2.1)
and the Hasse-Minkowski Local-Gobal-Principle for quadratic forms (2.2).
In contrast, around the same time as Gödel’s Incompleteness Theorem,
Tarski showed that the other classical mathematical discipline, geometry
(at least elementary geometry), is decidable; this holds true not only for
Euclidean geometry, but for all of algebraic geometry where, when translated
into cartesian coordinates, geometric objects don’t necessarily obey linear or
quadratic equations, but polynomial equations of arbitrary degree over R or
C: The full 1st-order theory of R (and hence that of C) is decidable. 1
There is a whole zoo of interesting natural intermediate rings between Z
and C (or rather between Z and the field Q of complex algebraic numbers).
To explore the boundaries within this zoo of species that belong to the de-
cidable world (like Q, or the field Qalg := Qe Q of p-adic algebraic numbers
1Even though Tarski may be better known for his decidability results than his un-
decidability results, one should point out that his ‘Undefinability Theorem’ (1936) that
arithmetical truth cannot be defined in arithmetic is very much in the spirit of Gödel’s
Incompleteness Theorems (in fact, it was discovered independently by Gödel while prov-
ing these). Tarski also proved undecidability of various other first-order theories, like,
e.g., abstract projective geometry. This may put our very rough initial picture of the five
counterpointing pairs into a more accurate historical perspective.
or the field of totally real numbers or the ring Z of all algebraic integers) and
those on the undecidable side (like number rings or number fields or the ring
of totally real integers) is a fascinating task weith more open questions than
answers (sections 2.4 and 2.5).
With the full 1st-order theory of Z being undecidable, there still might
be an algorithm to solve Hilbert’s 10th Problem, i.e., an effective decision
procedure for the existential 1st-order theory of Z. That this is also not
the case is the celebrated result due to Martin Davis, Hilary Putnam, Ju-
lia Robinson and Yuri Matiyasevich (sometimes, for short, referred to as
‘Matiyasevich’s Theorem’ as his contribution in 1970 was the last and per-
haps most demanding): Hilbert’s 10th Problem is unsolvable — no algorithm
can decide correctly for all diophantine equations whether or not they have
integer solutions (section 3).
Maybe the most prominent open problem in the field is the question
whether Hilbert’s 10th Problem can be solved over Q, i.e., whether there is
an algorithm deciding solvability of diophantine equations with solutions in
Q. If we had an existential definition of Z in Q (which is still open) the
answer would again be no because then Hilbert’s original 10th Problem over
Z would be reducible to that over Q, and an algorithm for the latter would
give one for the former, contradicting Matiyasevich’s Theorem.
Instead, insection4,wereproducetheauthor’suniversaldefinitionofZin
Q which, at least in terms of logical complexity, comes as close to the desired
existential definition as one could get so far (4.1) and, modulo either of two
conjectures from arithmetic geometry, as one ever possibly gets: assuming
Mazur’s Conjecture or the Bombieri-Lang Conjecture, there is no existential
definition of Z in Q (4.3).
In section 5 we briefly discuss the question of full/existential decidability
for several other important rings, not all arising from number theory.
In these notes we do not aim at an encyclopedic survey of what has been
achieved in the area, nor do we provide full detailed proofs of the theorems
treated (each proof ought to be followed by an exercise: ‘fill in the gaps ...’).
Werathertrytopointtothelandmarksinthefieldandtheirrelativeposition,
to allow glimpses into the colourful variety of beautiful methods developed
for getting there. Many (often, but not always long-standing) open problems
are mentioned to whet the appetite, while the exercises provide working
experience with some of the tools introduced. What makes the topic really
attractive,especiallyforgraduatestudents, isthatmostresultsdon’tusevery
heavy machinery, are elementary in this sense, though, obviously, people did
have very good ideas.
I would like to express my warmest thanks to Dugald Macpherson and
Carlo Toffalori for giving me the opportunity to hold these lectures in the
superb setting of Cetraro, and to the enthusiastic audience for their immense
interest, their encouraging questions and their critical remarks. I am also
very gratefultotheanonymous referee andtheeditors fortheir most valuable
suggestions for improving on an earlier version of these notes.
1 Decidability, Turing machines and Gödel’s
1st Incompleteness Theorem
In this lecture we would like to sketch the proof of the first of Gödel’s cel-
ebrated two Incompleteness Theorems. Denoting by := N;+, ;0,1 the
natural numbers as -structure, where := +, ;0,1 ,and by Th( )
L L { · } N
its 1st-order -theory, a weak version of the theorem is the following
Theorem 1.1 ([Göd31]). Th( ) is undecidable.
I.e., there is no algorithm which, on INPUT any -sentence α, gives
YES if α Th( ), i.e., = α
OUTPUT ∈ N N |
NO otherwise
In order to make this statement precise, we will define the notion of an
algorithm using Turing machines. There have been many alternative defini-
tions (via register machines, λ-calculus, recursive functions etc.) all of which
proved to be equivalent. And, indeed, it is the credo of what has come to
be called Church’s Thesis that, no matter how we pin down an exact (and
sensible) notion of algorithm, it is going to be equivalent to the existing ones.
Whether or not one should take this as more than an empirical fact about
the algorithms checked sofar, is an interesting philosophical question.
1.1 Turing machines
A Turing machine T over a finite alphabet A = a ,a ,...,a consists of a
with infinitely many cells, each of which is either empty (contains the empty
letter a ) or contains exactly one a (1 i n).
In each step the tape head is on exactly one cell and performs exactly one
of the following four operations:
a i type a i on the working cell (0 i n)
r go to the next cell on the right
l go to the next cell on the left
The program (action table) of T is a finite sequence of lines of the shape
where a A a , where b is one of the above operations, and where z, z
are from a finite set Z = z ,...,z of states.
The program determines T by asking T to interpret
as ‘if T is in state z and the tape head reads a then do b and go to state z’.
T may stop on a given INPUT after finitely many steps (and then the
OUTPUT is what’s on the tape then) or it runs forever (with no OUTPUT
given). A decision algorithm always stops, by definition.
1.2 Coding 1st-order -formulas and Turing machines
.
Let A = +, ;0,1;=,(,), , , ,v, be the finite alphabet for 1st-order
arithmetic, thinking of the variable v as the string v ... of length 1+n, and
assign to the finitely many elements of the disjoint union
A Z a ,r,l,s
distinct positive integers (their codes). Code formulas via unique prime de-
.
composition, e.g., if , 0, =, 1 have codes 2, 4, 1, 3 resp., the formula
ρ = 0 = 1 has code
ρ = 22 34 51 73 = 555660
and can be recovered from it.
Similarly, one can define a unique code T for (the program of) each
Turing machine T by coding the sequence of lines in the program.
1.3 Proof of Gödel’s 1st Incompleteness Theorem (sketch)
Suppose, for the sake of finding a contradiction, that there is a Turing ma-
chine T which decides for any -sentence α whether = α or = α.
Then there is an arithmetic fun
ction fT : N N describi
any -sentence α,
(cid:26) N 6|
Here we call a function f : N N arithmetic if there is an -formula
φ(v ,v ) such that for any n,m N,
(φ is then called a defining formula for f.) That there is such a defining
formulaφT forfT comesfromthe1st-orderfashioninwhich Turing programs
come along; the logical connectives and quantifiers translate into arithmetic
operations.
So for any -sentence α we have
which means that we can ‘talk’ about the truth of a sentence about inside
, and so we are in a position to simulate the liar’s paradox: Define g : N
N such that for all -formulas ρ(v )
Then g is arithmetic, say with defining formula ψ, so that
Applied to the formula ρ (v ) := ψ(v ,1) this gives
the contradiction we were looking after.
Since there is an effective algorithm (a Turing machine) listing the Peano
axioms, and since Th( ) is complete we get the following immediate
Corollary 1.2. The Peano axioms don’t axiomatise all of Th( ).
Nevertheless, a great many theorems about do follow from the Peano
axioms, and there has been an exciting controversy launched by Angus Mac-
intyre as to whether Fermat’s Last Theorem belongs (cf. the Appendix in
[Mac11]).
Another immediate consequence is the following
Corollary 1.3. Th( Z;+, ;0,1 ) is undecidable.
Proof: Otherwise, as the natural numbers are exactly the sums of four
squares of integers, Th( ) would be decidable.
2 Undecidability of number rings and fields
2.1 The field Q of p-adic numbers
The field of p-adic numbers was discovered, or rather invented, by Kurt
Hensel over 100 years ago and has ever since played a crucial role in number
theory. It is, like the field R of realnumbers, the completion of Q, though not
w.r.t. the ordinary (real) absolute value, but rather w.r.t. a ‘p-adic’ analogue
(for each prime p a different one). This allows to bring new (p-adic) analytic
methods into number theory and to reduce some problems about number
fields (which are so-called ‘global’ fields) to the ‘local’ fields R and Q . This
is of particular interest in our context because, as we will see, number fields
are undecidable, whereas the fields of real or p-adic numbers are decidable.
So whenever a number theoretic problem is reducible to a problem about the
local fields R and Q (one then says that the problem satisfies a Local-Global-
Principle) the number theoretic problem becomes decidable as well.
2Theuseoftheterms‘local’and‘global’whichonemoretypicallyencountersinanalysis
or in algebraic geometry hints at a deep analogy between number theory and algebraic
geometry, more specifically between number fields (i.e. finite extensions of Q, the global
fieldsofcharacteristic0)andalgebraicfunctionfieldsinonevariableoverfinite fields(i.e.,
finiteextensionsofthefieldF (t)ofrationalfunctionsoverF ,theglobalfieldsofpositive
characteristic). It is one of the big open problems in model theory whether or not the
positivecharacteristicanalogueofQ ,i.e.,thelocalfieldF ((t))of(formal)Laurentseries
over F , is decidable.
Let us fix a rational prime p. The p-adic valuation v on Q is defined by
the formula
v (pr ) = r for any r,m,n Z with p m n = 0,
with v (0) := . It is easy to check that this is a well defined valuation (for
background in valuation theory cf. [Dri13] in this volume or [EP05]). The
corresponding valuation ring is
Z = q Q v (q) 0 = a Z,p b Z 0
with maximal ideal
pZ = q Q v (q) > 0 = p a Z,p b Z 0 .
v induces the p-adic norm . on Q given by
q := p vp(q) for q = 0,
with 0 := 0. Observe that the sequence p,p2,p3,... converges to 0 w.r.t.
. .
We can now define the field Q of p-adic numbers as the completion of
Q w.r.t. . , i.e., the field obtained by taking the quotient of the ring of
(p-adic) Cauchy sequences by the maximal ideal of (p-adic) zero sequences
(version 1). Equivalently (version 2), one may define
Q := α = a pν n Z,a 0,1,...,p 1
as the ring of formal Laurent series in powers of p with coefficients from
0,1,...,p 1, where addition is componentwise modulo p starting with the
lowest non-zero terms and carrying over whenever a +b p (so if this hap-
pens for the first time at ν the (ν+1)-th coefficient becomes 1+a +b
modulo p etc.) — like adding decimals, but from the left. Similarly, multi-
plication is like multiplying polynomials in the ‘unknown’ p with coefficients
modulo p, and again carrying over whenever necessary.
Exercise 2.1. Show that 1 = ∞ (p 1)pν and 1 = 1+p+p2 +....
Giventhispresentationofp-adicnumbers, onedefinesthep-adicvaluation
on Q , again denoted by v , for any non-zero α Q as
v (α) := min ν a = 0 .
This is a prolongation of the p-adic valuation on Q; its value group is, obvi-
ously, still Z, and its valuation ring is
Z := = α Q v (α) 0 = a pν a 0,1,...,p 1 ,
the ring of p-adic integers with maximal ideal
pZ = α Q v (α) > 0 = a pν a 0,1,...,p 1 ,
and with residue field
Z /pZ = Z /pZ = Z/pZ = F .
By definition, Q is dense in Q w.r.t. the p-adic topology induced by (the
two) v , and Z is dense in Z : in fact, Z is the completion of Z (w.r.t. the
norm induced by . on Z).
Yet another way to think about the ring of p-adic integers (version 3)
is to view it as an inverse limit
Z = limZ/pnZ
of the rings Z/pnZ w.r.t. the canonical projections Z/pnZ Z/pmZ for
m n. Note that, for n > 1, the rings Z/pnZ have zero divisors whereas the
projective limitZ becomes anintegraldomain(withQ asfieldoffractions).
Exercise 2.2. Prove the equivalence of versions 1, 2, 3.
One of the key facts about Z is Hensel’s Lemma which uses the analytic
tool of Newton approximation to find a precise zero of a polynomial, given
an approximate zero. For α Z , let us denote its image under the canonical
residue map Z F by α. Similarly, we will write f for the image of the
polynomial f Z [X] under the coefficientwise extension of the residue map
to Z [X] F [X].
Lemma 2.3 (Hensel’s Lemma). Simple zeros lift: Let f Z [X] be a
monic polynomial and assume α Z is such that α is a simple zero of f
(i.e., f(α) = 0 = f (α)). Then there is some β Z with f(β) = 0 and
β = α.
Exercise 2.4. The proof is an adaptation of the proof in van den Dries’
contribution to this volume, section 2.2, the details being left to the reader as
an exercise.
Example If p > 2 then every 1-unit, that is, every x 1+pZ is a square:
consider the polynomial f(X) = X2 x and let α = 1; these satisfy the
assumptions of Hensel’s Lemma, and so f has a zero β (with β = 1); hence
x = β2.
Similarly, if one denotes by ζ a primitive n-th root of unity, then ζ Z :
the polynomial Xp 1 1 has (p 1) distinct linear factors over F , − an ∈ d so,
by Hensel’s Lemma, the same holds in Z .
Thus we can write the multiplicative group of Q as a direct product of
three ‘natural’ subgroups:
From this one immediately reads off that, for p > 2, there are precisely four
square classes (elements in Q /(Q )2), represented by
1, p, ζ and pζ .
As a consequence, one obtains the following well-known 1st-order -
definition of Z in Q :
Z = x Q y Q such that 1+px2 = y2 .
Exercise 2.5. Show that, for p = 2, a similar definition works with squares
replaced by cubes.
Exercise 2.6. Show that, for p a prime 3 mod 4,
Z = t Q x,y,z Q such that 2+pt2 = x2 +y2 pz2 ,
and, if p 1 mod 4 and q N a quadratic non-residue mod p,
Z = t Q x,y,z Q such that 2+pqt2 = x2 +qy2 pz2 .
With the valuation ring, also the maximal ideal, the residue field, the
group of units, the value group and the valuation map all become inter-
pretable in . Thus, the axiomatization given below can be phrased
entirely in -terms. Now here is a milestone in the model theory of Q :
Theorem 2.7 (Ax-Kochen/Ershov). Th(Q ) is decidable. It is effectively
axiomatized by the following axioms:
v is henselian
the residue field of v is F
the value group Γ is a Z-group, i.e., Γ Z;+;0;< which can be
axiomatized by saying that there is a minimal positive element and that
[Γ : nΓ] = n for all n
v (p) is minimal positive
The proof, again, is similar to the proof of the other Ax-Kochen/Ershov
Theorem presented in section 6 of van den Dries’ contribution [Dri13] to this
volume.
Fields elementarily equivalent to Q are called p-adically closed 3 .
Exercise 2.8. Check that fields which are relatively algebraically closed in a
p-adically closed field are again p-adically closed.
So, for example, the field
Qalg := Q Q
of algebraic p-adic numbers is p-adically cloesed (we use the notation K for
the algebraic closure of K). Note that Qalg is countable while Q isn’t.
Exercise 2.9. Show that K := Q ((Q)) (in the notation of [Dri13], after
Definition 3.3, this is Q ((tQ))) is p-adically closed and solve the mystery
that, on the one hand, K and Q are elementarily equivalent, on the other,
they both have a henselian valuation with the same residue field Q , but with
non-elementarily equivalent value groups (Q for K and 0 for Q ).
3Sometimes the term p-adically closed refers, more generally, to fields elementarily
equivalent to finite extensions of Q — cf. [PR84].
2.2 The Local-Global-Principle (LGP) for quadratic forms
Let q(X ,...,X ) be a quadratic form over Q, i.e., a homogeneous polyno-
mial of degree 2 in Q[X ,...,X ]. An element a Q is said to be represented
by q if there is x = (x ,...,x ) Qn such that a = q(x).
Theorem 2.10 (Hasse-Minkowski-Theorem). A rational a is represented by
q in Q if and only if a is represented by q in all Q and in R.
The proof is trivial for n = 1, it uses the so-called geometry of numbers
for n = 2, it requires delicate case distinctions ‘modulo 8’ for n = 3 and
n = 4, and then follows more easily by general quadratic form tricks for
n > 4. (cf. [O’Me73], for an alternative proof using Hilbert symbols and
quadratic reciprocity cf. [Ser73]).
The above LGP-principle is effective: by a simple linear transformation
any quadratic form can be brought into diagonal form:
q(X ,...,X ) = a X2 + +a X2
1 n 1 1 ··· n n
Then the only primes p where representability of a by q in Q need to be
checked are p = 2, p = (where Q := R), those p where v (a) = 0, and
those where v (a ) = 0 for some i n. So only these finitely many primes
need checking and, since all the Q and R are decidable, the whole procedure
is effective.
For cubic forms no such LGP holds: By an example of Selmer ([Sel51]),
5 is represented by the cubic form
in R and in every Q , but not in Q.
2.3 Julia Robinson’s definition for Z in Q and in other
number fields
Julia Robinson’s contribution to questions of decidability in number theory
is enormous. Her first big result in this direction is the 1st-order definability
of Z (or N) in Q from which the undecidability of Th(Q) immediately follows
(1949), given Gödel’s 1st Incompleteness Theorem. 10 years later she ex-
tended this to arbitrary number fields. Later she became heavily involved in
Hilbert’s 10th Problem (section 3). The very appealing documentary ‘Julia
Robinson and Hilbert’s Tenth Problem’ by George Csicsery came out in 2010
([Csi10]).
To give Julia Robinson’s explicit definition of Z in Q, let us introduce the
following formulas: for a,b Q and k Q, let
φ(a,b,k) := x,y,z(2+abk2 +bz2 = x2 +ay2)
and let, for n Q,
Theorem 2.11 ([Rob49]). For any n Q,
Proof: The easy direction ‘ ’ follows, for n N, by the principle of
induction, and for n Z, from the observation that ψ(n) ψ( n), because
n occurs only squared in ψ.
For the non-trivial direction one first shows, using Exercise 2.6 and The-
orem 2.10, that, for a prime p 3 mod 4 and k Q,
φ(1,p,k) v (k) 0 and v (k) 0,
and that, for primes p,q with p 1 mod 4 and q a quadratic non-residue
φ(q,p,k) v (k) 0 and v (k) 0.
So, in either case, the ... -bit in ψ is satisfied, and, thus, for ψ(n) to hold
we must have φ(1,p,n) for any prime p 3 mod 4 resp. φ(q,p,n) for any
pair p,q of primes in the second case. But then, by the equivalences above,
v (n) 0 for any prime p, and so n Z.
Corollary 2.12. Th(Q) is undecidable.
Let us recall, that number fields are finite extensions of Q, and that the
ring of integers in K, denoted by , is the integral closure of Z in K, i.e.,
the set of elements of K satisfying a monic polynomial with coefficients in Z.
Theorem 2.13 ([Rob59]). For any number field K, is definable in K
and Z is definable in . In particular, Th( ) and Th(K) are undecidable.
Proof: The definition of in K proceeds along similar lines as that of
Z in Q, especially as the LGP for quadratic forms holds in arbitrary number
fields.
That N is definable in uses the fact that for all non-zero f
there are only finitely many a such that
a+1 f ... a+l f,
where l = [K : Q].
Now define, for a,f,g,h ,
.
ρ(a,f,g,h) := f = 0 (a+1 f ... a+l f) 1+ag h
Then, for any n ,
.
n N f,g,h [ρ(0,f,g,h) a ρ(a,f,g,h) ρ(a+1,f,g,h) a = n ]
To prove the easy direction ‘ ’, assume n satisfies the right hand side. By
the fact above, there are only finitely many awith ρ(a,f,g,h). The inductive
form of the definition ensures that ρ(0,f,g,h), ρ(1,f,g,h),... terminating
only for a = n. Therefore, n must be a natural number.
For the converse direction ‘ ’, assume n N. It suffices to find f,g,h
ρ(a,f,g,h) a = 0 a = 1 ... a = n.
Put f := (n+l)! and let S := a a+1 f ... a+l f . Then, by
the fact above, S is finite and we can find some g N large enough so that,
for any two distinct a,b S, a b g and, for any non-zero a S, 1+ag 1.
∈ − | ∈ 6|
Then, for any distinct a,b S, 1+ag and 1+bg are relatively prime (if there
is a prime ideal of containing both 1 + ag and 1 + bg then it contains
(a b)g, hence g2 and so g, but it cannot contain both g and 1+ag).
Now put h = (1+g)(1+2g) (1+ng). Then ρ(a,f,g,h) is satisfied for
a = 1,...,n. If, however, there is some other a S then 1+ag is not a unit
and is prime to h. Therefore, 1+ag h and ρ(a,f,g,h) does not hold.
2.4 Totally real numbers
There are many infinite algebraic extensions of Q (sometimes misleadingly
called ‘infinite number fields’) which are also known to be undecidable. In
fact, most of them are: there are only countably many decision algorithms,
butuncountablymanynon-isomorphic,andhence,inthiscase,non-elementarily
equivalent algebraic extensions of Q. To give an explicit example, let A be an
undecidable (= non-recursive, cf. section 3.2) subset of the set of all primes
K := Q( √p p A ).
Then (the 1st-order theory of) K, and hence also , is undecidable: oth-
erwise A = p N p is prime and x K p = x2 would be decidable.
While this example seems artificial, there is a number of ‘natural’ infinite
algebraic extensions of Q for which it makes sense to ask about decidability
of the field or of its ring of integers. We will treat some of these in this
section and the next, and we will list some nice open problems in section
5.3. The field of totally real numbers is special in that its ring of integers is
undecidable whereas the field is decidable.
The field of totally real numbers is defined to be the maximal Galois
extension T of Q inside R. T is an infinite algebraic extension of Q, the
intersection of all real closures of Q (inside a fixed algebraic closure Q). T
can also be thought of as the compositum of all finite extensions F/Q for
which all embeddings F ֒ C are real. e
As for finite extensions of Q one defines , the ring of integers of T, as
the integral closure of Z in T.
Theorem 2.14 ([Rob62]). Th( ) is undecidable.
Let us separate the key ingredients of the proof in the two lemmas below.
Lemma 2.15. Let R be an integral domain with N R. Let ℘(R)
be a family of subsets of R which is arithmetically defined (or uniformly
parametrised), say, by an -formula φ(x;y ,...,y ), i.e., for any F R,
F y Rk x R[x F φ(x;y)].
Assume that all F are finite and each initial segment 0,1,...,n of N
is in . Then N is definable in R.
Proof: For any n R,
For a,b T, we use the notation ‘a b’ to indicate that a < b for any
ordering < on T. Note that this is expressible by an -formula:
a b a = b x b = a+x2
(totally positive elements are always sums of squares, and, in T, every sum
of squares is a square).
Lemma 2.16.
min M R -ly many t s.t. 0 t M = 4
Proof: That there are infinitely many t with 0 t 4 is easy: for
any n > 1 and any n-th root ζ of unity, t := 2+ζ +ζ 1 has this property.
Conversely, any t with this property is one of these t : This follows
fromKronecker’s 1857Theorem ([Kro57]) that algebraic integers all of whose
conjugates have absolute value 1 are roots of unity: if α = α ,α ,...,α
are all the conjugates of such an algebraic integer α, then, for any k, the
coefficients a of the polynomial
k − 1 ··· − n k,n − 1 − k,0
satisfy a ; being integers as well, there canonlybe finitely many
| k,s |≤ s
(cid:18) (cid:19)
such a , hence only finitely many such f , and so αk = αl for some k < l,
making α an (l k)-th root of unity.
From this one obtains that totally real integers all of whose conjugates
have absolute value 2 are of the shape α +α 1 for some root of unity α:
let β be such an element with conjugates β = β ,...,β and let
then α is an algebraic integer with α2 βα+1 = 0 and any conjugate α of
α (over Q) satisfies α2 β α +1 = 0 for some i; as β 2 (and, in fact,
w.l.o.g., < 2) the two roots of this equation are the two complex conjugates
of α, hence
α 2= i +1 i = 1,
so, by Kronecker’s Theorem, α is a root of unity and β = α +α 1 is of the
indicated shape.
Now the Lemma follows easily.
Proof of Theorem 2.14: The family ℘( ) defined by
φ(x;p,q) 0 qx p p 4q
contains, by Lemma 2.16, only finite sets, but arbitrarily large ones. Hence,
by a variant of Lemma 2.15, N is definable in .
2.5 Large algebraic extensions of Q and geometric LGP’s
As in the previous section, we denote the field of totally real numbers by T.
In the literature, it is also often denoted by Qtot r or Qt.r..
Theorem 2.17. T is pseudo-real-closed (‘PRC’), i.e. T satisfies the follow-
ing geometric LGP: for each (affine) algebraic variety V/T,
V(T) = V(R) = for all real closures R of T.
The theorem was first proved by Moret-Bailly ([Mor89]) using heavy ma-
chinery from algebraic geometry, with a more elementary proof given later
by Green, Pop and Roquette ([GPR95]).
By explicitly describing the structure of the absolute Galois group G
of T, that is, the Galois group of the algebraic closure T = Q of T over T,
Fried, Völklein and Haran showed in [FVH94], using the above theorem:
Theorem 2.18. Th(T) is decidable.
The axiomatization expresses the PRC property in elementary terms (it
is not at all obvious how to do this, but it had long been established, e.g., in
[Pre81]) as well as the fact that G is the free (profinite) product of all G ,
where R runs through a set of representatives of the conjugacy classes of all
real closures of T (so each G = Z/2Z). The latter can be ‘axiomatized’ via
so-calledembedding problemsinasimilarfashionas, byafamousTheoremof
Iwasawa, freeprofinite groupsof infinite countable rankcan becharacterized.
An interesting immediate consequence of this tension between T being
decidable and not, is the following:
Corollary 2.19. is not definable in T.
The decidability of (the 1st-order theory of) T implies that the field
T(√ 1) is decidable as well. No answer is known to the following:
Question 2.20. Is decidable?
A p-adic analogue of Theorem 2.17 and 2.18 was given by Pop in [Pop96]:
One defines the field Qtot p, the field of totally p-adic numbers, as the maxi-
mal Galois extension of Q inside Q , that is, the intersection of all conjugates
of Qalg over Q. Pop showed that Qtot p is pseudo-p-adically-closed,i.e. it sat-
isfies an analogous LGP (with real closures replaced by p-adic closures), and
that the absolute Galois group is similarly well behaved. As a consequence,
Qtot p is decidable. We have no answer to the following
Question 2.21. Is Qtot−p decidable?
Let us close this section by mentioning another celebrated LGP, that is,
Rumely’s Local-Global-Principle ([Rum86]) which concerns the ring Z of all
algebraic integers, i.e., the integral closure of Z in the algebraic closure Q of
Theorem 2.22. Let V be an affine variety defined over Z. Then
V(Z) = V( ) = for all valuation rings of Q.
6 ∅ ⇔ O 6 ∅ O
Using this, van den Dries ([Dri88]) showed the following Theorem via
some quantifier elimination, Prestel and Schmid ([PS90]) showed it via an
explicit axiomatization:
Theorem 2.23. Th(Z) is decidable.
Note that Z is not definable in Q (by quantifier elimination in ACF ,
every definable subset of Q is finite or cofinite), so there is no cheap way of
proving the abeove Theorem. e
For a survey on geometeric LGP’s and many more results in this direction
cf. [Dar00].
3 Hilbert’s 10th Problem and the DPRM-Theorem
3.1 The original problem and first generalisations
In 1900, at the Conference of Mathematicians in Paris, Hilbert presented his
celebrated and influential list of 23 mathematical problems ([Hil00]). One of
Hilbert’s 10th Problem (‘H10’)FindanalgorithmwhichgivesonINPUT
any f(X ,...,X ) Z[X ,...,X ]
YES if x Zn such that f(x) = 0
OUTPUT ∃ ∈
Hilbertdidnotasktoprovethatthereissuchanalgorithm. Hewasconvinced
that there should be one, and that it was all a question of producing it —
one of those instances of Hilbert’s optimism reflected in his famous slogan
‘wir müssen wissen, wir werden wissen’ (‘we must know, we will know’). As
it happens, Hilbert was too optimistic: after previous work since the 50’s by
MartinDavis, HilaryPutnamandJuliaRobinson, in1970,YuriMatiyasevich
showed that there is no such algorithm (Corollary 3.7).
The original formulation of Hilbert’s 10th problem was weaker than the
standardversionwehavegivenaboveinthatheratherasked‘Given a polyno-
mial f, find an algorithm ...’. So maybe one could have different algorithms
dependingonthenumberofvariablesandthedegree. However, itisevenpos-
sible to find asingle polynomial forwhich no such algorithmexists (Corollary
3.14) — this is essentially because there are universal Turing Machines.
One should, however, mention that, in the special case of n = 1, that
is, for polynomials in one variable, there is an easy algorithm: if, for some
x Z, f(x) = 0 then x f(0); hence one only has to check the finitely many
divisors of f(0). Similarly, by the effective version of the Hasse-Minkowski-
LGP (Theorem 2.10) and some extra integrality considerations, one also has
analgorithmfor polynomials in anarbitrarynumber of variables, but of total
degree 2. And, even if there is no general algorithm, it is one of the major
projects of computational arithmetic geometry to exhibit other families of
polynomials for which such algorithms exist.
To conclude these introductory remarks let us point in a different direc-
tion of generalizing Hilbert’s 10th Problem, namely, generalizing it to rings
other than Z: If R is an integral domain, there are two natural ways of gen-
eralizing H10:
H10/R = H10 with the 2nd occurrence of Z replaced by R
H10+/R = H10 with both occurrences of Z replaced by R
Observation 3.1. Let R be an integral domain whose field of fractions does
not contain the algebraic closure of the prime field (F resp. Q). Then
H10/R is solvable Th (R) is decidable
H10+/R is solvable ⇔ Th ∃ ( R;r r R ) is decidable,
where Th denotes the positive existential theory consisting of existential
sentences where the quantifier-free part is a conjunction of disjunctions of
polynomial equations (no inequalities).
Note that the language on the right hand side of the 2nd line contains a
constant symbol for each r R.
Proof: ‘ ’ is obvious in both cases. For ‘ ’ one has to see that a disjunction
of two polynomial equations is equivalent to (another) single equation, and,
likewise, for conjunctions: By our assumption we can find some monic g
Z[X] of degree > 1 which is irreducible over R. Then, for any polynomials
f ,f over Z resp. R and for any tuple x over R,
Since in fields, inequalities can be expressed by a positive existential for-
mula (f(x) = 0 y f(x) y = 1), we immediately obtain the following:
Corollary 3.2. Let K be a field not containing the algebraic closure of the
prime field. Then
H10/K is solvable Th (K) is decidable.
In fact, the same is true for , the ring of integers of a number field K:
Exercise 3.3. Show that, if K is a number field,
= x[x = 0 y x (2y 1)(3y 1)].
Deduce that Th ( ) = Th ( ).
One of the biggest open questions in the area is
Question 3.4. Is H10/Q solvable?
3.2 Listable, recursive and diophantine sets
A subset A Z is called
diophantineifthereissomem Nandsomepolynomialp Z[T;X ,...,X ]
A = a Z x Zm with p(a;x) = 0
e.g., N is diophantine in Z: take p = T X2 X2 X2 X2
− 1 − 2 − 3 − 4
listable (= recursively enumerable) if there is an algorithm (= a Turing
machine) printing out the elements of A (and only those), e.g., the set
P of primes or S := a3 +b3 +c3 a,b,c Z
recursive (= decidable) if there is an algorithm deciding membership in
A, e.g., N and P are recursive, about S it is not known.
It is clear that every diophantine set is listable and that every recursive set
is listable. That, conversely, every listable set is diophantine is the content
of the ‘DPRM-Theorem’ (next section).
That not every listable set is recursive follows from the following
Proposition 3.5 (The Halting Problem of Computer Science is un-
decidable). There is no algorithm to decide whether a program (with code)
p halts on INPUT x.
Proof: Otherwise define a new program H by:
H halts on input x x does not halt on input x
(we identify x with x ). For x = H we are in trouble then.
Using this, we find a listable, but non-decidable set:
A = 2p3x p halts on input x
It is non-decidable by the proposition, but we can list it: for x,p N print
2p3x if p halts on input x in N steps.
3.3 The Davis-Putnam-Robinson-Matiyasevich
(= DPRM)–Theorem
..., often for short referred to as Matiyasevich’s Theorem, is the following
remarkable
Theorem 3.6 ([Mat70], conjectured by Davis 1953, building on work of
Davis, Putnam and Robinson). Every listable subset of Z is diophantine.
Corollary 3.7. Hilbert’s 10th problem is unsolvable.
Proof: The set A at the end of the previous section is listable, hence, by
the Theorem, diophantine. So there is some m N and some polynomial
p Z[T;X ,...,X ] such that A = a Z x Zm with p(a;x) = 0 .
By construction, however, it is not decidable. Hence there is no algorithm
which decides, on input t Z, whether or not p(t;x) = 0 has a solution
x Zm.
We will only give a brief history and sketch of the proof of the Theorem.
For a full account of the history see the excellent survey article [Mat00], and,
for a full self-contained proof (not always following the historic path), see
[Dav73].
Whether, in H10, we ask for solutions in Zn or in Nn doesn’t make a
difference: aseveryintegerisadifferenceoftwonaturalnumbersandasevery
natural number is the sum of 4 squares of integers we can easily transform a
polynomialequationinto anothersuch thattheformerhasinteger solutionsif
and only if the latter has solutions in natural numbers, and we find a similar
transformation for the other way round. Following history (and because N
has the advantage of having a least element) we will stick to finding solutions
in N.
Theorem 3.8 ([Dav53]). If A N is listable then A is almost diophantine,
i.e., there is a polynomial g Z[T;X;Y,Z] such that for all a N
a A z y z x g(a;x;y,z) = 0.
Note that every A with such a presentation, later called ‘Davis normal
form’, is listable.
Exercise 3.9. Observe that 2N is listable. Find an almost diophantine pre-
sentation.
A big challenge at the time was to find a diophantine presentation for
2N, or, more generally, for exponentiation. Julia Robinson showed that, in
order to achieve this, it suffices to find a diophantine relation ‘of exponential
growth’ (what then went under the name ‘Julia Robinson-predicate’):
Theorem 3.10 ([Rob52]). There is a polynomial q Z[A,B,C;X] such that
for all a,b,c N
a = bc x q(a,b,c;x) = 0,
provided there is a diophantine relation J(u,v) of exponential growth, i.e.,
for all u,v N
J(u,v) v < uu
k N u,v with J(u,v) and v > uk.
That it is, indeed, enough to show that exponentiation is diophantine,
was then proved in the joint paper of Davis, Putnam and Julia Robinson .
Theyusedthetermexponentialpolynomialtorefertoexpressionsobtainedby
applying the usual operations of addition, multiplication and exponentiation
to integer coefficients and the variables:
Theorem 3.11 ([DPR61]). If A N is listable then there are exponential
polynomials E and E such that, for all a N,
a A x E (a;x) = E (a;x).
As predicted by Martin Davis, it then needed a young Russian mathe-
matician, Yuri Matiyasevich from St Petersborough, to fill the gap:
Theorem 3.12 ([Mat70]). There is a diophantine relation J(u,v) of expo-
nential growth.
TheoriginalproofusedFibonaccinumbers. In[D73],Davisgaveasimpler
proof using the so called Pell equation
x2 dy2 = 1,
4That we write the first name only for the lady is neither gallantry nor sexism: the
reasonis that there are other Robinsonsin the same area: AbrahamRobinson, one ofthe
founders of model theory, and the logician and number theorist Raphael Robinson, also
Julia’s husband
where d = a2 1 N is a non-square. It is not hard to verify that, for the
number field K := Q(√d),
x+y√d x,y Z with x2 dy2 = 1
It then requires a series of elementary computations to actually check that,
on N N, the relation
J(x,y) x2 (a2 1)y2 = 1 x+y√d = (a+√a2 1)m for some m N
is of exponential growth, or, at least, close to it.
DPRM-Theorem 3.6 = Theorem 3.10 + 3.11 + 3.12
3.4 Consequences of the DPRM-Theorem
One of the reasons why Davis’ conjecture (the later DPRM-Theorem) was
considered dubious was the fact that it implies the existence of a prime
producing polynomial (P denotes the set of prime numbers):
Corollary 3.13. There is some n N and a polynomial f Z[X ,...,X ]
such that P = f(Zn) N .
Today, even an explicit polynomial (with n = 10) is known ([Mat81]).
Proof: Obviously, P is listable. Hence, by the DPRM-Theorem 3.6, there
is a polynomial p Z[T;X] such that
P = a Z x p(a;x) = 0 .
But then the polynomial
f(T ,...,T ;X) := [1 p(T2 +...+T2;X)](T2 +...+T2)
1 4 − 1 4 1 4
does the job.
As indicated at the beginning of this section, Hilbert’s 10th problem has
a negative solution even if one asks it for a single polynomial, or, to put it
less misleadingly, for polynomials of a fixed shape, in particular of a fixed
number of variables and a fixed degree:
Corollary 3.14. There is a polynomial U Z[T;X] and an algorithm pro-
ducing, for each algorithm , some t (a counterexample) such that fails
to answer correctly whether A there is s A ome x Zn with U(t ;x) = 0. A
The proof relies on the fact that there are universal recursive functions/
Turing machines which, in addition to an INPUT-tuple x, take an INPUT-
code t , and give as OUTPUT the OUTPUT of the algorithm on input
x.
Let us close this section by mentioning that many famous mathemat-
ical problems can be translated into diophantine problems. For example,
Goldbach’s Conjecture that every even number > 2 is the sum of two prime
numbers: Clearly, the set of counterexamples to this conjecture is listable,
hence, by DPRM, diophantine, i.e., we can find a polynomial g Z[T;X]
such that, for any t N,
g(t;x) = 0
has a solution if and only if t spoils the conjecture. So Goldbach’s Conjecture
is equivalent to the statement that g(t;x) = 0 has no solution at all.
Similar translations can be found for Fermat’s Last Theorem, the Four
Colour Theorem and the Riemann Hypothesis. This may serve as an ‘expla-
nation’ why Hilbert’s 10th problem had to be unsolvable: such difficult and
diverse mathematical problems cannot be expected to be solvable by just one
universal process.
4 Defining Z in Q
Hilbert’s 10thproblem over Q, i.e., the question whether Th (Q) is decidable,
is still open.
If one had an existential (= diophantine) definition of Z in Q (i.e., a
definition by an existential 1st-order -formula) then Th (Z) would be
interpretable in Th (Q), and the answer would, by (for short) Matiyasevich’s
Theorem, againbe no. But it is still open whether Z is existentially definable
in Q.
We have seen the earliest 1st-order definition of Z in Q, due to Julia
Robinson ([R49]), in section 2.3. It can be expressed by an -formula of
φ(t) : x x y ... y z ... z f(t;x ,x ;y ,...,y ;z ,...,z ) = 0
1 2 1 7 1 6 1 2 1 7 1 6
for some f Z[t;x ,x ;y ,...,y ;z ,...,z ], i.e., for any t Q,
1 2 1 7 1 6
t Z iff φ(t) holds in Q.
In 2009, Bjorn Poonen ([P09a]) managed to find an -definition with 2
universal and 7 existential quantifiers (earlier, in [CZ07], an -definition
with just one universal quantifier was proved modulo an open conjecture on
elliptic curves). In this section we present our -definition of Z in Q:
Theorem 4.1 ([Koe10]). There is a polynomial g Z[T;X ,...,X ] such
that, for all t Q,
t Z iff x Q418 g(t;x) = 0.
If one measures logical complexity in terms of the number of changes of
quantifiers then this is the simplest definition of Z in Q, and, in fact, it is
the simplest possible:
Exercise 4.2. Show that there is no quantifier-free definition of Z in Q.
Corollary 4.3. Q Z is diophantine in Q.
Corollary 4.4. Th (Q) is undecidable.
Theorem 4.1 came somewhat unexpected because it does not give what
one would like to have, namely an existential definition of Z in Q. However,
if one had the latter the former would follow:
Observation 4.5. If there is an existential definition of Z in Q then there
is also a universal one.
Proof: If Z is diophantine in Q then so is
Q Z = x Q m,n,a,b Z with n = 0, 1, am+bn = 1 and m = xn
In fact, we will indicate in section 4.3 why we do not expect there to be
an existential definition of Z in Q.
Using heavier machinery from number theory, Jennifer Park has recently
generalised Theorem 4.1 to number fields:
Theorem 4.6 ([Par12]). For any number field K, the ring of integers
is universally definable in K.
4.1 Key steps in the proof of Theorem 4.1
Like all previous definitions of Z in Q, we use the Hasse-Minkowski Local-
Global-Principle for quadratic forms (Theorem 2.10). What is new in our
approach is the use of the Quadratic Reciprocity Law and, inspired by the
model theory of local fields, the transformation of some existential formulas
into universal formulas.
Step 1: Poonen’s diophantine definition of quaternionic semi-local
The first step essentially copies Poonen’s proof ([Poo09a]). We adopt his
terminology:
Definition 4.7. For a,b Q , let
H := Q 1 Q α Q β Q αβ be the quaternion algebra over Q
with multiplication defined by α2 = a, β2 = b and αβ = βα,
∆ := l P H Q = M (Q ) the set of primes (including
a,b a,b l ∼ 2 l
) where H does not split locally (Q := R) — ∆ is always finite,
and ∆ = iff a N(b), i.e., a is in the image of the norm map
S := 2x Q x ,x ,x Q : x2 ax2 bx2 +abx2 = 1 the set
• a,b { 1 ∈ | ∃ 2 3 4 ∈ 1 − 2 − 3 4 }
of traces of norm-1 elements of H , and
T := S + S – note that T is an existentially defined subset of
a,b a,b a,b a,b
Q.
Lemma 4.8. T = Z , where, for l P, Z = Z Q is Z localised
a,b l ∆a,b (l) ∈ (l) l ∩
at l, and Z := x Q 4 x 4 . (T = Q if ∆ = .)
The proof follows essentially that of [Poo09a], Lemma 2.5, using Hensel’s
Lemma, the Hasse bound for the number of rational points on genus-1 curves
over finite fields, and the local-global principle for quadratic forms. Poonen
then obtains his -definition of Z in Q from the fact that
Z = Z = T .
Note that ∆ iff a > 0 or b > 0.
Step 2: Towards a uniform diophantine definition of all Z ’s in Q
We will present a diophantine definition for the local rings Z = Z Q
(i.e., Z localized at pZ) depending on the congruence of the prime p modulo
8, and involving p (and if p 1 mod 8 an auxiliary prime q) as a param-
eter. However, since in any first-order definition of a subset of Q we can
only quantify over the elements of Q, and not, e.g., over all primes, we will
allow arbitrary (non-zero) rationals p and q as parameters in the following
definition.
Definition 4.9. For p,q Q let
p p, p 2p, p
p 2p, p 2p, p
p p, p 2p,p
p,q 2pq,q 2pq,q
The R’s are all existentially defined subrings of Q containing Z, since for
any a,b,c,d Q
T +T = Z ,
a,b c,d (l)
and since in each case at least one of a,b,c,d is > 0, so ∆ ∆ .
Definition 4.10. (a) P[k] := l P l k mod 8 , where k = 1,3,5 or
(b) For p Q , define
P(p) := l P v (p) is odd , where v denotes the l-adic valua-
P[k](p) := P(p) P[k], where k = 1,3,5 or 7
p k mod 8 iff p k +8Z , where k 0,1,2,...,7
for l a prime, the generalized Legendre symbol = 1 to
(cid:18)(cid:18) (cid:19)(cid:19)
indicate whether or not the l-adic unit pl vl(p) is a square modulo
l.
Lemma 4.11. (a) Z = T +T
(2) 3,3 2,5
(b) For p Q and k = 3,5 or 7, if p k mod 8 then
(cid:26) T ∅
In particular, if p is a prime ( k mod 8) then Z = R [k] .
(c) For p,q Q with p 1 mod 8 and q 3 mod 8,
Z if P(p,q) =
p,q Q ∈ if P(p,q) =
(cid:26) T ∅
P(p) P(q) with = 1, or
 (cid:18)(cid:18) (cid:19)(cid:19)
l P(p,q) : l   P(q) P(p) with = − = 1, or
 (cid:18)(cid:18) (cid:19)(cid:19) (cid:18)(cid:18) (cid:19)(cid:19)
  (cid:18)(cid:18) (cid:19)(cid:19) (cid:18)(cid:18) (cid:19)(cid:19)
In particular, if p is a prime 1 mod 8 and q is a prime 3 mod 8
with = 1 then Z = R [1] .
p − (p) p,q
(cid:18) (cid:19)
Corollary 4.12.
(2) ∩ p ∩ p ∩ p ∩ p,q
The proof of the Lemma uses explicit norm computations for quadratic
extensions of Q , the Quadratic Reciprocity Law and the following
Observation 4.13. For a,b Q and for an odd prime l,
v (a) is odd, v (b) is even, and = 1, or
 (cid:18)(cid:18) (cid:19)(cid:19)
l ∆   v (a) is even, v (b) is odd, and = 1, or
∈ a,b ⇔   l l l −
 (cid:18)(cid:18) (cid:19)(cid:19)
v (a) is odd, v (b) is odd, and − = 1
  (cid:18)(cid:18) (cid:19)(cid:19)
Corollary 4.14. The following properties are diophantine properties for any
p Q :
p k mod 8 for k 0,1,2,...,7
P(p) P[1] P[k] for k = 3,5 or 7
Step 3: From existential to universal
InStep3,wetrytofinduniversaldefinitionsfortheR’soccurringinCorollary
4.12 imitating the local situation: First one observes that for R = Z , or
for R = R with k = 3,5 or 7, or for R = R , the Jacobson radical J(R)
(which isdefined astheintersection ofallmaximal idealsofR) canbedefined
by an existential formula using Observation 4.13. Now let
R := x Q y J(R) with x y = 1 .
Proposition 4.1e5. (a) R is defined by a universal formula in Q.
(b) If R = Z then R = Z , provided P R = , i.e.,
l P R× (l) e l P R× (l) \ × 6 ∅
provided R∈=\ Q. ∈ \
(c) In particular, if R = Z then R = R.
Theprovisoin(b),however, canbeguaranteedbydiophantinelydefinable
conditions on the parameters p,q:
Lemma 4.16. (a) Define for k = 1,3,5 and 7,
Φ := p Q p k mod 8 and P(p) P[1] P[k]
Then Φ and Ψ are diophantine in Q.
(b) Assume that
R = R for k = 3,5 or 7, where p Φ , or
R = R where (p,q) Ψ.
Then R = Q.
The proof of this lemma is somewhat involved, though purely combina-
torial, playing with the Quadratic Reciprocity Law and Observation 4.13.
The universal definition of Z in Q can now be read off the equation
where Φ and Ψ are the diophantine sets defined in Lemma 4.16.
TheequationisvalidbyLemma4.11,Proposition4.15(b),(c)andLemma
4.16(b). Thedefinitionisuniversalasonecanseebyspellingouttheequation
and applying Lemma 4.15(a) and Corollary 4.14: for any t Q,
p (t R p Φ )
∀ gk=3,5,7 ∈ p ∨ 6∈ k ∧
Theorem 4.1 is now obtained by diophagntine routine arguments and counting
quantifiers.
4.2 More diophantine predicates in Q
From the results and techniques of section 4.1, one obtains new diophantine
predicates in Q. Among them are
x N(y), where N(y) is the image of the norm Q(√y) Q
Thefirst wasalso obtainedin[Poo09b], using a deepresult ofColliot-Thélène
et al. on Châtelet surfaces — our techniques are purely elementary.
4.3 Why Z should not be diophantine in Q
There are two conjectures in arithmetic geometry that imply that Z is not
diophantine in Q, Mazur’s Conjecture and, what one may call the Bombieri-
Lang Conjecture.
Mazur’s Conjecture ([Maz98]) For any affine variety V over Q the (real)
topological closure of V(Q) in V(R) has only a finite number of connected
components.
It is clear that, under this conjecture, Z cannot be diophantine in Q, as
the latter would mean that Z is the projection of V(Q) for some affine (not
necessarily irreducible) variety V over Q, but then, passing to the topological
closure in R, V(R) would have finitely many connected components whereas
the projection (which is still the closed subset Z of R) has infinitely many -
contradiction.
The next conjecture, though never explicitly formulated by Lang and
Bombieri in this form, may (arguably) be called ‘Bombieri-Lang Conjecture’
(following [HS00]). In order to state it we define, given a projective algebraic
variety V over Q, the special set Sp(V) to be the Zariski closure of the union
of all φ(A), where φ : A V runs through all non-constant morphisms from
abelian varieties A over Q to V.
Bombieri-Lang Conjecture
If V is a projective variety over Q then V(Q) (Sp(V)(Q)) is finite.
We shall use the following consequence of the conjecture:
Lemma 4.17. Assume the Bombieri-LangConjecture. Letf Q[x ,...,x ]
Q[x ,...,x ] be absolutely irreducible and et V = V(f) An+1 be the affine
hypersurface defined by f over Q. Assume that V(Q) is Zariski dense in
V. Let π : An+1 A1 be the projection on the 1st coordinate. Then
V(Q) π 1(Q Z) is also Zariski dense in V.
The proof uses a highly non-trivial finiteness result on integral points on
abelian varieties by Faltings ([Fal91]).
Theorem 4.18 ([Koe10]). Assume the Bombieri-Lang Conjecture as stated
above. Then there is no infinite subset of Z existentially definable in Q. In
particular, Z is not diophantine in Q.
Proof: Suppose A Z is infinite and definable in Q by an existential
formula φ (x) in the language of rings. Replacing, if necessary, A by A,
we may assume that A N is infinite.
Choose a countable proper elementary extension Q⋆ of Q realizing the
type φ (x) x > a a A and let A⋆ = x Q⋆ φ (x) . Then A⋆ con-
tains some nonstandard natural number x N⋆ N. The map →
(cid:26) 7→
is definable in N and hence in Q, so 2x N⋆. As 2x is greater than any
element algebraic over Q(x), the elements ∈ x,2x,22x,... are algebraically in-
dependent over Q. We therefore find an infinite countable transcendence
base ξ ,ξ ,... of Q⋆ over Q with ξ A⋆.
Let K = Q(ξ ,ξ ,...). As Q⋆ is countable we find α Q⋆ (i N) such
where we may in addition assume that, for each i N, the minimal polyno-
mialf K[Z]of α over K has coefficients inQ[ξ ,...,ξ ]. As Qis relatively
algebraically closed in Q⋆, all the f Q[X ,...,X ,Z] are absolutely irre-
ducible over Q.
Now consider the following set of formulas in the free variables x ,x ,...:
p = p(x ,x ,...) := g(x ,...,x ) = 0 i N,g Q[x ,...,x ] 0
1 2 1 i 1 i
zf (x ,...,x ,z) = 0 i N
∪ {∃ | ∈ }
x is not an integer
Then p is finitely realizable in Q: Let p p be finite and let j be the
highest index occurring in p among the formulas from line 2. Since the
K(α ) are linearly ordered by inclusion all formulas from line 2 with index
< j follow from the one with index j. Hence one only has to check that
V(f ) has Q-Zariski dense many Q-rational points (x ,...,x ,z) Aj+1
with x Z. But this is, assuming the Bombieri-Lang Conjecture, exactly
the conclusion of the above Lemma. Note that V(f )(Q) is Q-Zariski dense
in V(f ) because there is a point (ξ ,...,ξ ,α ) V(f )(Q⋆) with ξ ,...,ξ
j 1 j j j 1 i
algebraically independent over Q.
Hence p is a type that we can realize in some elementary extension Q⋆⋆
of Q. Calling the realizing ω-tuple in Q⋆⋆ again ξ ,ξ ,... our construction
yields that we may view Q⋆ as a subfield of Q⋆⋆.
But now ξ A⋆ Z⋆ and ξ Z⋆⋆, hence ξ A⋆⋆. This implies that
there is after all no existential definition for A in Q.
Let us conclude with a collection of closure properties for pairs of models
of Th(Q) (in the ring language), one a substructure of the other, which might
have a bearing on the final (unconditional) answer to the question whether
or not Z is diophantine in Q.
Proposition 4.19. Let Q⋆,Q⋆⋆ be models of Th(Q) (i.e., elementary exten-
sions of Q) with Q⋆ Q⋆⋆, and let Z⋆ and Z⋆⋆ be their rings of integers.
(b) Z⋆⋆ Q⋆ is integrally closed in Q⋆.
(c) (Q⋆⋆)2 Q⋆ = (Q⋆)2, i.e. Q⋆ is quadratically closed in Q⋆⋆.
(d) If Z is diophantine in Q then Z⋆⋆ Q⋆ = Z⋆ and Q⋆ is algebraically
closed in Q⋆⋆.
(e) Q is not model complete, i.e., there are Q⋆ and Q⋆⋆ such that Q⋆ is not
existentially closed in Q⋆⋆.
Proof: (a) is an immediate consequence of our universal definition of Z in
Q. The very same definition holds for Z⋆ in Q⋆ and for Z⋆⋆ in Q⋆⋆ (it is part
of Th(Q) that all definitions of Z in Q are equivalent). So if this universal
formula holds for x Z⋆⋆ Q⋆ in Q⋆⋆ it also holds in Q⋆, i.e., x Z⋆.
(b) is true because Z⋆⋆ is integrally closed in Q⋆⋆.
(c) follows from the fact that both being a square and, by section 4.2, not
being a square are diophantine in Q.
(d) If Z is diophantine in Q then Z⋆⋆ Q⋆ Z⋆ and hence equality holds,
by (a).
To show that then also Q⋆ is algebraically closed in Q⋆⋆, let us observe
that, for each n N,
A := (a ,...,a ) Zn x Z with xn +a xn 1 +...+a = 0
n 0 n 1 n 1 − 0
is decidable: zeros of polynomials in one variable are bounded in terms of
their coefficients, so one only has to check finitely many x Z. In particular,
by (for short) Matiyasevich’s Theorem, there is an -formula φ(t ,...,t )
Z = t ...t x[xn +t xn 1 +...+t = 0] φ(t ,...,t ) .
0 n 1 n 1 − 0 0 n 1
Since bothA and(cid:0)its complement inZn arediophantine inZ, the same h(cid:1)olds
in Q, by our assumption of Z being diophantine in Q, i.e., A⋆⋆ (Q⋆)n = A⋆.
As any finite extension of Q⋆ is generated by an integral primitive element
this implies that Q⋆ is relatively algebraically closed in Q⋆⋆.
(e) Choose a recursively enumerable subset A Z which is not decidable.
Then B := Z A is definable in Z, and hence in Q. If B were diophantine
in Q it would be recursively enumerable. But then A would be decidable:
contradiction.
So not every definable subset of Q is diophantine in Q, and hence Q is
not model complete. Or, in other words, there are models Q⋆,Q⋆⋆ of Th(Q)
with Q⋆ Q⋆⋆ where Q⋆ is not existentially closed in Q⋆⋆.
We are confident that with similar methods as used in this paper one
can show for an arbitrary prime p that the unary predicate ‘x Qp’ is also
diophantine. This would imply that, in the setting of the Proposition, Q⋆ is
always radically closed in Q⋆⋆. However, we have no bias towards an answer
(let alone an answer) to the following (unconditional)
Question 4.20. For Q⋆ Q⋆⋆ Q with Q⋆ Q⋆⋆, is Q⋆ always alge-
braically closed in Q⋆⋆?
5 Decidability and Hilbert’s 10th Problem over
other rings
In this section we only report on major achievements under this heading and
on a small choice of big open problems. There is a multitude of surveys on
the subject, each with its own emphasis. For the interested reader, let us
mention at least some of them: [RRo51], [Maz94], [Phe94], [PZ00], [Shl00],
[Poo03], [Shl07] and [Poo08].
5.1 Number rings
For number rings and number fields, the question of decidability has been
answered in the negative by Julia Robinson (Theorem 2.13). The question
whether Hilbert’s 10th Problem is solvable is much harder. Given that we
don’t know the answer over Q (though almost everyone working in the field
believes it to be no) there is even less hope that we find the answer for
arbitrary number fields in the near future. For number rings the situation is
much better.
Let K be a number field with ring of integers . Then Hilbert’s 10th
Problem could be shown to be unsolvable over in the following cases:
if K is totally real (i.e., K T) or a quadratic extension of a totally
real number field ([Den75], [DL78] and [Den80])
if [K : Q] 3 and c = 2 ([Phe88]) 5 .
if K/Q is abelian ([SS89]).
In each of the proofs the authors managed to find an existential definition of
Z in using Pell-equations, the Hasse-Minkowski Local-Global Principle
(which holds in all number fields) and ad hoc methods that are very specific
to each of these special cases.
The hope for a uniform proof of the existential undecidability of all num-
ber rings only emerged when elliptic curves were brought into the game:
Theorem 5.1 ([Poo02]). Let K be a number field. Assume there is an ellip-
tic curve E over Q with rk(E(Q)) = rk (E(K)) = 1. Then Z is existentially
definable in and so Hilbert’s 10th Problem over is unsolvable.
In his proof, Poonen uses divisibility relations for denominators of x-
coordinates of n P, where P E(K) E (K) and n P E(Q) (for a
similar approach cf. [CPZ05]).
Theassumptionmadeinthetheoremturnsouttoholdmoduloagenerally
believed conjecture, theso calledTate-Shafarevich Conjecture. Foranelliptic
curve E over a number field K, it refers to the Tate-Shafarevich group (or
Shafarevich-Tate group) X , an abelian group defined via cohomology
groups. It measures the deviation from a local-global principle for rational
points on E.
Tate-Shafarevich Conjecture X is finite.
Weak Tate-Shafarevich Conjecture dim X /2 is even
The latter follows from the former due to the Cassels pairing (Theorem 4.14
in [Sil86] which is an excellent reference on elliptic curves).
5c denotes the class number of K, that is, the size of the ideal class group of K. It
measureshow far is from being a PID: c =1 iff is a PID, so c =2 is ‘the next
best’. It is not known whether there are infinitely many number fields with c =1.
6ThesetE(K)ofK-rationalpointsofEisafinitelygeneratedabeliangroupisomorphic
to the direct product of its torsion subgroup E (K) and a free abelian group of rank
Theorem 5.2 ([MR10]). Let K be a number field. Assume the weak Tate-
Shafarevich Conjecture for all elliptic curves E/K. Then there is an elliptic
curve E/Q with rk(E(Q)) = rk(E(K)) = 1.
Taking those two theorems together one obtains immediately the follow-
Corollary 5.3. Let K be a number field. Assume the weak Tate-Shafarevich
Conjecture for all elliptic curves E/K. Then Hilbert’s 10th Problem is un-
solvable over .
5.2 Function fields
It is natural to ask decidability questions not only over number fields, but
also over global fields of positive characteristic, i.e., algebraic function fields
in one variable over finite fields, and also, more generally, for function fields.
Hilbert’s 10th Problem has been shown to be unsolvable for the following
function fields:
F (t) ([Phe91] and [Vid94])
finite extensions of F (t) ([Shl92] and [Eis03])
The first two cases were achieved by existentially defining Z in the field, and
then applying Matiyasevich’s Theorem. This is, clearly, not possible in the
last two cases. Instead of existentially defining Z the authors existentially in-
terpret Z via elliptic curves: the multiplication by n-map on an elliptic curve
E/K where E(K) contains non-torsion points easily gives a diophantine in-
terpretation of the additive group Z;+ . The difficulty is to find an elliptic
curve E/K such that there is also an existential definition for multiplication
on that additive group.
For the ring of polynomials F [t], Demeyer has even shown the analogue
of the DPRM-Theorem: listible subsets are diophantine ([Dem07]).
Generalizing earlier results ([Che84], [Dur86] and [Phe04]), it is shown in
[ES09], that the full first-order theory of any function field of characteristic
> 2 is undecidable.
For analogues of Hilbert’s 10th Problem for fields of meromorphic or
analytic functions cf., e.g., [Rub95], [Vdau03] and [Pas13].
5.3 Open problems
Hilbert’s 10th Problem is open for
Q and all number fields
the ring of totally real integers (cf. sections 2.4 and 2.5)
Hilbert’s 10th Problem and full 1st-order decidability are open for
C(t): this may well be considered the most annoying piece of our ig-
norance in the area. On the other hand, C[t] and, in fact, R[t] for any
integraldomainRisknowntobeexistentially undecidable in t
([Den78] and [Den84]).
F ((t)) and F [[t]] — in this case the answer to either question will
be the same for the field and the ring: in his recent thesis [Ans12],
WillAnscombe founda parameter-free existential definition of F [[t]] in
F ((t)). In [DS03], Jan Denef and Hans Schoutens show that Hilbert’s
10th Problem is solvable, if one assumes resolution of singularities in
characteristic p.
thefieldΩofconstructiblenumbers(=themaximalpro-2Galoisexten-
sion of Q). What is known here is that is definable in Ω ([Vid99]),
and,moregenerally([Vid00]),thatforanyprimepandanypro-pGalois
extension F of a number field, is definable in F. As a consequence,
the field of real numbers constructible with ruler and scale, i.e., the
maximal totally real Galois subextension Ω T of Ω is undecidable.
the maximal abelian extension Qab of Q and its ring of integers Zab
— recall that, by the Kronecker-Weber Theorem, Qab is the maximal
cyclotomic extension of Q, obtained from Q by adjoining all roots of
unity. Here the answer may be related to the famous Shafarevich Con-
jecture that the absolute Galois groupof Qab is a free profinite group (if
this is true decidability becomes more likely, cf. the remarks following
Theorem 2.18).
Let us remark that the ring of integers Zrab of the field Qrab := Qab R
of real abelian algebraic numbers is undecidable, by the identical proof
as Theorem 2.14. Note that Qab = Qrab(i) and that Qrab is the fixed
field of Qab under complex conjugation. We do not know whether Qrab
is definable in Qab, but we conjecture that Zrab is definable in Zab which
would result in undecidability of Zab.
the maximal solvable extension Qsolv of Q and its ring of integers Zsolv
— here the answer may be related to the longstanding open question
whether Qsolv is pseudo-algebraically-closed (PAC) (Problem 10.16 in
[FJ86], or Problem 11.5.9(a) in the 3rd edition; a field K is PAC if
every absolutely irreducible algebraic variety defined over K has a K-
rationalpoint): if the answer to this question is yes and if Shafarevich’s
Conjecture holds then Qsolv is decidable, axiomatized by being PAC,
by the algebraic part and ‘by its absolute Galois group’, the minimal
normal subgroup of a free group with prosolvable quotient.
the ring of integers of the field of totally p-adic numbers — here the
question is whether there is an analogue of Kronecker’s Theorem used
in Lemma 2.16.
Allknownexampleseitherhaveboththefulltheoryandtheexistentialtheory
decidable or both undecidable. We have no answer to the following
Question 5.4. Is there a ‘naturally occurring’ ring R with Th (R) decidable,
but Th(R) not?
We are confident that one can build ‘unnatural’ examples using some
Shelah-styleconstruction(thoughwehaven’tfolloweduponthat). Apositive
answer to an analogue of this question is Lipshitz’s result that addition and
divisibility over Z is -decidable, but -undecidable ([Lip78]).
Let us cconclude these notes by mentioning decidability questions for
fields that come up in other parts of this volume:
Let k be a field of characteristic 0 and let Γ be an ordered abelian
group. Then, by the Ax-Kochen/Ershov principle (see [Dri13]),
k((Γ)) is decidable k and Γ are decidable
k((Γ)) is -decidable k and Γ are -decidable
Let R be the real exponential field and let SC+ be the ‘souped up’
version of Schanuel’s Conjecture as in [MW96]. Then
R is decidable SC+ holds
R is -decidable
The complex exponential field C is, clearly, undecidable, as Z is
definable via the kernel of exponentiation (this was already known to
Tarski). In fact, Z is even existentially definable in C : In the 1980’s,
Angus Macintyre observed that, for any x C,
x Q t,v,u[(v u)t = 1 ev = eu = 1 vx = u],
and in 2002, Miklós Laczkovich found, that for any x C,
x Z x Q z (ez = 2 ezx Q).
Hence,C isevenexistentiallyundecidable(cf. section2.2in[KMO12]).