Understanding genomic alterations in cancer genomes using an
integrative network approach
Edwin Wang1, 2
1. Lab of Bioinformatics and Systems Biology, National Research Council Canada,
Montreal, Canada
2. McGill University Center for Bioinformatics, Montreal, Canada
In recent years, cancer genome sequencing and other high-throughput studies of cancer
genomes have generated many notable discoveries. In this review, Novel genomic
alteration mechanisms, such as chromothripsis (chromosomal crisis) and kataegis
(mutation storms), and their implications for cancer are discussed. Genomic alterations
spur cancer genome evolution. Thus, the relationship between cancer clonal evolution
and cancer stems cells is commented. The key question in cancer biology concerns how
these genomic alterations support cancer development and metastasis in the context of
biological functioning. Thus far, efforts such as pathway analysis have improved the
understanding of the functional contributions of genetic mutations and DNA copy
number variations to cancer development, progression and metastasis. However, the
known pathways correspond to a small fraction, plausibly 5-10%, of somatic mutations
and genes with an altered copy number. To develop a comprehensive understanding of
the function of these genomic alterations in cancer, an integrative network framework is
proposed and discussed. Finally, the challenges and the directions of studying cancer
omic data using an integrative network approach are commented.
Keywords:
Chromothripsis
Cancer genome evolution
Systems biology
Cancer genome sequencing
1. Introduction
Because of the ongoing development of new, fast, and inexpensive DNA sequencing
technologies, the cost of genome sequencing technology has rapidly declined. Eventually,
genome sequencing technology may allow doctors to decoding the entire genetic code of
a patient disease sample in a clinical setting. Cancer is rooted in genetic and epigenetic
alterations, which are either inherited or acquired (i.e., mutated or methylated) during our
lives. Cancer genomes contain two classes of mutations: driver mutations, which are
positively selected because they are essential for tumor growth and development, and
passenger mutations, which are not subject to selection because they do not offer a
growth advantage. Positive selection indicative of driver mutations is evidenced by a
higher probability than by chance of amino acid-changing nonsynonymous mutations to
synonymous mutations that do not involve amino acid changes.
However, we are still no closer to uncovering the molecular underpinnings of the
disease. If we could catalog cancer driver-mutating genes, we could link these genes to
biological pathways, biological processes and cellular networks. Cancer genome
sequencing and omic studies will improve the understanding of the genetic/epigenetic
underpinnings of major types and subtypes of human cancer, thus generating new
insights concerning how to address and to manage cancer in clinics. These studies will
eventually enable more personalized treatments that will improve patient care.
Significant effort has focused on compressive omic analysis, including genome
sequencing, SNPs profiling, gene expression, epigenetic changes and proteomic profiling
of major tumor types. These efforts represent a decade-long program that has aimed to
generate high-quality omic data on more than 25,000 tumors for up to 50 types of cancer
of clinical and societal importance. Three major organizations, the Wellcome Trust
Sanger Institute in the United Kingdom, the Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) in the United
States and the International Cancer Genome Consortium (ICGC) [1] in Canada, have
advanced this program. Furthermore, several countries are working on this project, and
the ICGC is collecting, merging and managing all of the data. In fact, the sequencing of
25,000 tumors is being performed around the world in 40 projects focused on the bladder,
the blood, the bone, the brain, the breast, the cervix, the colon, the head and the neck, the
kidney, the liver, the lung, the oral cavity, the ovary, the pancreas, the prostate, the
rectum, the skin, the soft tissues, the stomach, and the uterus. The ICGC has collected
omic data on more than 3,500 tumors.
Among these efforts, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital took an initiative to make
cancer genome information freely accessible to the global scientific community at
www.ebi.ac.uk/ega/organisations/EGAO00000000046. [2] This site mainly includes the
genome sequences (entire genome sequencing with up to a 30-fold coverage) for matched
sets of normal and tumor tissue samples from pediatric cancer patients. It is expected to
sequence more than 1,200 genomes by the end of 2012. It represents the world's greatest
effort and investment to understand the genetic origins of childhood cancers and is the
first major privately funded human genome sequencing project to share its data as soon as
they become available. Table 1 summarizes the major completed genome sequencing
efforts (i.e., at least 20 genomes have been sequenced in each study), most of which were
published in 2012. In terms of cancer genome sequencing, 2012 signals the start of a
significant increase in the amount of cancer genome sequencing data.
These efforts have generated several notable insights, including new genomic alteration
mechanisms, the tracing and deciphering of cancer genome evolution and the dissection
of tumor subclones.
2. Cancer genome sequencing uncovered unexpected genomic alteration
mechanisms
2.1. Chromothripsis
Traditionally, cancer has been believed to develop gradually in a steady and stepwise
progression. It often takes years to accumulate the multiple mutations to facilitate
cancer's aggressive growth. In fact, most cancers undergo phases of abnormal tissue
growth before developing into malignant tumors. However, recent analyses of tumor
genomes revealed different patterns of genomic alteration mechanisms. One mechanism,
“chromothripsis” [3], is a process by which a genome shatters into hundreds of fragments
for one chromosome or several chromosomes in a single cellular catastrophe, and the
DNA repair machinery then recombines the fragments in a highly erroneous order. This
process generates gene amplifications/deletions on a massive scale. This mechanism
suggests that a chromothripsis (also called a chromosomal crisis) can generate multiple
oncogenes or tumor suppressors in a single event. Chromosomal crises have been
observed across all common cancers at an incidence rate of 1/40 but are more common in
bone cancers, with an incidence rate of 20% [3]. Chromothripses have been observed in
other studies, although at a similarly low incidence rate (2%-4%) [4, 5].
It has been suggested that P53 mutation may trigger a chromothripsis. However, a P53
mutation is very common in cancer. An intriguing question concerns whether a
chromosomal crisis occurs often or occasionally in the human body’s cells. Notably,
some cells that undergo a chromosomal crisis are able not only to survive but also to
emerge with a genomic landscape that grants a selective advantage to the clone, thus
promoting cancer development. Because a chromosomal crisis induces many dramatic
genomic changes, we expect that a fraction of the genetic alterations are harmful to cells’
survival. Should this expectation be accurate, many cells undergoing a chromosomal
crisis could die, and we would be unaware of the occurrence. Another possibility is that
tumor cells with many dramatic genetic alterations induced by a chromosomal crisis are
so weak that they can be eliminated by tumor microenvironments. These factors may
explain the extremely low rate of chromothripsis in tumors. Comparing the
microenvironments of the tumors that have or do not have chromothripsis might offer
insight regarding this point. The survival outcomes of the patients with chromothripsis-
derived and patients with non-chromothripsis-derived tumors need to be reviewed.
2.2. Kataegis
Chromothripsis refers to a new oncogenic mechanism that operates on a global level;
that is, it occurs in one chromosome or in several chromosomes. Another new mutation
mechanism has been found to operate locally, generating large numbers of mutations (or
hotspots of hypermutations) in small regions of the genome; this process has been termed
'kataegis' (from the Greek word for thunderstorm) [6]. Compared with chromothripsis,
which occurs at a rate of 1/40 in cancer genomes, kataegis is remarkably common,
occurring at a rate of 13/21 in breast cancer genomes. Kataegis most likely causes
mutations to occur at one time rather than accumulating in a step-wise fashion. Kataegis
is observed when a large number of substitution mutations occur simultaneously and
extremely close to one another in a region of the genome [6]. Therefore, kataegis can be
identified as distinguishing mutational patterns that often co-occur with large-scale
rearrangements. Kataegis has been described as most likely occurring at one time;
however, certain regions of the genome may mutate repeatedly during tumor evolution. If
this possibility is proven, the affected regions are extended due to mutations between
different subclones. Whether such extended mutation profiles are found in these genome
regions requires further examination.
These mutation mechanisms indicate that internal factors, such as genome
rearrangement, may contribute some types of genetic mutations and that some regions of
cancer genomes are more likely to mutate than others. Several questions remain. The first
question concerns (1) whether kataegis occurs once or repeatedly in different subclones.
Based on the results, kataegis most likely occurs in different subclones across the tumor’s
evolution; however, this conclusion need to be confirmed. The remaining questions
concern (2) whether the genomic alterations derived from kataegis or chromothripsis are
enriched with cancer drivers; (3) whether kataegis or chromothripsis results from
specifically defective internal cellular machinery or certain combinatory patterns of
existing mutations or from other epigenetic alterations; (4) whether kataegis-derived
cancer genomes are more aggressive than the tumors derived from other genomic
alteration mechanisms; and (5) whether the DNA copy number change represents an
important genetic alteration in cancer cells. A series of chromothripses might convert a
cell into a cancer cell quickly. However, these cells may not mutate but rather undergo
many copy number changes. Further investigations of these novel genomic alteration
mechanisms may deepen the understanding of factors influencing these mutations/copy
number variations and cancer development. Nevertheless, early mutations, copy number
changes or alterations of chromosomal structures caused by other factors, such as
smoking, sunlight, or stress, may be conducive to kataegis or chromothripsis.
3. Genomic alterations and cancer genome sequencing
3.1. Deciphering cancer genomic alterations in an evolutionary context
Tumors are widely known to be heterogeneous. Therefore, a tumor is often expected
to comprise a set of clones of cancer cells. Understanding the mechanisms that cause
cancer requires comprehensive insight into the processes underlying cancer genetics. To
obtain this information, the Sanger group sequenced 21 breast cancer genomes,
catalogued their mutations and attempted to trace the evolution of cancer mutation
profiles between different subclones in the context of timing [7]. Using appropriate
bioinformatic approaches, they were able to uncover the genetic mutation marks and the
inscribed record of the latter’s emergence over time, thus enabling the divergence of a
cell in forming the various clones to be traced.
Cancer mutational processes evolve over a tumor’s lifespan. Each time a gene is
mutated in a cell, the mutation event encrypts a distinctive stamp inscribed in its genome.
Such a distinctive stamp can be considered a mutation signature or a distinctive mark on
the genome. From a historical perspective, an archaeological history of mutations results
from the accumulations of marks upon one another. Therefore, collecting, cataloguing
and sorting the orders of these marks allow the cancer's life history to be deciphered.
Cells in a single subclone possess an identical genetic mutation profile. The cells in late-
occurring subclones add new mutations to the genetic mutation profiles of the early
subclones. Only a mutation causes a clone to dramatically expand, after which the clone
constitutes the tumor’s dominant population and the tumor grows large enough to be
diagnosed. During this process, the history of the genetic mutations and the emergence
and the expansion of the new clone is imprinted upon the cancer genome. Therefore,
these genetic mutation profiles can be used to build an evolutionary tree of subclones.
This analysis allows the tracing of the occurrence of a new mutation profile, the
biological processes involved in each mutation profile or subclone, and the proportion of
each subclone present in the tumors. The study showed that as the mutations, or genetic
marks, accumulate in a cell, the corresponding changes caused the cancer to diverge into
different clones [7]. The emergence of different subclones occurred in all of the examined
cancer genomes. This analysis suggests that when a new subclone has grown sufficiently
to constitute the dominant population of cancer cells (i.e., more than 50% of tumor cells),
the tumor becomes clinically detectable. The genetic mutation profiles of subclones and
dominant subclones differ markedly, implying that the dominant subclone may require a
significant amount of time to develop.
This study has several implications. First, it confirms that a tumor contains many
subclones; thus, the heterogeneity can be sampled by sequencing, as shown in Gerlinger
et al. [7]. Second, the study suggests that a cancer patient may benefit from the use of
combinatory drugs for different subclones. One perspective is that treatment may proceed
by targeting the early clones because their mutation profiles are identical to those of the
late subclones [8]. However, this approach might not work well. The late subclones,
particularly the dominant subclones, acquire new traits for cell proliferation and survival.
These new traits could grant the late subclones “new” survival capabilities, thus implying
that the ‘drug targets’ for the early subclones are unsuitable for the late subclones.
However, subclones [9] can successfully be dissected from tumors, and the RNA-seq or
sequencing analysis of these subclones can be performed [10]. Profiling these subclones
helps to identify drug targets for each subclone. Third, each cancer appears to be
generated by a distinct combination of mutational processes. Fourth, the study confirms
the prediction that transforming a normal cell to a cancer cell is a lengthy process that has
been shown to last 10 years [11]. This fact supports the search for mutation signatures or
molecular biomarkers for early diagnosis and the possibility of personalized early
preventions to potential cancer patients.
3.2. Which subclone contains the cancer stem cell?
Although many implications have been found from deciphering cancer genomes, a key
question remains: can we identify or infer which subclone contains the cancer stem cell?
The cancer stem cell hypothesis suggests that tumors are organized into aberrant cell
hierarchies. In such a hierarchy, a cancer stem cell capable of replicating indefinitely is
the parent cell that generates differentiated daughter cells with a limited capacity to
proliferate. If proven for a tumor, this hypothesis suggests that cancer is curable if drugs
are available to kill cancer stem cells. Recently, three studies have provided the first
evidence that cancer stem cells exist [12]. These studies have demonstrated that cancer
stem cells reproduce cancer cells when the tumor is extinguished by anticancer drugs, a
result that applies to benign and malignant tumors.
These results suggest that cancer stems cells are inherently capable of propagating
genetic or epigenetic alterations throughout a tumor and driving cancer evolution. The
cancer stem cells constitute the stem of tumor cell production. During a cancer’s
evolution, a certain genetic mutation profile may define cancer stem cell subclones. The
parental subclones of the cancer stem cell subclone are non-stem cells, thus indicating
that genetic/epigenetic changes could convert a non-stem cell into a cancer stem cell.
Such a stem cell produces many daughter cells that may further evolve into diversified
cancer cells. If this process occurs, then the dominant subclones of the tumors would not
be cancer stem cells but would emerge from cancer stem cells.
Thus, many questions remain. First, should every tumor contain a subset of cancer
stem cells? All tumors may not contain cancer stem cells, for example, if a
chromothripsis occurs to generate enough fitting combinations of mutations to generate a
new subclone capable of becoming dominant in a tumor. However, generally, sustaining
the cancer’s evolution requires generating enough cancer cells using cancer stem cells. In
this case, a cancer stem cell must evolve and be defined by a set of mutations. Second, if
a cancer stem cell must exist in a tumor, what are the characteristics of its genetic
mutation profiles? The evolution of cancer genomes implies that a cancer stem cell
subclone should be an early subclone in the history of the tumor’s development. We
assume that the cancer stem cell subclone generates new cells but at a limited and slow
rate because of the microenvironment’s unfavorable conditions. These daughter cells are
further mutated and generate new subclones.
This hypothesis is supported by the discoveries of Driessens et al. [12-14] and Chen et
al. [13] that show that the cellular organization of early (precancerous) skin and intestinal
tumors are composed of both stem cells and non-stem cells. Furthermore, Driessens et al.
observed that progression to cancer in benign skin tumors is associated with an increased
cancer stem cell population. They found that every cancer stem cell within a tumor is
equally probable of clonally expanding or dying, possibly even in the absence of new
mutations, thus suggesting that a cancer stem cell subclone most likely occurs in an early
stage of cancer development (Fig 1).
The most important finding from the above discussion is that subclonal diversity in
cancer genomes may be dissected. To treat cancer more efficiently requires the dissection
of not only the dominant subclones but also the minor subclones, which are among the
top subclones in the hierarchy and most likely cancer stem cells. The key challenges are
determining the functions of the mutations in these subclones and linking these mutations
to drug targets for each subclone and, subsequently, identifying mutational signatures as
diagnostic tools that predict the early development of cancer.
4. The functional understanding of genomic alterations in cancer genomes at a
systems level
As discussed above, in recent years, sequencing efforts have generated many genomic
alterations of cancer. Although some important insights, such as new genomic alteration
mechanisms, cancer genome evolution, and clonal dissection, have been gleaned from the
corresponding data, a lack of frameworks and tools nevertheless persists with respect to
how genomic alterations drive cancer evolution, clonal expansion, and cancer
development and metastasis. Understanding these processes requires investigating the
function of these genomic alterations. However, currently, the greatest challenge is
understanding the functions of driver mutations in cancer genomes. On average, several
hundred driver mutations have been catalogued from each tumor, but interpreting these
mutations is inefficient, thus limiting the understanding of why and how these mutation
genes work. Most current cancer genome sequencing work has mapped the mutations
onto biological pathways, including signaling pathways.
A biological pathway contains a set of linear relationships between genes or proteins
and is an important model to describe biological relationships. From an abstract
perspective, a pathway is a model that represents humans’ efforts to explore, describe,
and organize biological relationships in cells [15]. Such efforts allow us to further
understand biological systems and to predict cell behaviors. However, less than 5-10% of
mutations can be explained by these ‘core pathways’ in which a set of genes is relatively
highly mutated [16, 17]. Several problems are associated with this approach. First,
pathway gene members are fuzzy and poorly defined. For example, if different databases
such as KEGG or BioCarta are queried for ‘EGFR signaling pathway,’ each database will
provide a different gene list. Second, only a small set of mutation genes (less than 5-10%)
can be mapped onto the ‘core pathways,’ thus, most mutation genes are unmapped. Third,
for each study, only a few ‘core pathways’ such as RAS-PI3K were found repeatedly.
These pathways are well known in cancer studies, and drugs have been developed for
these pathways or key genes. In this respect, the pathway approach does not provide new
insights but captures the existing knowledge in the field.
To comprehensively understand the drivers of cancer genomes, computational methods
should be developed because of the large number of driver mutation genes in each tumor.
The development of effective computational methods first requires understanding what
subjects biology addresses. Over many years, biologists have explored several types of
relationships among genes, proteins, RNAs and other molecules. The molecular
mechanisms of biological processes or diseases have also been studied. A molecular
mechanism often discloses an event of A regulating B, B inducing or inhibiting C and
generating a phenotype or disease. Each mechanism comprises a set of relationships
between molecules such as gene regulation, protein interaction, activation, genetic
interaction and inhibitory action. In this context, biology is a science that describes
relationships [15].
Traditionally, biologists use pathways to describe the relationships between a limited
number of genes. As shown above, numerous driver mutations have been found in each
tumor, but the pathway approach explains only 5-10% of the genetic mutations in the
cancer genome. It is expected that biologists must consider thousands of biological
relationships with respect to these genes in one tumor, for which task the traditional
methods of describing biological relationships are inadequate. Furthermore, as the cross-
talk between pathways has been documented extensively in recent years, scientists have
come to recognize that a network model may provide a solution. A network model
describes the interactions and relationships between genes or proteins in a nonlinear
manner. The pathway and network approaches are conceptual models that reflect an
avenue of exploring biology by humans. Both models project living cell molecules onto
conceptual frameworks, but the molecular network model more closely approximates the
processes that occur in cells.
4.1. Basic concepts of molecular networks
A molecular network can be represented using nodes and links. Nodes represent genes
or proteins, whereas links represent the relationships between genes and proteins. Cancer
omic data can be integrated into a molecular network to pose questions and obtain
corresponding insights. However, different types of networks have distinct properties and
thus can be used to address different questions.
There are four basic molecular networks: signaling, gene regulatory, metabolic and
protein interaction networks. A network hub consists of the nodes that have the most
links (top 5-10% of the links) within the network. However, a hub assumes a different
biological meaning in different networks: hubs in gene regulatory networks represent
global transcription factors, which assume a major role in responding to stimuli and
coordinating the regulated genes. Consistent with this mechanism, the transcripts of the
hub transcription factors often rapidly decay [18]. The rapidly decaying transcripts of
global hub transcription factors might encode “switch” functions, which are used under
different conditions and stimuli. Hubs in cellular signaling and metabolic networks help
to organize information flows within the networks. Hubs in signaling networks assume a
major role in integrating different signals and pathways [19]. However, hubs in protein
interactions indicate that hub proteins are involved in considerably more biological
processes/protein complexes than are other proteins [20].
Most targets of transcription factors in regulatory networks are “workers.” They
directly execute the tasks of biological processes. Most nodes in gene regulatory network
have no regulatory role, whereas most nodes in cellular signaling networks have
regulatory roles. In signaling networks, approximately all nodes are “regulators.”
Therefore, logical regulatory relationships are extensively encoded in signaling networks.
In another view, nodes in signaling networks are information carriers. Similarly, nodes in
metabolic networks are carriers of the metabolic flux. Nodes in protein interaction
networks are members of protein complexes, or ‘co-workers,’ that interact and
collaborate to complete specific tasks. [15]
Generally, signaling networks contain several logical codes of regulation, whereas
protein interaction networks do not encode regulatory logics. Gene regulatory networks
encode both regulatory logic and gene “workers.” Gene regulatory networks help to
identify key cancer regulators, the co-expression of genes, and the sets of “workers”
involved in cancer processes, whereas signaling networks help to identify cancer causal
genes and the regulatory logic in cancer processes [15]. Protein interaction networks
provide a source for identifying co-workers in cancer progression or metastasis [15]. In
recent years, notable discoveries have also addressed cancer metabolism. For example,
hypoxia and isocitrate dehydrogenase 1 (IDH1) function in the citric acid cycle pathway,
an energy-generating pathway. The IDH1 mutations cause the accumulation of 2-
hydroxyglutarate, a metabolite in the metabolic pathway, and thus cause cancer [21] [22,
23]. These studies generate interest in studying cancer in metabolic networks. Metabolic
networks could help identify key enzymes or metabolites that could induce metabolic
chaos and thus cause cancer.
When incorporating cancer omic data into these networks, the expression levels of
major regulators (i.e., kinases) in signaling networks do not necessarily change
dramatically during cancer progression and metastasis because signaling cascades are
modulated through protein modifications, not gene regulation. Indeed, examining
phosphoproteomic data in signaling networks is informative [24].
4.2. An integrative network analysis of cancer omic data
Prior to the advent of cancer genome sequencing, researchers pursued network
analyses of cancer-related data. Additional details regarding this research are available in
reviews [25, 26] and in the book Cancer Systems Biology [15]. For example, an
integrative analysis of tumor gene expression profiles and protein interaction networks
permits the identification of network modules as cancer biomarkers. A network module
contains a set of closely interacted genes/proteins that collaborate to perform certain
biological process. In a network module, the interactions between the module members
are more frequent than the interactions between the module members with the
protein/nodes outside the module. The resulting network module markers are more
reproducible than traditionally obtained biomarkers that are identified without using
protein interaction networks [27, 28].
Another study found that the protein network modules of gene co-expression are more
reliable predictors than the biomarkers that are identified without considering network
modules [29]. Exhaustively describing human molecular networks is a long-term task.
Therefore, although the network module approach has yielded promising results, the
accuracy of its predictions is nevertheless low (less than 80%). However, excellent results
(i.e., over 90% prediction accuracy when tested in multiple independent patient cohorts)
have been obtained with biomarkers through cancer-hallmark-based functional modules
that extend beyond the network module [30].
A functional module biomarker is linked to a network module of cancer driver-
mutating genes on the protein interaction network. Notably, as long as the genes, which
perform the same function of the module and act as the interacting partners of proteins in
the cancer-driver network module, are modulated, they show predictive power (Figure 2)
[30]. Most importantly, the members of the cancer-driver network module are fixed, but
the modules’ modulated interacting partners change with patient cohorts [30]. These
results explain why many potential biomarker sets exhibit limited overlap, a well-known
phenomenon in the cancer biomarker field.
The first study that attempted to interpret the drivers behind cancer-mutating genes in
networks was published in 2007. In this work, Cui et al. [31] first examined the
traditionally discovered cancer-mutating genes, which were considered to be cancer
drivers and which were mined using the COSMIC database, using a manually curated
human signaling network. They identified 12 cancer signaling network modules in which
cancer-mutating genes were densely connected. Such modules cannot be discovered
using a pathway approach or by examining mutating genes individually. Cui et al. applied
these modules to the drivers behind the mutating genes derived from the first genome-
wide sequencing of cancer [32] and found that these mutations became meaningful if
assigned to 2 or 3 signaling network modules [31].
This result resolved the controversial arguments concerning whether tumor genome
sequencing should continue [33] because the first study of tumor genome sequencing
showed that cancer mutations are highly complex: driver-mutating genes are rare, even in
the tumors of sample origin, such as breast cancer [34]. In addition, these genes are not
organized into pathways. Subsequently, some scientists argued that cancer genome
sequencing is time- and resource-consuming and provides unclear results [33]. Cui et
al.’s network analysis provides evidence that cancer driver-mutating genes are organized
into network modules to assume roles. Lincoln Stein and colleagues [35] used an
extended signaling network to examine cancer driver-mutating genes derived from the
genome sequencing of two glioblastoma multiforme data sets [17, 36] and confirmed that
cancer driver-mutating genes are organized into network modules.
Given that current networks are incomplete, Ciriello et al. [37] used correlation
analysis and statistical approaches to develop a method for identifying cancer gene
modules, specifically, Mutual Exclusivity Modules in cancer (MEMo). MEMo considers
the frequency of cancer gene mutation across a set of tumor samples. Cancer mutation
genes are most likely to participate in the same biological process, and cancer-mutating
genes that are involved in the same biological process are mutually exclusive in a
module. This approach may help detect cancer gene modules that cannot be found with
existing networks. However, a limitation of the method is that the sample number
significantly affects the results.
Akavia et al. [38] used a Bayesian network approach to develop a network-module-
based method, CONEXIC (computational algorithm, copy number and expression in
cancer) to examine DNA copy number alterations in tumor genomes. This approach
integrates copy number alterations and gene expression profiles to identify potential
cancer driver genes that have recurrent copy number changes in tumor samples. A
limitation of this study is that the Bayesian network learning approach and other network
learning approaches exhibit weak performance for eukaryotic genomes, such as those in
yeast and humans [39].
5. Future directions
An integrative network analysis of cancer genome sequencing data is in its early
phases. Several challenges and questions need to be addressed. First, in terms of their
functional importance, the cancer driver-mutating genes need to be prioritized into
categories such as cancer cell survival or metastasis. This task is urgent because each
tumor contains several hundred cancer driver-mutating genes, but it is unclear which
genes should be prioritized in research. New network methods can be developed to
answer this question. Second, the network of cancer stems cells requires further study to
understand which combinations of mutating genes or epigenetic/copy number changes
maintain the characteristics of cancer stems cells. Third, the network dynamics of cancer
evolution should be mapped, and the key events that lead to cancer initiation need to be
understood. Fourth, the networks of cancer hallmarks should be modeled. This approach
has been proposed, and its necessity has been detailed in the book Cancer Systems
Biology [15]. Li et al. obtained excellent results in identifying cancer biomarkers by
modeling functional modules of cancer hallmarks [30]. Fu et al. also showed that
apoptotic network motif modeling based one of the cancer hallmarks inferred that the 26S
proteasome may help predict cancer prognosis [40]. Fifth, the dynamics of the cancer
gene network motifs need to be studied, and the regulatory principles and controls of the
oncogenic signaling information flows should be understood. In-depth discussions are
available in a recent review [26]. Finally, new network algorithms need to be developed
to translate some cancer mutations and other genetic/epigenetic changes into drug targets.
Inarguably, many other problems and activities may be solved through an integrative
network approach. With additional cancer high-throughput studies in the near future, we
believe that the integrative network approach will become increasingly useful to cancer
research.
Acknowledgements
This work is supported by Canadian Institute of Health Research and NRC’s Genome
and Health Initiative.