]MQ.oib-q[
2v8862.2021:viXra
SHORT TITLE: THEORY ON REPORTING
Understanding Theoretically The Impact of Reporting
of Disease Cases in Epidemiology
To appear in Journal of Theoretical Biology (Elsevier)
ARNI S.R. SRINIVASA RAO
Bayesian and Interdisciplinary Research Unit,
Indian Statistical Institute,
203 B.T. Road, Calcutta, INDIA 700108.
Email: arni@isical.ac.in.
Tel: +91-33-25753511.
AMS subject classifications: 92D30, 26.70
Abstract. Inconductingpreliminaryanalysisduringanepidemic,
data onreporteddiseasecasesofferkeyinformationinguidingthe
direction to the in-depth analysis. Models for growth and trans-
mission dynamics are heavily dependent on preliminary analysis
results. Whenaparticulardiseasecaseisreportedmorethanonce
or alternatively is never reported or detected in the population,
then in such a situation, there is a possibility of existence of mul-
tiple reporting or under reporting in the population. In this work,
a theoretical approach for studying reporting error in epidemiol-
ogy is explored. The upper bound for the error that arises due to
multiple reporting is higher than that which arises due to under
reporting. Numerical examples are provided to support the argu-
ments. This article mainly treats reporting error as deterministic
and one can explore a stochastic model for the same.
Key words: Multiple reporting, diagnosis, adjustment.
Acknowledgement. My gratitude to Professor Lord Robert M. May of
Oxford for his excellent encouragement and appreciation to continue
this work when I had shown initial draft. Part of the work was done
during 2005-2007 while I was at Center for Mathematical Biology,
Mathematical Institute, University of Oxford. I am grateful to the
referees for their several helpful suggestions, comments to revise and
making very generous comments about the work.
SHORT TITLE: THEORY ON REPORTING 2
1. Introduction
Reporting is one of the crucial elements of epidemiological research.
Its importance ranges from helping the base line assessment of the
epidemic to understanding the rate of reproduction of infected individ-
uals. For example, a simple equation of the form I(t) = I(0)exp(a.t)
can be used to estimate a, the exponential growth rate between the
reported infection numbers I(0) and I(t) at times 0 and t (t > 0) re-
spectively. When I(0) and I(t) suffer with reporting errors or when
they lack accuracy, then the computed growth rate a is misleading.
There are evidences that under reporting of the cases lead to under es-
timation of incidence [1, 2], delay in monitoring and surveillance [3, 4].
There are studies which support better idea on the magnitude of the
epidemic had there been no under reporting [5, 6]. Since under re-
porting could mislead the impact of the epidemic, there were attempts
to understand the extent of under reporting using various surveys and
modeling [7, 8, 9, 10]. There are several deterministic and stochas-
tic models available for computing the growth rates of epidemics, see
[11, 12]. There are certain methods which fail to predict epidemic
growth accurately or fail to ascertain the past trends of the infections
when reporting is incomplete. The method of back-calculation [13]
for estimating HIV infection fails to construct HIV trends accurately
when AIDS reporting is incomplete. Such methods are based on the
fact that, after assessing the number of individuals with infection, the
duration between infection times and disease times is used to project
number of individuals with disease at some future time point. Here,
instead of handling the cases discretely, convolution of infectiondensity
anddensity ofdurationbetween infectionanddisease timesforrelevant
continuous random variables are considered. Future numbers of indi-
viduals with disease already projected using back-calculation methods
can be compared with number of reported disease cases at the same
point to obtain reporting error of disease cases. By application of such
methods, it is implicitly assumed that the populations are closed to
migration during the study period or during the two time points where
a reporting error of disease is estimated. Other popular methods for
reporting error include, conducting surveys at two or more time points
ona populationwhich involve either testing of randomly selected blood
samples for infection under study or assessing infected people through
verbal autopsies and then comparing the estimated infection preva-
lence in the same population with already existed reported infection
numbers at the same time. In general, for simple or advanced models,
if data suffers from under-reporting then usually the data is adjusted
SHORT TITLE: THEORY ON REPORTING 3
before applying a given method. Reported incidence and prevalence
are requirements for validating models and forecasting. Also, the pa-
rameters derived from these reported incidence trends are shown to be
consistent in model building and analysis [11].
Over media coverage of Swine Flu in some parts of the world led to
over magnifying of the disease burden as these preliminary results were
used in modeling epidemics in many countries during 2009 outbreak of
novel H1N1 influenza. It could have happened that in the 2009 swine
flu outbreak, some studies disregarded the large number of cases that
did not lead to any serious complications. Protocols and prepared-
ness for future pandemic based on the experience of 2009 outbreak in
Europe is well understood [14]. In a study on BSE (Bovine Spongi-
form Encephalopathy) in France, it was found that some cases were
not detected by the surveillance system, which caused under reporting
of the epidemic [15]. In this study, they reconstructed the past trends
by back-calculation and adjusted the under reporting. Another study
on BSE in Britain examined the under reporting of cases and differen-
tial mortality using back-calculation by improving the standard back-
calculationtechnique [16]. Measles dataanalysis inItaly indicated that
under reporting could be distorting observed epidemic patterns [17]. A
study [18] on HIV addresses that over reporting of individuals on an-
tiretroviral therapy and related caution to be taken while estimating
the number. Over reporting percentage was found to be important to
ascertain actual epidemic levels in sexually transmitted infections in
Amsterdam [19].
There are several ways of quantifying the reporting error depending
upon the epidemic. These could be observing incidence curve obtained
by models with reported incidence of a given epidemic, through sam-
ple surveys, back-calculation methods etc, for example, see [8, 9, 13].
In this paper, a supplementary way is proposed for understanding ef-
ficiency of reporting using limit analysis. In this context, the terms
’limit analysis’ meant that the rate of increasing or decreasing of re-
porting efficiencies are studied over a very long period of time, and
also situations such as reported number of disease cases approaching
to actualdisease cases are studied while obtaining bounds of error. Nu-
merical examples are also provided. Our method treats reported and
actual disease cases as numbers on the real line and functions of error
of reporting are proposed to quantify the bounds of error of reporting.
We introduce theoretical arguments in different settings and illustrate
them by numerical examples. The upper bound for this calculated er-
ror that arises due to multiple reporting (excess reporting) is shown
here to be lower than that of error due to under reporting. We also
SHORT TITLE: THEORY ON REPORTING 4
analytically show that even if error of reporting is not observed, there
is a possibility of multiple reporting in the data. Realistic data fitting
is not in the scope of present work. The results indicate that there
exists a serious consequence to multiple reporting (a situation arises
when each case is reported more than once).
2. Preliminaries
Reporting of disease cases plays an important role in understanding
epidemics. We provide two examples and two observations.
Example 1. Consider a homogenous population of 800 individuals,
whereeach individual hasequal chance ofacquiring aninfectionoftype
A virus. Suppose 7 individuals were reported of acquiring infection of
type A by the health system in a year of 26 actual number of cases
infected in the same year. Now, the prevalence of type A virus in
this year is 7/800 = 0.00875, but actual prevalence after adjusting for
under reporting is 26/800 = 0.0325. Percentage of reported out of
actual cases in this situation is 26.92.
Example 2. Let us now compute incidence rate of type B virus in
a cohort study. Suppose a cohort of 750 individuals are followed for
one year and during which 17 new cases were reported in the year to
have acquired type B virus out of 48 actually acquired the virus in
the same year. The incidence rate by assuming uniform distribution
of infections over the year is 17/741.5 = 0.0229 person-years, where as
actual incidence rate after adjusting for under reporting is 48/726 =
0.0661 person-years. Note that each of the 17 reported cases were
remained uninfected onanaverage ofsix months, hence 750 individuals
were actually followed for 750-8.5=741.5 years without being infected
in that year. By a similar explanation for 48 actual cases, we obtain
726 person-years. In an ideal situation, well designed cohort studies
consists at least information on number of individuals recruited for the
study, duration of follow-up for each individual and number of newly
infected cases of virus during the study period. Among other reasons,
under reporting could arise also due to both infection and recovery
from the virus between two follow-up periods and not detecting the
virus at the time of the next follow-up, not reporting at the time of
verbal autopsy conducted at next follow-up where clinical diagnosis for
the presence of the virus were conducted etc.
The under reporting or over reporting of cases leads to errors in
assessing the epidemic spread through modeling. Total disease cases
SHORT TITLE: THEORY ON REPORTING 5
(i.e. the number of actual cases) in the population could be taken
as the reported number plus or minus the error of reporting. In the
present work, itisattemptedtostudywhen efficiency inreportingerror
is considered as a difference between Λ (number of total cases at time
h) and Ω (number of reported cases at time h). The three situations
that arise are, i) Λ > Ω (due to under reporting), ii) Λ < Ω (due
to over reporting) and iii) Λ = Ω (due to accurate reporting or due to
no reporting error, when there are no multiple reported cases among
reported cases).
Observation 1. We saw from the examples 1 and 2, that there is
no error (or some may term it as no bias) in estimating incidence
or prevalence when the ratio Ω /Λ attains the value 1. We define
neighbourhood around actual cases Λ for some σ > 0 be B (Λ ) =
{b ∈ R : |b−Λ | < σ} and define neighbourhood around 1 for some
ω > 0 be A (1) = {a ∈ R : |a−1| < ω}. Then for every A (1), there
exists a B (Λ ) with the property that for all Ω ∈ B (Λ ), it fol-
lows that Ω /Λ ∈ A (1). In the next section, we argue that (Ω )
is bounded. By adopting results in [20] to the present epidemiology
scenario, we can deduce that (Ω ) is convergent when (Ω ) is bounded
(if we obtain the inequality 2Ω 6 Ω + Ω ). Further, under a
certain assumption, we see that (Ω ) is convergent without above in-
equality. The fact that the above type of inequality is not necessary
for a bounded sequence to convergent was discussed with an example
in [20].
Observation 2. Let x be a random variable such that x ∈ (0,1). If
m 1 2 3 m m 1 2 3 m
the following were observed [21]:
Further, when Ω follows Poisson mass function with parameter P
and rate of decrease of x s is c, it was observed [21] that
, 0 , 0 ,...
Ω ! Ω ! Ω !
(cid:18) h h h (cid:19)
is convergent.
SHORT TITLE: THEORY ON REPORTING 6
Multiple reporting phenomena might also contribute in reduction of
efficiencyinreportedcases. Inthiswork,efficiencyisnotonlymeasured
as a difference of reported and total cases, but also impact of multiple
reportingphenomena isstudied. Theresultspresented hereareoriginal
and brings a new outlook to study epidemic behavior.
3. Epidemic reporting efficiency
We denote, α for the difference between reported and actual cases
at time h. If Λ is total cases, Ω is reported cases and α is error of
reporting taken over thetime hthen symbolically, Λ = Ω ±α . As α
tendsto zero, thenΩ → Λ for someh > N ∈ N (section3, [21]), Λ is
more thanΩ (in case of under reporting), Λ is less thanΩ (in case of
multiplereporting)andΛ isequaltoΩ (incaseofnoreportingerror).
There is some possibility that these under reported cases suffer from
multiple reporting. For instance, let n be the number of individuals
outofΩ thosearereportedexactlyonce, sothatΩ −n isthenumber
those are reported more than once, then Ω = (Ω −n )+n . This
tells us, reported cases need not be of different individuals and could
be sum of those individuals whose cases were reported more than once
and those individuals whose cases reported only once. If none of the
individuals were reported exactly once (a rare event may arise in case
of complete uncertainty of health diagnostics, facilities), then all the
reported cases are sum of multiple reporting cases. If we denote f
for the efficiency of reporting and define it as the ratio of Ω and Λ ,
then f could vary over the time period depending upon the reporting
system. If multiple reporting is present then, f(x ) = Λ /Ω and after
adjusting for excess number due to multiple reporting, the resultant
efficiency function will be, f (x ) = Λ /n , where n < Ω . Here
1 h h 1h 1h h
f > f. Similarly, α = Λ − Ω or Ω − Λ and α = Λ − n or
1 h h h h h h h 1h
n −Λ , where n < Ω . If we assume α is constant over time (say,
1h h 1h h h
α) then the difference between Λ and Ω is constant over time h.
We begin with elementary case of epidemic efficiency as a difference
between reported and total cases and then extend the case by varying
efficiency.
3.1. ( Λ h < Ω h). This is a situation which raises due to multiple re-
porting of cases. The reasons responsible for this are when individuals
go to several clinics or public medical setups to get diagnosis and each
of these clinical or medical setup report to the national level epidemic
surveillance. Individuals may prefer re-diagnosis either due to not hav-
ingfaithinoneparticularsystemwheretheyweredetectedforadisease
or it could be due to choice of reconfirmation of the diagnosis. Since,
SHORT TITLE: THEORY ON REPORTING 7
α > 0, we have Ω − α > 0 and Λ > 0 ∀ h ∈ Z+. Let us assume
that the epidemic grows exponentially and becomes severe as the time
progresses (which is usual in the beginning for many epidemics), then
(Ω ) can be taken as a monotonic increasing sequence. Let W be the
wholepopulation, then Ω ≤ CW ∀h, where C ∈ R+ isdue to multiple
reporting. At any given point of time, (Ω ) cannot be more than the
finite multiples of the total population. This is because if the epidemic
spreads to entire population and even if each case is reported multiple
ways, still it will be a finite number, i.e CW is finite. Hence (Ω ) is
bounded and convergent. Since α is finite then (Λ ) is also convergent.
−1.
From the proper-
ties of numbers, whenever α/Ω < 1, then we can bring the inequality
(1 − α/Ω )
−1)exp(α/Ω
−1.
simplifying we get α < Ω ln(Ω /Λ )∀h. Let Ω be the maximum for
Ω values and Λ be the maximum for Λ values, then Ωln Ω/Λ
can be treated as an upper bound for α. Let (Ω ) be a monoto(cid:16)nicall(cid:17)y
non-increasing (band also epidemic does not grow exponenbtially)b, bbut
always maintains the relation Ω −α > 0, and follows a periodic max-
imum value with period of H (say) time points. For this situation also
Ωln Ω/Λ is an upper bound for α. There is a possibility to have a
smal(cid:16)ler up(cid:17)per bound than this for α. Even if Ω
values stop to behave
lbike pebriobdic maximum property and increase after some j > N ∈ N,
then α < Ω ln(Ω /Λ ). When Λ → 0 then Ω → 0. Eventually,
as Λ → 0 then irrespective of the error of the reporting is high or
low, eventually disease cases will become zero, hence study of α is not
considered important in this situation. Now, we begin with a trivial
statement on total reported cases.
Theorem 3. Let ǫ > 0. If Ω > Λ , Ω is monotonically increasing
function or monotonic non-increasing but Ω −α > 0, then there exists
a point in the sequence (Λ ) such that Λ ∈ B (Ω ), where B (Ω ) is
n h ǫ h ǫ h
ǫ− neighbourhood of Ω .
Proof. Let ǫ > 0. We have seen in section 3.1 that α < Ω ln(Ω /Λ )
when (Ω ) is monotonically increasing as well (Ω ) is not monotonic
increasing but Ω −α > 0. Therefore, |Λ −Ω | <Ω ln(Ω /Λ ). When
h h h h h h
we choose Λ > Ω /exp(ǫ/Ω ) for some h > N, then Λ ∈ B (Ω ). (cid:3)
h h h h ǫ h
3.2. ( Λ h > Ω h). Thisisatypicalunderreportingsituationwhichcould
arise due to following consequences: incomplete diagnosis, incomplete
reporting of the diagnosed cases and under detection of cases. Here
SHORT TITLE: THEORY ON REPORTING 8
h h h h h h h
h h h h h h
−1.
Therefore α <
h h h h h h
Λ exp(−Ω /Λ ) and Λexp −Ω/Λ is an upper bound. Even though
reported cases are less than(cid:16) that o(cid:17)f actual, there is a possibility of
multiple reporting ambong undebr rbeported cases. Admitting this fact
further complicates the error associated with epidemic analysis. In the
presence of such multiple reporting, under reporting observed is indeed
more than that of we normally admit without taking ’multiple report-
ing factor’ (MRF). In other words, by neglecting MRF (when it is
present in the data), the degree of reporting would be better, but it is
indeed a false degree of reporting (Fig. 3.1). Therefore, MRF within
under reporting implies reporting is further lower than the total cases.
Theorem 4. If Λ > Ω then there exists a point in the sequence (Λ )
such that Λ ∈ B (Ω ), for every ǫ > 0.
Proof. Under the hypothesis, we have α < Λ exp(Ω /Λ ). There-
fore, |Λ −Ω | < Λ exp(−Ω /Λ ). Now, when we choose Ω >
h h h h h h
Λ (lnΩ /logǫ) for some h > N then Λ ∈ B (Ω ). Note that, Ω >
h h h ǫ h h
3.2.1. Multiple reporting within Ω . Let K be a positive integer which
is defined as number of classes at time h which can accommodate Ω .
Suppose Ω is completely made up of K (say) classes and each class
consists finitenumber of(multiple) reportingofoneindividual. If every
class consists of one member then Ω = K , a situation when multiple
reporting among reported cases is avoided. On the other side if η (∈
K ) classes are empty (i.e. no reported case in these classes), then this
is compensated by more than one reported cases in one or more of the
remaining(K −η )classes(N ,say)(seealsoFig. 3.2). Asη → 0,the
reportedcases(underreportednumber)tendstorepresent true(actual)
cases and are not affected by multiple reporting of individual cases.
Expected error in the presence of under reporting α = Λ −(K −η ).
Even though η → 0, we have to note that actual cases suffer under
reporting. We can observe that α < Λ exp(−N /Λ ) and as η → 0
then α < Λ exp(K /Λ ). Overall, as α,η → 0, the reporting error is
minimized and total reported cases is equal to the total (actual) cases
(assuming diagnosis is complete). If Ω → ∞, then as η → K (or
η is high), the error of reporting is very high. If Ω ≈ const., then as
SHORT TITLE: THEORY ON REPORTING 9
{ 1,1,1,1,2,2,2,2,2,8,8,12,12,12,5,15,17,17,23,23,23 }
Effective reporting (under) number in the presence of MRF
{ 1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13,14,15,16,17,18,19,20,21 }
Reported cases (out of actual cases)
{ 1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13,14,15,16,17,18,19,20,21,22,23,24,25 }
Actual cases
Figure 3.1. Schematic diagram of ’multiple reporting
factor’ within under reporting. In the first row, we ob-
serve that 21 cases are reported for an epidemic in a
certain time period. If we assume there is no multiple
reporting among these 21 reported cases, we can con-
sider them as total reported in this period. If we report
them as provided in the second row, then the ratio of
reported cases to the actual disease cases (see third row)
is 21/25 = 0.84. However, observe that, out of 21 cases
reported in the first row, case 1 is reported 4 times, case
2 is reported 5 times, and so on case 23 is reported 3
times. Removing multiple reported cases from first row,
the number of distinct cases reported are only 8,thus the
ratio of reported (after adjusting for under reporting) to
actual cases reduces to 8/25 = 0.32.
η → K , error of reporting will be still more than that of expected.
When Λ → 0 then as η → K , the error of reporting will decline
too. But this violates the assumption that reporting error is constant.
This condition is out of the scope of this section and we discuss these
issues in the next section. Lower the η implies lower level of multiple
reporting in the population.
Proof. We know that η → 0 ⇒ Ω → K . This means by algebraic
limit principle for a given constant α, Ω + α → K + α. Therefore
Λ → K + α. This implies, for all ǫ > 0, there exists an integer
N such that h > N ⇒ |Λ −K −α| < ǫ for some h. Therefore
Corollary. α → 0 ⇒ Λ → K .
Suppose η > 0, this means there are some empty classes out of K
classes, so that K 6= Ω . This implies K /Ω < 1 and
SHORT TITLE: THEORY ON REPORTING 10
(cid:18) h(cid:19)
This leads to
K < lnΣ .
Since, K1, K2 ...
are positive and each are less than 1, we get
j=1Ω Ω Ω Ω
j (cid:26)(cid:18) 1(cid:19)(cid:18) 2(cid:19) (cid:18) h(cid:19)(cid:27)
(see remark 9 in the Appendix I and also Appendix II). Suppose,
if we relax the assumption on empty classes by allowing η > 0, then
Kh ∈ [0,1]. In this case we can use the Weierstrass inequality of the
(3.1) 1− h ≤ Πh 1− h ≤ 1+ h
j=0 h (cid:18) h(cid:19) j=0 h!
When Kh ≥ 0, we have
Πh 1+ h ≤ h+ h /h < exp h
(cid:18) h(cid:19) "( j=0 h) # ( j=0 h)
(3.3) ⇒ h > ln Πh 1+ h
j=0 h (cid:26) (cid:18) h(cid:19)(cid:27)
(from the result by [22], and for Kh ∈ [0,1], we have
Πh 1− h ≤ h− h /h < exp − h
(cid:18) h(cid:19) "( j=0 h) # ( j=0 h)
(3.4) h < ln Πh 1− h
j=0 h (cid:26) (cid:18) h(cid:19)(cid:27)
SHORT TITLE: THEORY ON REPORTING 11
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1 2 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . Ki
When cases are reported only once.
. .
. . .
.
. . .
. .
. . .
.
. . . . . .
1 2 3 . . Ki
When MRF is present.
Figure 3.2. This figures indicates if η (∈ K ) classes
are empty (i.e. no reported case in these classes), then
this is compensated by more than one reported cases in
one or more of the remaining (K −η ) classes.
over j for j = 1,2,...,h form a probability distribution,
then we can arrive at following inequality (for details refer to [?, 24]
(cid:18) h(cid:19) (cid:18) h(cid:19)
Theorem 6. If Λ > Ω and MRF is present then Λ ∈ B (K −η ).
h h h ǫ h h
Proof. Wehaveseeninsection2.2.1thatα < Λ exp{−(K −η /Λ )}.
h h h h h h h
for some h > N then the result follows. (cid:3)
Note 7. When lemma 5 is true then Λ ∈ B (K ).
3.3. ( Λ h = Ω h). In this situation, error of reporting is evidently null.
However, possibility of MRF could not be ruled out. Suppose Ω is
formed of K classes as we saw in section 2.2.1 and Ω = K , then
α = 0. If Ω > K , then the arguments presented in 2.2.1 holds here
and similar error exists.
SHORT TITLE: THEORY ON REPORTING 12
3.4. Stratification of error by location and time. Let U and V are s×t
matrices of reported cases and total cases across s geographical loca-
tions for t time points. U is represented by,
U =  . .
.
. .
.
... . .
.
 s1 s2 st 
where, Ω is denotes the cases in ith location in the jth time point
(for i = 1,2,···s and j = 1,2,...t). Let Ω = Σt Ω and Ω =
i. j=1 ij ..
Σs Σt Ω . If α denote error of reporting in the ith location and jth
i=1 j=1 ij ij
time point, then V can be represented by,
11 11 12 12 1t 1t
21 21 22 22 2t 2t
V =  . .
.
. .
.
... . .
.
 s1 s1 s2 s2 st st 
=  . .
.
. .
.
... . .
.
 s1 s2 st 
α 6= 0 and α = 0 ∀j > 1
α 6= 0 for j = 1,2and α = 0 ∀j > 2
.
.
.
α 6= 0 for j = 1,2,...t,
then the characteristic roots are Λ ,Λ ,...,Λ . In the presence of
anepidemic, we have, Ω 6= 0,Ω 6= 0,...,Ω 6= 0, hence V can never
be a singular. In this situation, V is always invertible, such that:
SHORT TITLE: THEORY ON REPORTING 13
1. j=1 1j 11 11
2. j=1 2j j=1 2j 2j
. . .
. . .
. . .
s. j=1 sj j=1 sj sj
If the error in reporting cases do not follow any pattern, then the
relationship between U and V follow a random process. There needs
care in understanding the variability in the error, especially, if the
pandemic persists in the population for longer duration.
4. Varying epidemic efficiency function
We saw in the previous section that error of reporting plays im-
portant role in understanding the epidemic even though it is taken as
Λ ∼ Ω over h. Here in this section, it is assumed as a continuous
random variable with a probability density function (say ϕ(α)). This
assumption allows variation in the error of reporting over the time pe-
riod h. Now the relation between total and reported cases is taken as
Λ = Ω ±α, where α = αϕ(α)dα (mean reporting error).
The error of reporting might increase rapidly or stay steadily or
might decline after certain time point, since the beginning of an epi-
demic. Suppose epidemic hits at time t , then error might increase
or decrease till t and then change its direction asymptotically (where
t < t ). The rate of increase or decrease from t to t could be rapidly
fast or slow. To fit all such situations, we choose Weibull and gamma
functions and try to explain the error involved through them. These
two distributions can imitate several functional forms of the nature
of the error, that we are interested. Historically, Weibull distribution
has been very popular in the reliability analysis and recently it was
found to be giving satisfactory results to model incubation period of
AIDS [25] and survival distribution while analyisng bird flu data [26].
There are instances where gamma distribution was also worked as a
reliable model to explain the incubation period of AIDS. These two
distributions were able to capture the variability in the incubation pe-
riod because of their versatile nature. Suppose α ∼ Weibull density
with scale parameter θ and shape parameter π, then the mean of the
if the reporting is extremely worst, we need not expect the situation
Ω < α, hence we assume Ω > θΓ(1+1/π)∀h. This assumption is
also supported by the fact that α ∼ Weibull implies α → 0 (α 6= 0)
SHORT TITLE: THEORY ON REPORTING 14
as t → ∞. When α ∼ gamma density with scale parameter λ and
shape parameter ν, then the mean of the error function is ν/λ and
When total cases exceed reported cases, MRF discussed in the pre-
vious section could exist. In such situation, the error estimated above
usingtwodensities willbeanunder estimate. Letη bethefactordueto
MRF which follows a Weibull density with parameters (p,q) and ϕ(α)
be the associated probability density function. If η is mean number of
empty classes out of K classes, then the mean error in the presence
of MRF is α′ (say) = α + η. Now, the total cases can be estimated
appendix for the derivation of α′. See also the difference in the mean
error among 10 pairs of (Λ ,Ω ) for Λ > Ω situation given in the
example 1.
Example 8. A numerical example is given to show the difference be-
tween mean error (α) and true mean error (α) when multiple reporting
is present and Λ > Ω .
(100,95) 5 (100,95−40) 45
(90,82) 8 (90,82−38) 46
(110,100) 10 (110, 100−40) 50
(95,80) 15 (95,80−40) 55
(102,90) 12 7.7 (102,90−35) 47 35.7
(90,80) 10 (90,80−30) 40
(117,110) 7 (117,110−20) 27
(105,100) 5 (105,100−17) 22
(197,194) 3 (197,194−12) 15
(208,206) 2 (208,206−8) 10
MRF can be viewed as a multivariate variable and in such situation
the error estimation will be different than above. The discussion on
multivariate Weibull can be seen elsewhere [27, 28]. In these works
authors have demonstrated estimation of parameters when there are
more than two parameters.
5. Conclusions
Mathematical modeling has an important contribution in under-
standing epidemic outbreak and its spread. Reporting of the infections
SHORT TITLE: THEORY ON REPORTING 15
or disease cases are vital in terms of inputs to these models. However,
at the same time not being reported or over reporting of the cases leads
to limitations in assessing the epidemic spread. Usually, mathematical
models in epidemiology of infectious diseases consists of several param-
eters, including those determine growth of an epidemic. Growth of an
epidemic at the initial stage is estimated by conducting trend analysis
of reported cases. Unless reported cases are adjusted for under report-
ing (if such exists) and corresponding growth rates are revised before
plugging into models, often models need not predict accurately the
spread of infection. The difficulty lies in understanding the degree of
under reporting when a trend analysis on reported cases is conducted.
Some times reporting may be accurate in few reporting centers but
these centers might not be representative to the entire population for
which we are interested to predict the future course of an epidemic by
usingmathematicalmodels. Further,thepresenceofmultiplereporting
withinunder reportingofdisease casescouldcomplicate theassessment
of degree of under reporting and hence calculation of growth param-
eters required for modeling the spread is not straightforward. In an
recent outbreaks of SARS there was some concern for under reporting
[29, 30] and over-reporting [31], however it was concluded later that
there was no evidence of over-reporting of SARS [32]. We conclude
there needs systematic adjustment for under reporting and multiple
reporting within under reporting before analyzing the hospital based
data, if such issues exists in the data. In this note, total disease cases
occurred in a given population was taken as reported plus or minus
error of reporting. We have theoretically analyzed the degree of re-
porting error involved in under, over and multiple reporting of disease
cases. Wesawthaterrorshaveupper boundsΩln Ω/Λ whenT < Ω
(cid:16) (cid:17)
and Λexp −Ω/Λ when Λ > Ω . Multiple reporting factor (MRF)
influences (cid:16)the erro(cid:17)r estimates when disease cases are reported more
thanbonce andbovber all there exists under reporting in an outbreak. We
have explained schematically as well as numerically the impact of this
multiple reporting through a factor η. When reported cases suffer from
under reporting, the upper bound for error is larger. In the presence
of MRF and Λ > Ω , these bounds increase further.
When the error isassumed to bea continuous random variablewhich
follows two probability density functions viz, Weibull, gamma then the
relation between total and reported cases are given in terms of their re-
spective means obtained from these densities. Also, for the continuous
casetheimpactofMRF isstudiedanderrorisderivedusingprobability
SHORT TITLE: THEORY ON REPORTING 16
density functions. The error function expressed in terms of incomplete
gamma function can be numerically explored. Such functions can also
be applied for computation of bounds of life expectancy in human pop-
ulations [33, 34]. When reported cases are completely made up of K
classes outofwhich η classes areempty (i.e. withnoreporting inthese
classes) then we showed that additional error pγ{(1+1/q),(K/p)q}
would be an algebraic addition to the error without MRF. It was also
shown that as η → 0, then Λ −K → α. Recall, that K is a positive
integer defined as number of classes at time h which can accommodate
Ω .
In case of emerging or newly identified pandemics, reporting error
could follow a random pattern. Sometimes, the reporting across coun-
tries also vary in case of new epidemics due to lack of proper guidelines
and protocols of diagnosis. The matrix analysis presented can be ex-
tended to global epidemic, where status of error in each country is de-
pended on the country specific guidelines. The results presented in this
work helps in framing protocols for analysis and reporting the epidemic
data. The results can be useful in careful handling of various factors of
potential errors due to multiple reporting independently and multiple
reporting within under reporting. This kind of analysis presented here
applied to the epidemic is new and probably is in initial stage. We are
able to address the issues related to importance of adjusting multiple
reporting error by this method. The ideas presented could lead to new
theoretical approaches and also could be a supplement to the existing
methods in epidemic analysis.
Appendix I
Remark 9. Suppose 0 <
< 1 ∀j = 1,2,··· ,h. Then
(cid:18) 1(cid:19)(cid:18) 2(cid:19) (cid:18) 1 2(cid:19)
K K K K K K
1 2 3 1 2 3
(cid:18) 1(cid:19)(cid:18) 2(cid:19)(cid:18) 3(cid:19) (cid:18) 1 2 3(cid:19)
.
.
.
and so on up to hthterm.
SHORT TITLE: THEORY ON REPORTING 17
Therefore, we get
Σh j < 1+ j −1
j j=1(cid:18) j (cid:19)
( j=1(cid:18) j (cid:19) )
This kind of inequality is also called Weierstrass’s type inequality.
Original inequality is given in Appendix II.
Remark 10. Let α and η be two continuous random variables with
0 < α < ∞ and 0 < η < K, where K is the maximum number
of empty classes that η can attain. We know that E(α′) = E(α) +
E(η), where Eis expectation or mean of the random variable.Thismeans,
α′ = α+η. Let α ∼ Weibull(θ,π) and η ∼ Weibull(p,q) then
θ θ θ p p p
(cid:16) (cid:17) n (cid:16) (cid:17) o
Z0 (cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:26) (cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:27)
Taking α π = w,and η = uandchangingthelimitsaccordingly,
we get as below (cid:16) (cid:17)
(cid:0) (cid:1)
π p pu1/q q
(cid:18) (cid:19) Z0 (cid:18) (cid:19)
(cid:18) (cid:19) Z0
(cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:26) (cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:27)
Note 11. Other possible assumptions like η ∼ gamma(p,q) and deriva-
tion of corresponding mean error is left as an exercise.
Appendix II: Results due to Copson [20], Klamkin and
Newman [22], Klamkin [23], El-Neweihi and Proschan [24]
E.T. Copson proved that a bounded sequence of real numbers (a )
is convergent if the inequality a ≤ 1 (a +a ) is satisfied.
n+2 2 n+1 n
He further proves a more general theorem, whose statement is as
follows:
Theorem. If (a ) is a bounded sequence which satisfies the inequality
a n+r = s r=1 K s a n+r−s , where the coefficients K s are strictly positive
SHORT TITLE: THEORY ON REPORTING 18
and K +K +...+ K = 1, then (a ) is a convergent sequence. But if
(a ) is unbounded, it diverges to −∞.
Weierstrass inequalities [35] (also available in [22]) are given by
where A , A , ...,A are real numbers in [0,1] and S = n A .
1 2 n 1 i=1 1
S ≤ 1 in the inequality (5.3). M. S. Klamkin and D. J. Newman [22]
have extended the Weierstrass inequalities and showed that
where A ≥ 0, i = 1,2,...n and n A = 1. M. S. Klamkin [23]
further proved, under the same conditions, that
(5.6) i=1 i ≥ i=1 i
with equality only if A = 1/n. E. El-Neweihi and F. Proschan [24]
had established Weierstrass-product type inequalities (5.4, 5.5, 5.6) by
a uniform approach and then using powerful tools of majorization and
Schur-convex and Schur-concave functions.