Title: Untangling the Web of e-Research: Towards a Sociology of Online Knowledge
Eric T. Meyer1 & Ralph Schroeder1
1Oxford Internet Institute, University of Oxford, 1 St Giles, Oxford, OX1 3JS, United
Tel: +44 (0) 1865 287210
Fax: +44 (0) 1865 287211
e-mails: eric.meyer@oii.ox.ac.uk & ralph.schroeder@oii.ox.ac.uk
Corresponding author: Eric Meyer
Cite as: Meyer, E.T., Schroeder, R. (2009). Untangling the Web of e-Research: Towards a
Sociology of Online Knowledge. Journal of Informetrics 3(3):246-260
Abstract (168 words)
e-Research is a rapidly growing research area, both in terms of publications and in terms of
funding. In this article we argue that it is necessary to reconceptualize the ways in which we
seek to measure and understand e-Research by developing a sociology of knowledge based
on our understanding of how science has been transformed historically and shifted into online
forms. Next, we report data which allows the examination of e-Research through a variety of
traces in order to begin to understand how the knowledge in the realm of e-Research has been
and is being constructed. These data indicate that e-Research has had a variable impact in
different fields of research. We argue that only an overall account of the scale and scope of e-
Research within and between different fields makes it possible to identify the organizational
coherence and diffuseness of e-Research in terms of its socio-technical networks, and thus to
identify the contributions of e-Research to various research fronts in the online production of
knowledge.
e-Research; e-Science; cyberinfrastructure; sociology of knowledge; sociology of science.
This is a preprint of: Meyer & Schroeder. 2009.
Untangling the Web of e-Research: Towards a Sociology of Online Knowledge,
Special Issue on Science of Science: Conceptualizations and Models of Science, Journal of Informetrics
1 Introduction
e-Research1 is a rapidly growing area in many fields of scholarship, from the natural sciences
to the humanities, as research moves online and becomes increasingly distributed across
larger-scale and multi-institutional collaborations. Such a shift will pose major challenges to
the sociological understanding of science and technology, a field which has so far relied
heavily on case studies of individual projects instead of, for example, comparing across cases
with middle-range theories (Beaulieu, Scharnhorst, & Wouters, 2007). Other ways of
understanding science, such as bibliometrics, scientometrics, and more recently webometrics
(Thelwall, 2007) also face problems in the online world insofar as some outputs (such as the
paper-only monograph in fields such as anthropology) may be invisible in terms of online
traces, particularly when compared to the highly-cited online-only physics article. Finally,
some new ways to gauge directions in science, such as mapping of fields in terms of their
online presence (Shiffrin & Börner, 2004), have yet to be integrated within the sociology of
science and organizational analyses of knowledge production.
Several essays for this special issue contribute to the rapidly growing area of analyzing online
data about knowledge, and we also analyze e-Research with these type of data. In addition,
we consider some of the factors which shape the online realm as such, which can be
considered a more qualitative type of analysis, but also one that cuts across disciplinary
boundaries (as do many quantitative analyses). We thus aim to help fill the gap between
qualitative and quantitative approaches to understanding e-Research, as well as between
different disciplinary approaches, including the sociology of science and technology,
information science, and broader approaches to knowledge which include the humanities.
The aim of this article is to bridge these gaps by means of a fundamental reconceptualization.
We will argue, first, that a sociology of knowledge is more appropriate to coping with e-
Research than the sociology of science and technology. This is because the term ‘knowledge’
expands beyond science and technology to also include the humanities on the one hand, but it
also encompasses a wider conception of technology than individual artefacts such as the
infrastructures that provide repositories of data or texts. Second, as e-Research necessarily
entails online networks, knowledge in this case is created by means of various configurations
of scientific and technological tools and resources, which minimally include the components
of software, electronic networks and the digital materials of scholarship. e-Research can thus
be seen as a set of socio-technical relationships that are configured around networked projects
and programmes with different capabilities for online knowledge production. This includes
configurations such as EGEE (Enabling Grids for E-SciencE, arguably the single largest
global e-Research effort) that cannot easily be identified as a single e-Research project, or as
an e-Infrastructure, or as a national or international e-Research programme. Similarly, the
TeraGrid initiative funded by the National Science Foundation is not so much a project or
discipline-specific infrastructure, but it can rather be seen as a federated large technological
system with a number of more and less integrated projects in a variety of disciplines. Third,
we argue that areas like e-Research require a discipline-transcending novel approach that
combines quantitative data analysis but also an account of the socio-technical forces which
shape the online realm of knowledge.
1 We subsume under ‘e-Research’ other labels such as ‘e-Science’, ‘cyberinfrastructure’, and ‘e-Infrastructure’.
This is a preprint of: Meyer & Schroeder. 2009.
Untangling the Web of e-Research: Towards a Sociology of Online Knowledge,
Special Issue on Science of Science: Conceptualizations and Models of Science, Journal of Informetrics
On this basis, we will argue for a novel approach to understanding science and scholarship in
view of the increasing digitization of knowledge (Borgman, 2007). The domain of e-Research
will be examined because of its complexity and emergent nature (Dutton & Jeffreys,
forthcoming; Jankowski, forthcoming). Yet e-Research needs to be given a precise definition
because otherwise this could be taken to include all research using a personal computer and
an internet connection. Here we shall mean by e-Research the use of digital tools and data for
the distributed and collaborative production of knowledge. This excludes, for example, the
mere use of email for informal communication. Though of course email is part any scholarly
communication, it has become ubiquitous, and thus is not part of our definition any more than
is electricity. This begs the question of what constitutes a contribution to knowledge
production – an issue we shall return to.
2 Sociology of Online Knowledge
[INSERT FIGURE 1 ABOUT HERE]
Figure 1 shows existing approaches to online knowledge and how the approach suggested
here presents a more encompassing view. Existing approaches to understanding knowledge
discovery, distribution and access are, by and large, contained within the disciplinary silos
indicated here, with little crossover between and among the silos. For instance, the sociology
of science and technology (SST, which includes various subdisciplines such as STS, SSS, and
SSK2) has long been active in understanding the processes involved in the shaping of
knowledge within science. However, the overlap between SST and Library & Information
Science is very small, even though information scientists study many of the same
communities by using different tools, including bibliometrics. Information Science does,
however, overlap to some extent with the Scientometrics & Webometrics silo, which in turn
has some overlaps with the Internet research silo. Researchers in these fields are, we would
argue, aware of and reading each other’s literature more than are those within the
disconnected silos shown here. With regard to the disconnected silos, however, we argue that
other than small numbers of interdisciplinary individuals who span and connect these
disciplines, the majority of researchers are staying within their silos.
One way to bridge the gaps between these silos is by noting the objects of study they all
share. The cloud of online knowledge depicted in Figure 1 is meant to represent the
increasingly online world of knowledge, including not only publications, but also tools, data,
and a variety of resources. This online knowledge includes both formal outlets, such as
journals and data archives, as well as informal outlets, such as blogs, webpages, and podcasts.
We use the cloud metaphor not to refer to ‘cloud computing’ initiatives, but rather to the
amorphous nature of storage and access to these resources.
In the figure, the top and the bottom of the diagram represent the ends of a continuum, as
indicated by the scale on the left, between materials that live purely online and those that are
only available offline. The position of the disciplinary silos more toward the top or the
bottom of the figure indicate the extent to which the objects of study in the discipline are
mainly offline objects and behaviours, are mixed, or are mainly concerned with the online
world. Thus Internet research is deeply engaged with the study of online phenomena, but also
2 Science & Technology Studies (STS), Social Studies of Science (SSS), and Sociology of Scientific Knowledge
(SSK). For an overview of these approaches, see Hess (1997). Other useful points of departure into this
literature include Hacket, Amsterdamska, Lynch, & Wajcman (2008) and journals such as Social Studies of
Science and Science, Technology and Human Values.
This is a preprint of: Meyer & Schroeder. 2009.
Untangling the Web of e-Research: Towards a Sociology of Online Knowledge,
Special Issue on Science of Science: Conceptualizations and Models of Science, Journal of Informetrics
includes researchers doing work trying to understand the connection between the online and
the offline. Yet some of these disciplines (the sociology of literature) are largely confined to
offline knowledge (books and print journals), and even when they reach into the ‘cloud’ of
online knowledge, they address only specific aspects of the shape of online knowledge. Other
disciplines such as the examples of physics and chemistry are often still deeply engaged with
offline tools and data, including their laboratory spaces, but are also increasingly engaged in
understanding how the online world can enhance their work. So, while chemistry has
traditionally focused on generating and using data, knowledge, tools, and so forth, and while
sciences such as webometrics has mostly focused on studying the uses and structures of data,
knowledge, tools, and so forth - there is overlap between them as well. The recent focus of
many scientists on developing ontologies is one example of this (see, for instance, Catton,
Sparks, & Shotton (2006)), while the physics’ community’s early adoption and active
promotion of online distribution of pre-prints via arXiv.org as a model for the future of
scientific communication is another (Ginsparg, 1996; Gunnarsdottir, 2005; Kling, 2004).
Within the cloud of online knowledge, several trends are indicated. Increasing
interdisciplinarity is a trend across many disciplines, particularly those involved in the area
we focus on later in this article, e-Research. e-Research is by its very nature likely to be
interdisciplinary, as various domain specialists, technology experts, and information
specialists are routinely required to do the varied work required in e-Research. Tied to this is
increasing collaboration, either between or among disciplines. Wuchty et. al. (2007)
demonstrated an overall trend of increasing size of teams in the production of scientific
articles over the second half of the 20th century, and our data presented below suggests that
this is particularly acute with regard to e-Research. A third trend is the shift from specialized
to generalized discovery of, distribution of, and access to knowledge. Rather than relying on
subject librarians, subscriptions to paper journals, and specialized subject-specific databases,
research is increasingly being discovered and accessed via general purpose tools such as
Google and Google Scholar (Jacso, 2008). An important aspect of this increasingly
generalized access is that regardless of the oft-heard complaint that search has killed the habit
of browsing the library’s collection of recent issues of subject journals; one is now more
likely to discover research outside one’s main discipline if topical search terms are used. For
instance, a sociologist relying on browsing their library’s sociology journals will be getting a
well-distilled and, we would argue, narrow view of a topic such as the long-established field
of network sociology. Relying on search, however, they are likely to at least be exposed to
related material from other disciplines, such as the burgeoning study of on- and offline social
networks within physics and other disciplines, and may also then choose to read and cite that
material.
The structure of the cloud of online knowledge is also undergoing regular shaping and
modification. Here we have indicated three forces influencing the shape: the technological
infrastructures that are in place to support the online knowledge network, the structures
supporting online publication (and the corresponding limitations including access restrictions
and intellectual property control mechanisms), and the design and use of search tools. Thus,
even if the trends indicated above tend towards the removal of barriers between disciplines,
the affordances of the technologies making up the cloud can either lower or raise barriers,
either by design or via unintended consequences of cumulative decisions.
Data-driven analysis of online knowledge, often based on the analysis of online networks or
data establishing links between online publications, is bound to be incomplete because it
This is a preprint of: Meyer & Schroeder. 2009.
Untangling the Web of e-Research: Towards a Sociology of Online Knowledge,
Special Issue on Science of Science: Conceptualizations and Models of Science, Journal of Informetrics
lacks insights into these overall forces that shape online knowledge: the role that electronic
infrastructures play in the dissemination of and access to knowledge. Elaborating this point
for the whole of online knowledge is beyond the scope of this essay, but in the case of e-
Research, this includes the technological infrastructures that are emerging, the physical
networks that are connecting groups of researchers in different ways, and the channels for
dissemination of and access to knowledge. These, in turn, are shaped by funding policies,
different disciplinary practices, and the ways in which online publications are made available
(e.g. via closed, limited, or open access).
The sociology of online knowledge, indicated in the figure by the dotted line encompassing
aspects of many of the disciplines indicated here, is more inclusive than other disciplines
which have addressed the workings of science and knowledge and the modalities in which
they are conveyed. By cutting across the various disciplinary silos described above, the
sociology of online knowledge avoids many of the biases of particular disciplinary
approaches and extends across the whole realm of online knowledge.
The contributions in this special issue fit well with the argument we make here, although they
tackle domains that are far more extensive than e-Research. Frenken et al. (2009) and Skupin
(2009), for example, want to provide a spatial and geographical mapping of science; in other
words, they want to map the shape of the ‘cloud’ of online knowledge (in their case, much
wider than e-Research). Similarly, Chen et al. (2009) find ways to pinpoint particular
breakthroughs within this cloud, just as Lambiotte and Panzarasa (2009) develop tools to
identify communities within it. All these provide powerful quantitative insights into the shape
of knowledge production and patterns. Our approach, in contrast, comes closest to that of
Lucio-Arias and Leydesdorff, who include the systematicity of science communication and
its relation to other parts of the social system in their analysis of publications. Although we
do not consider this larger social system in our approach (though we do include the part of it
related to e-Research), we go further than Lucio-Arias and Leydesdorff (2009) in not limiting
ourselves to scientific publications, but also include the technological infrastructures and the
technologies for data manipulation in our sociology of online knowledge (the focus on texts
and documents, and the absence of technology, are well-known shortcomings of Luhmann’s
sociology of science on which Lucio-Arias and Leydesdorff draw, and which Fuchs (2001),
to be discussed shortly, has tried to remedy with his notion of the hard cores of technological
networks). Thus we are able to provide a more comprehensive account of changes in
knowledge production which include the technological channels and forces which underpin
current changes in dissemination and access to knowledge.
3 Approaches to Transformations in Science
This is where it becomes all-important to further distinguish between knowledge in different
fields or disciplines. Across all domains, e-Research entails manipulating knowledge; this can
range from searching databases to identify gaps in life sciences research - to producing a
searchable text of the works of a famous thinker in the case of humanities scholars. What
needs to be acknowledged, however, is that the manipulation of knowledge takes more and
less powerful forms, if we use as a yardstick of power the social and intellectual organization
of the sciences in terms of uncertainty and interdependence (Whitley, 2000), or Hacking’s
yardstick of representing and intervening in the physical world (Hacking, 1983), which can
be applied to e-Research using the concept of ‘research technologies’ (Schroeder, 2008). On
This is a preprint of: Meyer & Schroeder. 2009.
Untangling the Web of e-Research: Towards a Sociology of Online Knowledge,
Special Issue on Science of Science: Conceptualizations and Models of Science, Journal of Informetrics
the organizational side, these yardsticks can be combined with Fuchs’ idea of harder and
softer network cores (Fuchs, 2001) around which knowledge networks congeal, harder in the
case of natural sciences, and more diffuse in the humanities. In the humanities, a separate
yardstick can also be used that revolves around the organization of ‘schools’ (Frickel &
Gross, 2005) that form around certain networks and the competition within and between
network structures (Collins, 1998). The social sciences are hybrids between the natural
sciences and humanities, sometimes forming harder cores as when research technologies are
used to replicate and extend data that can be manipulated, at other times developing schools
around ‘classical thinkers’ or organizational cores around competing research programmes
and schools of thought.
Such a sociology of knowledge, based on the organizational strength of socio-technical
networks, must be underpinned by quantitative analysis. In section 5 below, we will use a
combination of several sources of data which provide insights about the scholarly outputs
related to e-Research, and regarding the overall resources devoted to different components of
e-Research efforts. These data are not complete, but we will argue that any sociology of
online knowledge such as the one we propose is bound to be provisional and should include
not only quantitative data gathered from online sources (as the other contributions to this
special issue do), but also attempt to understand the forces which shape the online realm of
knowledge.
Before we do this, however, we must pursue the question of what constitutes a transformation
in knowledge production? There are various ways to understand how science is changing. In
this article, we limit the scope of this question to e-Research. To be sure, e-Research
transforms knowledge in a various ways, but how? Some (for example, Hey & Trefethen,
2003) have claimed that a ‘paradigm shift’ or ‘revolution’ (as opposed to evolution) in
knowledge is taking place, drawing on philosophical ideas about the nature of knowledge.
Yet we will argue, first, that philosophy on its own is unlikely to be a useful guide to this
transformation.
One way to understand e-Research might be to draw on Popper’s philosophy, since the online
and public nature of knowledge of e-Research meshes well with Popper’s idea (lucidly
explained by Magee, 1973, pp. 65-73) that only externalized knowledge can be regarded as
valid knowledge. Popper proposed that ‘objective knowledge’ inhabits the public domain or
what he called ‘World Three’ (World Three of the growth of human knowledge, for Popper,
is distinct from World One, the physical world, and World Two, of individual mental states).
Popper’s main concern in arguing for valid and objective knowledge, however, was to
demarcate science from non-science. In doing this, he took for granted, based on a premise
about the evolution of knowledge throughout the course of human history, that science led to
the growth of knowledge. And this evolutionary view of knowledge, in turn, also implicitly
rests on the commonly held view that science precedes technological change.
Yet this evolutionary view of knowledge and of the relationship between science and
technology has been shown to be at odds with what we know historically about science and
its relationship to technology. Contra Popper, what has been established by comparative
history is that instead of an evolutionary path, the growth of knowledge experienced a take-
off at a particular period in history, shaped by the possibilities of an unfettered circulation of
scientists in Europe, especially during the late 18th and early 19th centuries. Even more
importantly, and again refuting the idea of an evolutionary growth of knowledge and that
This is a preprint of: Meyer & Schroeder. 2009.
Untangling the Web of e-Research: Towards a Sociology of Online Knowledge,
Special Issue on Science of Science: Conceptualizations and Models of Science, Journal of Informetrics
science drives technological progress, is that it was rather the other way around: research
technologies drove science because they provided powerful tools generating ‘high-consensus
rapid-discovery’ science (Collins, 1998, pp. 532-538; Schroeder, 2007, pp. 21-40). This take-
off took place on the basis of research instruments during the 1600s. Still, we shall see that a
more sociological notion of ‘objective knowledge’ or externalized knowledge, which focuses
on the way in which knowledge is organized via more and less publicly accessible networks,
or networks that are accessible throughout the relevant research communities, provides a
useful way to think about why e-Research is driving knowledge advance.
A different way to understand e-Research is that it can be seen as a new paradigm in science
and knowledge. Kuhn’s idea of a paradigm has been invoked to make this claim (Kuhn,
1962). Yet, as is well known, Kuhn used this concept in different ways (Masterman, 1970).
One interpretation of Kuhn’s notion of a paradigm shift in science is simply as a
fundamentally new way to do things. The other is that so much problematic evidence has
accumulated that the old paradigm can no longer cope and a new paradigm (or framework) is
needed.
Neither of these notions of paradigm fits the whole of e-Research. The first notion does not
fit because there is no evidence of across-the-board shifts in science towards e-Research.
Instead, it has been shown that there a major field differences (see, for example, Fry &
Schroeder, forthcoming; Olson, Zimmerman, & Bos, 2008). The second would apply most
readily to the problem of the ‘data deluge’ (Hey & Trefethen, 2003) as it has been argued that
this problem requires a paradigm shift. Again, however, there are field differences (Borgman,
2007). Nevertheless, it is clear that there are urgent problems of data deluges in some
disciplines. As we shall see, however, it is not just the data deluge per se that is the problem,
but rather the technologies to cope with them.
Sociologists and historians have thus presented a much more historically accurate and
sociologically realistic assessments of the growth of knowledge, based not on an inherent
evolution of knowledge or revolutionary paradigm shifts, but on a specific account of when
and why this growth occurs because of the research technologies and how they objectify
knowledge in hard (as per Fuchs’ ideas above) and replicable networks that generate
consensus and allow science to move rapidly on to new territory. As we shall see, this
conceptualization is directly relevant to e-Research, which revolves around tool development.
If not philosophy, what about information science? The scientometric perspective, based on a
bibliometric analysis of citations and the half-life of citations, provide measures of which
areas of science are most prominent or fast-moving. This perspective makes it possible to
track the prominence of different fields historically, in terms of the rise and relative decline of
the outputs in different disciplines or areas of research. This could also be done by means
examining the inputs to research, which is an approach associated with the economics of
innovation (Dosi, 1982; Freeman, 1984; Freeman & Soete, 1997) and typically measures
R&D spending in different fields. In the case of e-Research, it would be necessary to examine
not so much overall R&D spending, but rather the funding emphases within and between
different government research programmes. As we shall see in the data below, both
information science and the economics of innovation provide useful complementary
approaches.
This is a preprint of: Meyer & Schroeder. 2009.
Untangling the Web of e-Research: Towards a Sociology of Online Knowledge,
Special Issue on Science of Science: Conceptualizations and Models of Science, Journal of Informetrics
One missing element in understanding e-Research, in addition to research technologies, is
how scientific ‘communication’ as a system (see also Lucio-Arias and Leydesdorff, this
volume) has become the key to knowledge generation. Especially in the case of e-Research,
this includes not only publications, but also getting access to whole sets of experimental
results or other forms of data and research material. This kind of collaboration - sharing the
tools, data and other materials that go into knowledge production - has become essential to
some researchers. This is where mutual dependence and task certainty come in, because only
in certain fields are these materials critical to progress. Put differently, wherever access to
and being able to manipulate the materials is the bottleneck or reverse salient within the
technological system (Hughes, 1983), the sciences depend on e-Research technologies to
tackle these bottlenecks.
Networked tools and data can thus be seen as ‘infrastructures’ or ‘large technological
systems’ (Hughes, 1994), although they are not ‘infrastructures’ in the conventional sense of
supporting society-at-large since they are largely confined to a small community within
society; namely, scientists and researchers. Note that there are two kinds of bottleneck: one
within the discipline or field where the need for shared tools and data has become the
bottleneck to making scientific progress, and the second is the way in which large
technological systems or infrastructures have bottlenecks; namely, in the intertwining
between technical and organizational components where there are typically
interdependencies.
In any event, these infrastructures or large technological systems, consisting of online
networks, are now integral to the functioning of certain areas within disciplines. Where they
have become integral - in the sense that researchers have become mutually dependent on
them and where task certainty revolves around them – that is the question that this essay must
now seek to answer.
Before we do so, it can be noted that this mutual dependence and task certainty where e-
Research technologies are needed to address bottlenecks – or technology pull – cannot be the
sole factor in this spread since e-Research technologies are also being developed regardless
of a need for them; in other words, the e-Research programmes are promoting a technology
push. This is clear if we consider that many e-Research tools that are developed so far lack
any discernible uptake.
It is also important not only to gauge to what extent different disciplines rely on e-Research
technologies, but also how they do so. In other words, how integral is the organization of tool
and data within a common infrastructure or large technological systems to the core of
knowledge production in different fields? Fuchs (2001) has argued that only certain fields
have networks that are organized surrounding cores of artefacts. If we combine an analysis of
these networked artefactual and organizational cores (which can be measured, for example,
by levels of Grid computing use) with a number of scientometric indicators and indicators of
funding levels for research in different fields, then we will have a more complete picture of
how e-Research is transforming knowledge (perhaps as complete and accurate as possible for
a transformation that is still in the making).
In terms of quantitative measurement, it is in principle possible to obtain indicators of the
total number of projects or size of funding or citations that relate to e-Research. However,
since it can be assumed that the contours of e-Research will be homologous across a range of
This is a preprint of: Meyer & Schroeder. 2009.
Untangling the Web of e-Research: Towards a Sociology of Online Knowledge,
Special Issue on Science of Science: Conceptualizations and Models of Science, Journal of Informetrics
national efforts and publication outlets, it will be enough to provide a number of examples or
illustrations and see if they point in the same direction.
The definition of e-Research includes ‘shared’ or ‘collaborative’ tools and data. These two
terms should not be seen as being normative; instead, they simply indicate that e-Research as
an enterprise by definition consist of tools and resources that more than one researcher can
access or use. The fact that this sharing or collaborating takes place via networks is given.
Data should be seen in the broad sense to include sources of information formalized for
communication, interpretation and processing in a variety of disciplines (Borgman, 2007, pp.
119-120). And tools and data are interrelated in the sense that tools manipulate data - though
here there are differences between sciences and humanities in this respect.
The approach that we put forward here, one that focuses on organizations and how their
networks are shaped by research tools, must be complemented by taking into consideration
the different practices of different disciplines. For example, the humanities are mainly
digitizing texts, images, films, and audio recordings (Nentwich, 2003). Here it matters how
organizations collaborate in the production of shared resources, rather than whether
networked tools are used to manipulate text and images. Thus, in the case of humanities such
as philosophy and literature, we can ask to what extent these materials are supported by or
propagated within networks (Collins, 1998) in their aim of interpretation.
The transformation of knowledge by e-Research thus takes quite different forms in different
domains. Inasmuch as the humanities are digitizing texts and other materials for shared use,
the effect is primarily two-fold: tying researchers together around certain resources, and
making texts and other materials amenable to digital manipulation. Neither is particularly
new, though the effect of e-Research, as in the sciences, is to increasingly tie researchers
together around shared data resources – their artefactual and organization network cores. This
goes against the ‘lone’ scholar model that is prevalent in some humanities fields, and makes
research more collaborative organizationally and technologically. The key question, however,
is to what extent do various fields and disciplines depend on these large technological
systems or infrastructures? The difficulty of answering this question in the case of the
humanities is compounded by the habit of many humanities researchers to cite all materials,
including digitized resources used exclusively online, as if the researcher had consulted the
original paper resource. These conventions can make all traces of uses of shared digitized
resources disappear in the published research outputs.
Finally, it could be argued that focusing on the size of project grants is misleading since in
the humanities it is primarily individual scholarship that matters. However, this point merely
highlights the limitations of humanities in e-Research, since individual scholars will have
limited possibilities to maintain collaborative resources over the course of time without
institutional and technical support.
4 Methods of Measuring e-Research
Considerable data are available to measure e-Research using a variety of lenses and
viewpoints. As part of the Oxford e-Social Science project3, we have collected data from a
This is a preprint of: Meyer & Schroeder. 2009.
Untangling the Web of e-Research: Towards a Sociology of Online Knowledge,
Special Issue on Science of Science: Conceptualizations and Models of Science, Journal of Informetrics
variety of sources, only some of which we have room to present here. At the level of national
programmes in the US, UK, and EU, we have collected data on funding and number of
projects as a proxy for the scale of resources devoted to e-Research. In the US, for example,
according to the National Science Foundation Database4, the Office of Cyberinfrastructure
alone has funded 342 projects in the period 2000-2008 for a total of over $375M, distributed
among 158 different organizations. Other organizations also have funded e-Research projects
in the US, spread across any number of funding agencies. In the UK and EU, data is
somewhat less transparently available, but it is possible to piece together data about the scale
(numbers of projects and scale of funding) by drawing on a number of sources; Gentzsch
(2006) reports that $400M was spent as part of the UK e-Science initiatives from 2001-2006
and involved up to 1100 scientists.
Such a breakdown brings us to the various socio-technical components of e-Research efforts,
which includes tools, resources and infrastructures. One data source which can contribute to
an understanding of the level of resources devoted to the different components of e-Research
is the amount of shared computing power used by different disciplines over the course of
time; for example, Atkinson (2006, p. 41) reports that engineering and the physical sciences
somewhat unsurprisingly use the UK National Grid Service most heavily, while the
humanities and social sciences are very light users. Data such as these support the typologies
that distinguish between socio-technical components developed in different e-Research
efforts; for example, between computation-centric, data-centric and community-centric
efforts (David & Spence, 2003). Finally, by means of webometric analysis it can be shown
how, nationally and internationally, e-Research efforts cluster around core projects,
disciplines and national funding initiatives or infrastructures (Ackland, Fry, & Schroeder,
2007).
As indicated, while there are a number of ways to measure the impact of e-Research, here we
must limit our discussion to several. First, we report on a bibliometric sample obtained from
Scopus using a search string5 designed to retrieve a wide variety of articles on e-Research.
The search string was used to gather a wide set of articles by searching in all fields, and a
subset that only considered appearance of the term with the title-abstract-keyword fields. This
string yielded a total of 5776 articles from 1994-2008 in the wide set, including 2186 journal
articles, 3020 conference papers and the remainder a variety of other academic outputs
(primarily editorials and reviews). The narrower title-abstract-keyword set contains 1320
articles over the same 1994-2008 time period, including 451 journal articles and 692
conference papers. Scopus was chosen for this project for several reasons, including the
availability of discipline and field categories available in the Scopus database. Scopus has
also been found to be equivalent to the Web of Science in its coverage of journal
5 Search term: ({e-Research} OR eResearch OR {e-Science} OR eScience OR {e-Humanities} OR eHumanities
OR {e-social science} OR cyberscience OR {cyber-science} OR (cyber PRE/0 science) OR cyberinfrastructure
OR (cyber PRE/0 infrastructure) OR {cyber-infrastructure} OR cyberresearch OR {cyber-research} OR (cyber
PRE/0 research) OR {e-Infrastructure} OR eInfrastructure OR (humanities w/15 digital) OR ((humanities W/15
online) AND (humanities W/15 computing)) OR (“social science” w/5 infrastructure) OR (“social scientist” w/5
infrastructure) OR (“humanities” w/5 infrastructure) OR (grid w/5 humanities) OR (grid w/5 “social science”))
The search term includes multiple versions of spellings of words to capture as many variations as possible. So,
for instance, {e-Research} in curly brackets maintains the hyphen in the exact search term, (cyber PRE/0
science) returns results with the word cyber immediately before the word science, (humanities w/15 digital)
returns instances of the two terms in the same sentence, and (grid w/5 humanities) returns instances of the words
used in the same phrase.
This is a preprint of: Meyer & Schroeder. 2009.
Untangling the Web of e-Research: Towards a Sociology of Online Knowledge,
Special Issue on Science of Science: Conceptualizations and Models of Science, Journal of Informetrics
publications, but superior in terms of conference presentations (Meho & Rogers, 2008; Meho
& Yang, 2007), including in terms of conferences for the computer sciences that are central
to many e-Research activities.
Second, we report on data pertaining to the projects funded by the US National Science
Foundation through the Office of Cyberinfrastructure. Finally, we look at some data from
Google Insights to understand the ways in which others are searching for terms related to e-
Research. There are a number of other data sources available that we intend to report
elsewhere, but for the purposes of this article, these are sufficient to illustrate some of the
emergent structures underlying e-Research, particularly in the US and the UK.
All of these data sources are incomplete, but together they give a good indication of the focus
and direction of the e-Research effort. Even the focus and direction, however, are only partial
indicators of the changes in and impact on research practices. This is where it becomes
important to look closely at the components of e-Research, and which part of the research
process e-Research tools, data and materials are deployed in and integral to.
The data reported here represent a lens through which we can start to see the patterns that are
developing around e-Research in a variety of settings. Starting with the Scopus sample of
articles on the general topic of e-Research (including a variety of associated search terms) we
see a number of patterns that illustrate the development of publications in this area,
disciplinary differences engaged in e-Research, and the language used in the titles of articles
on this topic. We also include data from the National Science Foundation, partly discussed
above but also included below to compare the language used in titles of grant proposals to
those used in research outputs.
[INSERT FIG 2 ABOUT HERE]
In Figure 2, we can see the growth of articles on e-Research over time. In the figure, each set
of bars is comprised of a left side and a right side. The data on the left half of the bar shows
the total Scopus results for the search term indicated above searching in all fields in Scopus
divided into two parts: the bottom portion indicates the number of articles using the narrower
method of only searching for the term within the title, abstract and keywords, and the top
portion shows the additional articles added by searching in all fields. The data on the right
half of each bar indicates the percentage of the wider search comprised of articles, in the
bottom portion, and conference proceedings, in the top portion. The total number of articles
represented in this figure is 5206.
Except for a few scattered early articles, publications did not begin to appear in significant
numbers until about 2003 and then saw rapid growth, particularly in 2004 and 2005. More
recently, however, it is unclear whether the growth of publications is levelling off or possibly
even started to shrink somewhat. The total number of articles in 2008 (n=1157) is about 4.6%
less than 2007 (n=1213). It will be several years before it would be possible to say whether
these numbers are a minor blip in the data or a trend. It is possible that some of the apparent
downturn in the most recent data is due to sources that have not yet been updated in Scopus.
Regardless of the overall trend, however, this simple figure does serve to illustrate the
novelty of this newly developed area of research and funding. It is worth noting, however,
that many of the actors engaged in this domain consider themselves to have been involved
This is a preprint of: Meyer & Schroeder. 2009.
Untangling the Web of e-Research: Towards a Sociology of Online Knowledge,
Special Issue on Science of Science: Conceptualizations and Models of Science, Journal of Informetrics
with e-infrastructure long before the actual term came into use: in the AVROSS sample
reported by Barjak et al., over 10% of their sample reported having been engaged with e-
infrastructure since before 1995 (Barjak et al., 2007, p. 24).
Also worth noting in Figure 2 is the change in the proportion of the sample comprised of
journal articles and of conference papers. The majority of publications on e-Research in its
nascent years were journal articles. From 2004, however, while the number of journal articles
continues to grow steadily, much of the explosive growth in publications on e-Research is
due to conference proceedings, with over half of the publications in the sample coming from
conference proceedings. There is a fairly simple explanation for this, but it speaks to the
sociology of how knowledge about e-Research is spreading: by 2004, conferences were being
established specifically to discuss developments in e-Science and related areas. The UK e-
Science All Hands meetings began in 2002 in Sheffield, UK, the first IEEE e-Science
conference was held in 2005 in Melbourne, Australia, and the 1st International Conference on
e-Social Science was held in Manchester, UK in 2005. These conferences generated
publications, which appear online and began to influence the scholarly discourse, but also
generated connections and future collaborations between the researchers who met at the
conferences. These and other e-Research oriented conferences attract researchers from a
variety of backgrounds, which weaken the disciplinary boundaries among e-Researchers and
also, therefore, require bridging the disciplinary silos among those who study this type of
online research.
[INSERT FIG 3 ABOUT HERE]
In Figure 3, the field differences among the manuscripts in the sample are reported. ‘Field’
differences are, of course, different from disciplinary differences, and we will use both
depending on the data available below. Clearly, however, the two are related and differences
in fields give good indications about disciplinary differences and vice versa. The fields used
here are aggregated from the “Subject Area” data in Scopus. The subject area classifications
fall into 30 categories, and are arrived at using a combination of human and computer agent
classification (Griffiths, 2004). Of the 30 categories, 25 appeared in our sample. However,
because many of them were quite small, we aggregated these into the nine broader fields
reported here. Not all disciplines were collapsed into a field, however: physics, for instance,
has been widely discussed in the literature on scholarly communication, and thus seemed to
merit separate consideration from either the rest of the natural sciences. It was also kept
separate from mathematics because of different rates of co-authorship in these fields reported
elsewhere (Wuchty, Jones, & Uzzi, 2007).
In the bottom chart of Figure 3, the proportion of the sample represented by each of the fields
is reported. Each field-specific bar has two portions: the bottom portion represents the
percentage of articles within that field that are also identified as part of another field in the
database, which is an indicator of multi-disciplinarity. As a result, the numbers in this figure
add up to more than the total number of articles, since the multi-disciplinary articles are by
definition represented multiple times, once in each field indicated. The top portion represents
the percentage of articles that are only identified with a single field. Note here the field
differences regarding multi-disciplinarity. Computer science is split 59% to 41% in favour of
multidisciplinary articles, while engineering is split with the same percentages but in favour
of single-field articles. Mathematics is nearly entirely multi-disciplinary in this sample (99%,
n=882), but we suspect this may be an artefact of the Scopus methodology; it is possible that
This is a preprint of: Meyer & Schroeder. 2009.
Untangling the Web of e-Research: Towards a Sociology of Online Knowledge,
Special Issue on Science of Science: Conceptualizations and Models of Science, Journal of Informetrics
the category of mathematics was used for a wide variety of computational approaches to
science, which in turn is represented well in an e-Research sample, rather than representing
large numbers of mathematicians being involved in e-Research publications. When we
examined the data for the articles coded within the mathematics subject area, a number of
articles with which we were familiar did not contain contributions from mathematicians.
This, of course, also suggests future work aimed at refining the categories we are using in this
analysis beyond those provided by Scopus. In general, however, the numbers here are along
the lines of what one would expect based on what has been reported elsewhere about
collaboration within and among fields: medicine and physics are more likely to be
multidisciplinary, the social sciences and other natural sciences somewhat less so.
The mean number of fields per article is a rough representation of the interdisciplinarity and
collaborativeness of the articles in this sample. For these data, all the fields except the natural
sciences are significantly different from the overall sample mean (1.52). This relatively low
overall mean is due in part to the large number of single field articles in the largest fields in
the sample, computer science and engineering. Nevertheless, the fields that stand out as being
the most interdisciplinary, as measured by the number of fields associated with their
publications, are mathematics (2.66), medicine/biomedicine/health (2.41), and computer
science (1.89). These fields are to some extent the usual suspects in terms of collaborative
publication across disciplines, but this also underscores the extent to which e-Research
reflects, and potentially amplifies, field and disciplinary differences. Disciplines such as
physics, which are already well understood to be heavily engaged in collaborative publication
across disciplines, are also apparently particularly well-suited to become engaged in e-
Research. While the data here are not sufficient to infer causality, we can speculate that there
may be a system of positive feedback in which a tendency toward collaborative production of
knowledge leads to a greater likelihood of involvement with e-Research, which in turn
amplifies the likelihood of collaboratively producing knowledge using e-Research tools and
data.
As has been reported elsewhere in data on all publications (Wuchty, Jones, & Uzzi, 2007)
and discussed in more detail below, the mean number of authors per article varies
considerably by field. In our sample of articles about e-Research, the overall mean number of
authors is 3.67 authors per article, but this ranges from an average of 1.44 authors per article
in the arts and humanities to 4.41 authors per article in physics. All of the fields except for
engineering and mathematics are significantly different from the overall sample mean, as
shown in the figure.
In terms of citation rates, all of the fields except for physics and the arts & humanities are
significantly different from the overall sample mean. The number of citations ranges from a
high of 6.22 in business & economics to a low of 1.83 in math; the overall average is 2.77
citations per article. The apparently high citation rate in business & economics is from a
relatively small sample of articles, so not too much should be drawn from this, but see below
for additional discussion on this point. In general, though, this portion of the figure gives a
good indication of the citation practices and impact, in a bibliometric sense, of e-Research
articles by field and discipline.
[INSERT TABLE 1 ABOUT HERE]
This is a preprint of: Meyer & Schroeder. 2009.
Untangling the Web of e-Research: Towards a Sociology of Online Knowledge,
Special Issue on Science of Science: Conceptualizations and Models of Science, Journal of Informetrics
It is worth comparing the numbers in this sample for mean numbers of authors per article to
that reported by Wuchty et al. (2007). As shown in Table 1, the mean number of authors in
this sample is in general slightly higher than what Wuchty et al. report for their sample of all
articles in the ISI database for the range of articles at the end of their sample period, 1996-
2000. In their supplemental data, they report the mean values for size of teams, as indicated
by authorship. Some of their categories do not match ours, and are not reported in a way that
is possible to disaggregate, but we did run one-sample t-tests for those that are directly
comparable. Of the 20 subject area classifications from our data which had directly
comparable data in Wuchty et al., 15 were not significantly different in terms of the mean
number of authors per paper (what Wuchty et al. refer to as “team size”). This gives us reason
to believe that in general, our dataset is comparable to theirs in fields which are not generally
seen to be central to e-Research (biochemistry or physics, for instance). However, in fields
which are central to e-Research, as we will now show in more detail, there are significant
differences in mean numbers of authors per paper.
So, in the case where the differences between their figures are ours are statistically
significant, we may be seeing indications of a real difference in co-authorship for those
involved with e-Research. The articles in the e-Research sample that have a higher mean
number of authors include computer science (3.85 compared to 2.39), engineering (3.65
compared to 2.94), mathematics (3.85 compared to 1.84), business (2.52 compared to 1.66),
and economics (2.25 compared to 1.71). At least the first three of these areas are central to
many of the developments in e-Research. These differences in the size of their publication
teams support the idea that their involvement in e-Research is also having an effect that can
be measured in terms of their publication habits. For business and economics, the difference
is a little less clear, but our speculation is that this may be to do with an apparent focus on
network research in the business and economics sample, which may be more likely to be
multiple authored than other work in those fields.
Caution is necessary, however. Without access to their complete dataset, it is difficult to
know if differences across all fields are statistically significant. In addition, the end point of
their dataset (1996-2000) corresponds with the earliest articles in our dataset, making it
difficult to argue that the data is directly comparable. A comparison using better matched
data, however, would be useful to pursue in a follow up study, since one argument made by
the supporters of e-Research is that the tools and data enable larger collaborations. If the
average number of authors per article publishing in the area of e-Research is higher than the
average number of authors per article in the same fields publishing generally, this would
support the notion. At this time, we can say we have a tentative indication that this is true, but
need additional data to confirm or disconfirm this.
[INSERT FIG 4 ABOUT HERE]
This is illustrated even more strikingly in Figure 4. In this figure, the data we have been
discussing has been converted to 3717 pairs of fields, as identified in the Scopus metadata.
The diagram shows the comparative size of the number of articles in the collection associated
with each field pairing with another field. Computer science clearly dominates, with 2463
paired fields in the sample, followed by mathematics (n=1541) and
medicine/biomedicine/health (n=1358). More interestingly, the connections and sizes of
connections (which of course are partly an artefact of the number of articles) give us an
indication of which fields are collaborating on articles. The triumvirate of computer science,
This is a preprint of: Meyer & Schroeder. 2009.
Untangling the Web of e-Research: Towards a Sociology of Online Knowledge,
Special Issue on Science of Science: Conceptualizations and Models of Science, Journal of Informetrics
medicine, and mathematics are clearly quite interdependent. Computer science in particular is
connected to nearly every field, except for the arts & humanities (which, again, is partly a
reflection of the small sample size for this field, which resulted in no connections exceeding
the minimum tie strength of 30 connections which was required to simplify the diagram). The
social sciences are connected to computer science, more weakly to medicine, business &
economics and engineering, but not at all to mathematics or physics. This indicates empirical
support for the idea that that the so-called hard sciences are not actively collaborating with
the social sciences and arts.
The dominance in the sample of computer science underscores the centrality of computer
science to the entire e-Research enterprise. Since e-Research has focused on enabling sharing
and collaboration of digital tools and data, computer science has understandably been a
central player in e-Research. Even more than this, however, we would suggest based on other
work (de la Flor & Meyer, 2008) that computer science has not just been the lucky recipient
of the attentions of interested e-Researchers, but that many of the central actors pushing e-
Research forward as a potential computerization movement (Elliott & Kraemer, 2008) are
based in computer science. These actors have been actively engaged in efforts to enrol the
participation of various domain researchers in e-Research. One open question, however, is
whether this movement will succeed in the long term, and whether these computer scientists
will be able to continue to expand computer science centric e-Research into other fields and
disciplines, including those reported here.
One weakness of this sample is the comparatively small number of arts & humanities articles.
There are several possible reasons for this. The most obvious is simply that the arts &
humanities may be, by and large, not deeply engaged with e-Research. If this is true, further
work may be needed to discover if this is due to active disengagement (i.e., rejecting potential
involvement) or passive disengagement (i.e., lack of awareness of possibilities for
involvement). A second potential reason was mentioned elsewhere in this article: the
disciplinary habits and practices of arts & humanities scholars which tend to cause
involvement with shared digital resources to disappear in the published outputs which favour
citing resources, including electronic resources, as if the original paper sources had been
consulted. A third reason has to do with the disconnect between preferred publication
channels in the humanities, which favour book publication, and the content coverage in
databases such as Scopus and ISI, which do not generally include books in their data. We are
examining this in other ongoing research, but it is too early to report that work here.
[INSERT FIGURE 5 ABOUT HERE]
The last visualisation combines data from the Scopus sample with information from the US
National Science Foundation Office of Cyberinfrastructure (NSF-OCI) in Figure 5. These
word clouds are generated from all the words in the titles of the papers in the sample, with
common English words removed. The top cloud is drawn from the Scopus data, the bottom
cloud from the NSF-OCI database6 of funded research, 2000-2008. This is a quick way to
look at the topics in the articles and research grants based on the frequency of words in the
titles. The figure also includes tables in the centre of the figure showing the frequencies of the
top 25 words in each dataset. While these word clouds do not show any statistical relationship
This is a preprint of: Meyer & Schroeder. 2009.
Untangling the Web of e-Research: Towards a Sociology of Online Knowledge,
Special Issue on Science of Science: Conceptualizations and Models of Science, Journal of Informetrics
among various words in the titles, they do give an overall impression of the types of themes
in our samples.
Several obvious foci are visible in the Scopus data: the focus on the Grid, data, applications,
and computing are clear. Other common terms partly reflect the dominance of computer
science in this sample: resources, workflow, service, computing, and semantic. The NSF-OCI
data, however, provides a comparison that gives us a slightly different view on e-Research.
The NSF-OCI has been an active and key player in advancing e-Research in the US through
their funding efforts and around the world through their advocacy of cyberinfrastructure.
Using the 341 projects in the database, the lower tag cloud represents at some level the ways
in which scientists are selling their work to the funding agency. Comparing this to the tag
cloud for publications, which represents at some level the results of these projects, makes
clear some interesting differences. First, some concepts appear to be more likely to be
discussed at the funding stage (collaborative, performance, demonstration) that are likely at
least partly an effort to use the terms that the funders are using to discuss these relatively new
efforts.
Note also that there is a focus on research, engineering and computing in both sets of data.
Some relative frequencies are quite distinctive and worth noting. The term “collaborative”
moves from being the fourth most frequent term in funding applications to being a relatively
infrequent term in publications (visible in the cloud near the top). Computing remains
important in both, but the Grid, only moderately frequently represented in funding
applications, is absolutely central to the publications. Many other pairs of words lead us to
speculate on the nature of transformation within projects over time. Undoubtedly, some of the
difference here represents the inevitable difference between the type of language and strategic
orienting that is required at the funding stage versus that required at the publication stage.
Nevertheless, it makes us wonder to what extent the changes are also reflected in
transformations within e-Research projects over time as initial expectations give way to
operational reality.
5.1 Future work
This study is ongoing, as we collect additional data to help us understand the sociology of
online knowledge, using e-Research as a case study. Future efforts will include additional
analysis of the data reported here to include measures such as co-authorship networks and
analysis of highly published and cited researchers. Examining authorship will also allow us to
map more precisely the disciplinary affiliations of authors than the crude categories used
within Scopus allow. We are also collecting webometric data using the same search terms we
have used in the Scopus sample to find websites with these terms and build a dataset of the
links between websites. This work will allow us to begin to map the global structure of online
knowledge in the e-Research area.
6 Conclusion
In this article, we have discussed a number of ways to view the potential transformations of
science promised by e-Research. By first discussing that we must start to develop a sociology
of online knowledge if we are to understand this emergent domain, we have set out the
position that understanding the socio-technical nature of e-Research is more complex than
simply understanding the policy and funding programmes that have been set forth within the
domain. To support this contention, we have presented data aimed at beginning to map the
This is a preprint of: Meyer & Schroeder. 2009.
Untangling the Web of e-Research: Towards a Sociology of Online Knowledge,
Special Issue on Science of Science: Conceptualizations and Models of Science, Journal of Informetrics
sociological features of this knowledge domain. At the same time, as we have seen, e-
Research as a domain ranges across a number of disciplinary approaches that might analyze it
– including information science, sociology of science, social studies of humanities, and
studies of new media. As research increasingly moves online, within e-Research but also
more broadly, the boundaries between these disciplinary approaches will need to be
transcended in order to gauge the relations between fields and to map and identify the
movements of the research fronts by means of online research tools, as the other
contributions to this special issue do. This will not yield a complete picture, however, as these
contributions also recognize: among the missing puzzle piece are structural characteristics
such as the gatekeeping functions of search engines in shaping access to online research, the
ways in which the publishing industry and publishing methods shape the balance between
online and offline research resources, funding policies towards different e-Infrastructures, and
the extent to which fields and disciplines use research technologies – tools, data and
resources – with material that can be digitized.
The shaping of the online realm of knowledge has implications for the interpretation of
Popper’s notion of the visibility of research, as well as for potential Kuhnian paradigm shifts
within certain fields. Whatever the differences between disciplines and fields, however, any
sociology of online knowledge must recognize that research technologies are increasingly
organized across institutional and disciplinary boundaries. The visibility and advance of the
outputs of knowledge, apart from how it can be quantitatively measured, is also shaped by
how these technologies provide a conduit for knowledge which can be analyzed as a separate
online whole, even if there are continuities between online and offline knowledge.
The data in this article show that e-Research has taken hold in different fields of research to
quite variable degrees. Much of this data suggests considerable future work to extend our
understanding of this emergent domain, particularly research that combines quantitative and
qualitative data. Neither purely quantitative nor qualitative approaches can do justice to e-
Research for two reasons: one is that different sources of data need to be combined in order
to obtain a middle-range and comprehensive understanding of the different levels of socio-
technical networks involved. The second reason is that only an overall account of the scale
and scope of e-Research within and between different fields makes it possible to identify the
organizational coherence and diffuseness of e-Research in terms of its socio-technical
networks, and thus to identify the contributions of e-Research to various research fronts in the
online production of knowledge.
On the basis of what has been argued, we would expect the largest concentration of projects
and the bulk of e-Research funding or resources to concentrate in those fields where the data
deluge as conceptualized here (as mutually dependent communication) must be addressed as
a matter of urgency. In certain fields more than others, there are bottlenecks in manipulating
and organizing vast amounts of data and other materials by means of tools (Meyer,
forthcoming). In other fields, such as the humanities, technological and organization
interdependencies can be created even without these urgent needs or need for mutually
dependent scholarship. How these research technologies form lasting network cores in
knowledge production – and are able to build on and maintain them – is a further question
which we have begun to answer, but which will need to be followed over the longer term.
What we can see already in the data is the emergence of concentrations of projects in certain
disciplines – or rather in combinations of disciplines where computer science, which provides
This is a preprint of: Meyer & Schroeder. 2009.
Untangling the Web of e-Research: Towards a Sociology of Online Knowledge,
Special Issue on Science of Science: Conceptualizations and Models of Science, Journal of Informetrics
the research technologies, is connected to domain disciplines. We can also see higher levels
of collaborative work around the use of research technologies across certain disciplines and
fields as well as in higher levels of the use of shared computing power. If we come back now
to the idea that objective knowledge is externalized and made visible around particular
networks in technologically hardened cores with higher levels of task certainty and mutual
dependence, we can see that these cores of research technologies - whether in the form of
larger infrastructures or in projects that are not infrastructures in supporting whole
communities of researchers but consist of smaller-scale socio-technical networks - these are
more prominent in some disciplines and fields rather than others. How the technologies of e-
Research will congeal still further and, if not revolutionize knowledge production then at
least transform it and lead the edge of research in certain disciplines in new directions,
remains to be seen. But certain network crystallizations are becoming visible already.
The approach here integrates data from a variety of sources and combines ideas about how
knowledge changes with a sociological understanding of the material bases of these changes,
via technological and socio-organizational networks. We have argued that only such a
combination of sources and understanding of socio-technical networks can give an indication
of the overall as well as the specific disciplinary directions of knowledge production in-the-
making. Put differently, the sociology of knowledge needs to be based on the material
organization of research technologies, which, in the case of e-Research, consists of an
emerging landscape of socio-technical networks, the contours of which we have begun to
sketch.
7 Acknowledgements
The work for this article has been supported by the Economic and Social Research Council
(ESRC) grant RES-149-25-1022 and is part of the Oxford e-Social Science project
issue, Katy Börner and Andrea Scharnhorst, and the anonymous reviewers for their helpful
comments on this article.
8 References Cited
Ackland, R., Fry, J., & Schroeder, R. (2007). Scoping the Online Visibility of e-Research by
Means of e-Research Tools. Paper presented at the Third International Conference on
e-Social Science, Ann Arbor, Michigan, Oct 7-9.
ARL Joint Task Force on Library Support for E-Science. (2007). Agenda for Developing E-
Science in Research Libraries: Final Report and Recommendations to the Scholarly
Communication Steering Committee, the Public Policies Affecting Research Libraries
Steering Committee, and the Research, Teaching, and Learning Steering Committee.
Retrieved 03 January 2008, from
Atkinson, M. (2006). e-Science: Foundations for the European Citizen: A keynote Talk at
GRID2006, Barcelona, Spain. Retrieved 28 Aug, 2008, from
Barjak, F., Wiegand, G., Lane, J., Kertcher, Z., Procter, R., Poschen, M., et al. (2007).
Accelerating Transition to Virtual Research Organisation in Social Science
This is a preprint of: Meyer & Schroeder. 2009.
Untangling the Web of e-Research: Towards a Sociology of Online Knowledge,
Special Issue on Science of Science: Conceptualizations and Models of Science, Journal of Informetrics
(AVROSS): Final Report. Brussels: Information Society and Media Directorate
General, Commission of the European Communities.
Beaulieu, A., Scharnhorst, A., & Wouters, P. (2007). Not Another Case Study: A Middle-
Range Interrogation of Ethnographic Case Studies in the Exploration of E-science.
Science, Technology & Human Values, 32(6), 672-692.
Borgman, C. L. (2007). Scholarship in the Digital Age: Information, Infrastructure, and the
Internet. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Catton, C., Sparks, S., & Shotton, D. (2006). The ImageStore Ontology and the BioImage
Database: Semantic Web Tools for Biological Research Images. Paper presented at
the BioImage Informatics Conference, UC Santa Barbara.
Chen, C., Chen, Y., Horowitz, M., Hou, H., Liu, Z., & Pellegrino, D. (2009). Towards an
Explanatory and Computational Theory of Scientific Discovery. Journal of
Informetrics.
Collins, R. (1998). The Sociology of Philosophies: A Global Theory of Intellectual Change.
Cambridge, MA: The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press.
David, P., & Spence, M. (2003). Towards institutional infrastructures for e-Science: the scope
of the challenge. Oxford Internet Institute, Research Report No. 2 [Electronic
Version]. Oxford Internet Institute Research Reports from
de la Flor, G., & Meyer, E. T. (2008). Framing e-Research: Understanding e-Research as a
computerization movement. Paper presented at the Oxford e-Research 08 Conference,
Oxford, UK.
Dosi, G. (1982). Technological paradigms and technological trajectories: A suggested
interpretation of the determinants and directions of technical change. Research Policy,
11(3), 147-162.
Dutton, W. H., & Jeffreys, P. (Eds.). (forthcoming). World Wide Science. Cambridge, MA:
The MIT Press.
Elliott, M. S., & Kraemer, K. L. (Eds.). (2008). Computerization Movements and Technology
Diffusion. Medford, NJ: Information Today, Inc.
Freeman, C. (1984). The Economics of Innovation. London: Penguin.
Freeman, C., & Soete, L. (1997). The Economics of Industrial Innovation (3rd ed.).
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Frenken, K., Hardeman, S., & Hoekman, J. (2009). Spatial scientometrics: towards a
cumulative research program. Journal of Informetrics.
Frickel, S., & Gross, N. (2005). A General Theory of Scientific/Intellectual Movements.
American Sociological Review, 70(2), 204-232.
Fry, J., & Schroeder, R. (forthcoming). e-Research and the Changing Disciplinary Landscape.
In W. H. Dutton & P. Jeffreys (Eds.), World Wide Science. Cambridge, MA: The MIT
Press.
Fuchs, S. (2001). Against Essentialism: A Theory of Culture and Society. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Gentzsch, W. (2006). National Grid Initiatives: Lessons Learned and Recommendations
(Keynote speech). Paper presented at the 2nd International Conference on e-Science
and Grid Computing, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 4-6 Dec.
Ginsparg, P. (1996). Winners and Losers in the Global Research Village (Invited contribution
for Conference held at UNESCO HQ, Paris, 19-23 Feb 1996, during session
Scientist's View of Electronic Publishing and Issues Raised, Wed 21 Feb 1996).
This is a preprint of: Meyer & Schroeder. 2009.
Untangling the Web of e-Research: Towards a Sociology of Online Knowledge,
Special Issue on Science of Science: Conceptualizations and Models of Science, Journal of Informetrics
Griffiths, G. (2004). The value of structure in searching scientific literature (Scopus white
paper series, number two). Retrieved 17 Feb, 2009, from
Gunnarsdottir, K. (2005). Scientific Journal Publications: On the Role of Electronic Preprint
Exchange in the Distribution of Scientific Literature. Social Studies of Science, 35(4),
549-579.
Hackett, E. J., Amsterdamska, O., Lynch, M., & Wajcman, J. (Eds.). (2008). The Handbook
of Science and Technology Studies (3rd ed.). Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Hacking, I. (1983). Representing and Intervening. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Hess, D. (1997). Science Studies: An Advanced Introduction. New York: New York
University Press.
Hey, T., & Trefethen, A. (2003). The Data Deluge: An e-Science Perspective. In F. Berman,
G. Fox & T. Hey (Eds.), Grid Computing: Making the Global Infrastructure a Reality
(pp. 809-824). Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Hughes, T. P. (1983). Networks of Power: Electrification in Western Society, 1880-1930.
Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Hughes, T. P. (1994). Technological momentum. In L. Marx & M. R. Smith (Eds.), Does
technology drive history? The dilemma of technological determinism (pp. 101-113).
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Jacso, P. (2008). Google Scholar Revisited. Online Information Review, 32(1), 102-114.
Jankowski, N. (Ed.). (forthcoming). E-Research: Transformations in Scholarly Practice.
London: Routledge.
Kling, R. (2004). The Internet and unrefereed scholarly publishing. Annual Review of
Information Science and Technology, 38(1), 591-631.
Kuhn, T. (1962). The Structure of Scientific Revolutions. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
Lambiotte, R., & Panzarasa, P. (2009). Communities, Knowledge Creation and Information
Diffusion. Journal of Informetrics.
Lucio-Arias, D., & Leydesdorff, L. (2009). The Self-Organization of Scientific Knowledge
on the Basis of Exchanges and References among Scientific Texts: The
Communication Turn in the Science of Science. Journal of Informetrics.
Magee, B. (1973). Popper. Glasgow: William Collins Sons & Co. Ltd.
Masterman, M. (1970). The Nature of a Paradigm. In I. Lakatos & A. Musgrave (Eds.),
Criticism and the Growth of Knowledge (pp. 59-90). Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Meho, L. I., & Rogers, Y. (2008). Citation Counting, Citation Ranking, and h-Index of
Human-Computer Interaction Researchers: A Comparison of Scopus and Web of
Science. Journal of the American Society of Information Science & Technology,
59(11), 1711-1726.
Meho, L. I., & Yang, K. (2007). Impact of Data Sources on Citation Counts and Rankings of
LIS Faculty: Web of Science Versus Scopus and Google Scholar. Journal of the
American Society for Information Science and Technology, 58(13), 2105-2125.
Meyer, E. T. (forthcoming). Moving from small science to big science: Social and
organizational impediments to large scale data sharing. In N. Jankowski (Ed.), E-
Research: Transformation in Scholarly Practice. New York: Routledge.
National Centre for e-Social Science. (2007). NCeSS webpage. Retrieved October 26, 2007,
Nentwich, M. (2003). Cyberscience: Research in the Age of the Internet. Vienna: Austrian
Academy of Sciences Press.
This is a preprint of: Meyer & Schroeder. 2009.
Untangling the Web of e-Research: Towards a Sociology of Online Knowledge,
Special Issue on Science of Science: Conceptualizations and Models of Science, Journal of Informetrics
Olson, G. M., Zimmerman, A., & Bos, N. D. (Eds.). (2008). Scientific Collaboration on the
Internet. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Schroeder, R. (2007). Rethinking Science, Technology, and Social Change. Stanford:
Stanford University Press.
Schroeder, R. (2008). e-Sciences as Research Technologies: Reconfiguring Disciplines,
Globalizing Knowledge. Social Science Information, 47(2), 131-157.
Shiffrin, R. M., & Börner, K. (2004). Mapping knowledge domains. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 101(Supp. 1), 5183-
Skupin, A. (2009). Conceptualizing Science: Implications for Knowledge Domain
Visualizations. Journal of Informetrics.
Thelwall, M. (2007). Bibliometrics to Webmetrics. Journal of Information Science, 34(4), 1-
18.
Whitley, R. (2000). The Intellectual and Social Organization of the Sciences (2nd ed.).
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Wuchty, S., Jones, B. F., & Uzzi, B. (2007). The Increasing Dominance of Teams in
Production of Knowledge. Science, 316, 1036.
Figure Captions
Figure Captions
Figure 1. Sociology of Online Knowledge
Figure 2. Publications on e-Research in Scopus, 1994-2008, (n=5206, articles and conference
papers only)
Figure 3. Citation rates, authors, fields, field Size, and multidisciplinarity in Scopus e-
Research articles, 1994-2008 (n=5206, articles and conference papers only)
Figure 4. Map showing number of articles by field, and article interdisciplinarity. The size of
the nodes in relation to each other shows the comparative number of times each field was
paired with another in the dataset. The line thickness connecting the nodes illustrates the
number of connections between a given pairing. Pairs with fewer than 30 connections are not
displayed in order to simplify the image.
Source: Data retrieved from Scopus using sample search terms; image created from data
generated by Microsoft Excel NodeXL plugin.
Figure 5. Visualization of most common terms in titles of Scopus e-Research articles, 1994-
2008 (n=5206) and most common terms in titles of NSF Office of Cyberinfrastructure grants
awarded, 2000-2008 (n=341).
Purely Online
Purely Offline
scirtemobeW
scirtemotneicS
noitamrofnI
seidutS ygolonhceT
erutaretiL
Forces shaping the online cloud
- Technological infrastructure
- Structure of online publications
- Design and use of search tools
gnidulcni(
senilpicsid
,yrtsimehC
Cloud of Online Knowledge
Trends within the online cloud
- Increasing interdisciplinarity
- Increasing collaboration
- Shift from specialized to generalized
discovery, distribution and access
e-Research Articles, 1994-2008
75 50% 298
100 0 0 2 5 7 6 7 7 3 4 7 5 9 0 5 5 0 1 5 2 8 19 103 70% 179 247 233
2 100% 2 100% 97% 53% 93% 93% 93% 90% 70% 31 87
4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
9 9 9 9 9 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
9 9 9 9 9 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
1 1 1 1 1 1 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2
Limited to articles and conference proceedings, n=5206
Total n by year n=401
Percentage of sample n=1025
comprised of conference
n added with proceedings
wide search
50% Percentage of sample n=844
comprised of articles
narrow search
n=74 n=70 n=32 n=41 n=59 n=55 n=134
51% 63% 73%
Computer Science Engineering Med-Bio-Health Math Social Science Natural Sciences Business- Physics Arts-Humanities
1.48 1.63 1.61 1.8 1.79
n=229 n=43
4.00 4.10 4.32 4.41
3.50 3.85 3.85
2.00 2.28 2.47
*** Sample
2.23 2.09 1.83 1.91 2.09
Computer Science Engineering Med-Bio-Health Math Social Science Natural Sciences Business- Physics Arts-Humanities
Citation Rates *
Field size and multidisciplinarity
Upper Charts Lower Chart
Significance of difference n=924 Total number of
from sample mean ** articles by field
23% Percentage (number)
Field mean 4.12
(213) of single field articles
Sample mean
77% Percentage (number)
(711) of multi-field articles
Engineering
Mathematics
Natural Sciences
Computer Science
Medicine, Biomed
and Health
Business and Economics
Arts and Humanities Social Sciences
Word cloud of Scopus e-Research titles, 1994-2008
Top 25 Scopus e-Research title Top 25 NSF cyberinfrastructure
word frequencies title word frequencies
1. grid 1335 1. research 74
2. service 560 2. cyberinfrastructure 55
3. systems 515 3. science 53
4. data 514 4. collaborative 50
5. application 331 5. network 49
6. web 326 6. engineering 44
7. digital 316 7. workshop 38
8. information 302 8. performance 34
9. research 298 9. high 31
10. network 291 10. ci-team 27
11. environment 290 11. data 25
12. resource 285 12. grid 23
13. computing 282 13. middleware 23
14. management 274 14. computing 21
15. science 264 15. demonstration 19
16. scientific 245 16. development 17
17. based 239 17. petascale 17
18. semantic 224 18. university 17
19. distributed 217 19. education 16
20. e-science 198 20. computational 15
21. workflow 196 21. connection 15
22. analysis 192 22. project 15
23. infrastructure 189 23. applications 14
24. knowledge 185 24. new 14
25. framework 182 25. services 14
Total terms in sample ^ 1312 Total terms in sample ^ 94
Total word instances ^ 30210 Total word instances ^ 1280
^ Common words and terms with fewer than 5 instances removed
Word cloud of NSF Office of Cyberinfrastructure award titles, 2000-2008
Table 1. Scopus e‐Research papers, 1996‐2008 (n=5206) compared to Wuchty et al. team size
Wuchty et al.
Authors (mean, 1996‐ Significance
Subject area N1 (mean) 2000) (p)
Agriculture 53 5.87 3.29 0.0286
Arts & Humanities 43 1.44 1.10 0.0474
Biochemistry 641 4.20 4.46 0.0850
Business 199 2.52 1.66 <0.0001 ***
Chemical Engineering 26 3.54 2.74 0.0597
Chemistry 51 4.82 3.69 0.0115
Computer Science 2821 3.85 2.39 <0.0001 ***
Economics 57 2.25 1.71 0.0002 **
Energy 25 4.56 2.64 0.1504
Engineering 1634 3.65 2.94 <0.0001 ***
Environmental Sciences 123 3.17 2.98 0.4143
Immunology 5 8.00 5.38 0.4246
Materials Sciences 41 3.20 3.46 0.4508
Mathematics 894 3.85 1.84 <0.0001 ***
Medicine 174 5.25 4.39 0.0126
Neurosciences 13 5.08 4.05 0.2215
Nursing 22 4.00 2.12 0.0156
Pharmacology 22 4.18 4.31 0.8238
Physics 191 4.41 4.05 0.1794
Psychology 122 2.62 2.57 0.7582
* p < .01, ** p < .001, *** p < .0001; Wuchty et al. data significance as difference from Wuchty
mean in Scopus sample for fields where which have directly comparable data, as measured by
one‐sample t‐test using SAS 9.1; Source Wuchty, Jones and Uzzi (2007).
1. Total of individual subject area classifications adds up to more than sample n due to multi‐
discipline papers being reported in more than one classification.