Use of Computer Vision to Detect Tangles in Tangled
Paritosh Parmar
Robotics Lab
SRM University
Chennai, India
paritosh_parmar@srmuniv.edu.in
Abstract—Untangling of structures like ropes and wires by cameras (which output RGB-D data). Therefore a method
autonomous robots can be useful in areas such as personal needs to be developed to detect tangles in a tangled mass of
robotics, industries and electrical wiring & repairing by robots. wires and also identify which wire is passing over the other
This problem can be tackled by using computer vision system in
wires using RGB images from 2-D camera. This information
robot. This paper proposes a computer vision based method for
can then be used by robots to untangle the tangled mass.
analyzing visual data acquired from camera for perceiving the
In this paper, an algorithm to detect tangles is proposed.
overlap of wires, ropes, hoses i.e. detecting tangles. Information
Given an image, following presented algorithm, tangles can be
obtained after processing image according to the proposed
method comprises of position of tangles in tangled object and detected, and position (X, Y coordinates) of tangle can be
which wire passes over which wire. This information can then be found out. Also, which wire passes over other wire/s at a
used to guide robot to untangle wire/s. Given an image, pre- particular tangle can be found out using this algorithm.
processing is done to remove noise. Then edges of wire are Deciding which wire passes over others requires an algorithm.
detected. After that, the image is divided into smaller blocks and An algorithm was developed for making this decision. This
each block is checked for wire overlap/s and finding other
algorithm is important because the decision to be made is
relevant information. TANGLED-100 dataset was introduced,
regarding the third coordinate axis i.e. Z-axis from available
which consists of images of tangled linear deformable objects.
2D data (RGB data from camera). The presented algorithm
Method discussed in here was tested on the TANGLED-100
does not rely on or use any markers.
dataset. Accuracy achieved during experiments was found to be
74.9%. Robotic simulations were carried out to demonstrate the The method introduced in this paper was tested on 100
use of the proposed method in applications of robot. Proposed images. Test images had noise in them. Test images had “real
method is a general method that can be used by robots working world” background. Many images had multiple wires of
in different situations. different colors. Accuracy of 74.9% was achieved with the
proposed method.
Keywords—computer vision; detecting tangles; robot vision;
personal robots; untangling linear deformable objects
I. INTRODUCTION
Automation and use of robots in personal space as well as
industries is increasing every day. Some of the examples of
personal robots are Roomba which can clean house on its own,
robotic window cleaners, robotic lawn mower, and companion
robots. A personal robot can be used to untangle structures Fig. 1. Tangle/overlap indicated in a tangled mass of wire (left). Tangled mass
like wires, threads, ropes and flexible pipes, hoses. Another of wires (right).
usage of robots on similar line can be: electrical wiring and
The remaining paper is organized in the following
repairing on electric poles by robots. One of the main
manner. Section II describes the overview of the methodology.
problems to be addressed in these cases is to detect tangles.
Section III describes pre-processing. Section IV describes
This paper is the first to address detection of tangles in wires1
edge detection and thresholding. Then in Section V
using computer vision.
windowing approach and contour tracing are described. Post-
In a tangled mass of wires, wire/s pass over (or overlap)
processing and decision making process are presented in
other wire/s or there may be one or more knots. Knots can also
Section VI. Experiments and results are presented in Section
be taken as special case of overlap. Consider that wires are
VII. Section VIII concludes the paper.
placed in X-Y plane. Consider for e.g. that in one tangle, wire
A is passing over wire B. Therefore wire A is placed at a II. OVERVIEW OF THE METHODOLOGY
higher place along Z direction than wire B. But the difference
Images of tangled wires are acquired from a camera. In
in placements along Z direction is very small. Such a small
real world scenario, more than one wire can be tangled
difference can’t be measured by currently available 3D
Note: In this paper, words wire, pipe/hose, ropes, threads would
equivalently be used for tangled objects.
together. These wires can be of different colors. Out of these height h is w x h x 3 array which stores blue, red, and green
wires only one or some wires may be of interest. In that case, components for each and every pixel. Color of a pixel is the
wire of interest is separated from others by using color result of the superimposition of green, red and blue colors
separation technique. Separation of wire of interest is present at that pixel position. Pure red color has red intensity
explained in detail in Section III. After separating out wire of of 255, pure green color has green intensity of 255 and
interest, image is pre-processed for removing noise likewise pure blue color has blue intensity of 255. For e.g.
(smoothing). Removal of noise is important for edge detection brown color has red color intensity of 185, green color
and thresholding, to be carried out in subsequent steps. intensity of 122, and blue color intensity of 87. Therefore for
Removal of noise is explained in detail in Section III. differentiating wire of the desired color, each pixel is checked
After pre-processing images, edge detection is carried out for desired red, green, and blue color intensities. Value of only
on the image as a result of which boundaries of wire/s are the matching pixels is set more than that of the black color.
detected. Edge detection is done by convolving the image with Hence, desired color, and consequently wire is differentiated.
the kernel. In this method the image is convolved with 8 Fig. 2 shows a case in which multiple wire of different colors
different kernels, one by one. Following steps are repeated for were present, of which only blue colored wire was of interest.
each kernel. The resultant image is then thresholded to obtain Blue colored was differentiated from other wires.
a binary image in which the edges are above the threshold
value. In this way, the edges are separated out. Edge detection
process and thresholding are explained in detail in Section IV.
After thresholding, ‘sliding window’ approach is taken.
As a result of sliding window approach, small patches of
edges are ‘captured’ in the sliding window. More than one
patch of edges can be captured into the window. If only one
patch is captured then there is no tangle in the area covered by Fig. 2. Multiple wires of different colors (left image). Blue colored wire
the window. If two or more patches are obtained then there is differentiated from rest of the wires (second image). Red colored wire
differentiated (right image) from three wires (third image).
a chance of a tangle in the nearby area. However, decisions
regarding tangle are taken in subsequent steps. Following
Once the color filtering is done, the image is smoothened
steps are repeated for every window. After patches of edge/s
to remove noise from the image. In the later stages, edge
are captured into the window, contours are traced around those
detection will be carried out. It is therefore, very necessary to
patches. Section V provides the details regarding window
remove noise from the image. During edge detection,
approach and contour tracing.
derivatives of images will be taken. Any noise present in the
Contours developed are a sequence of n - 1 points around
image will get amplified when its derivative is taken [1]. To
the patches. Now first & (n-2)th point, second & (n-3)th i.e. ith
get rid of noise amplification problem, image is blurred [1],
and (n-2-i)th points are considered as pairs. Mid-point of two
using Gaussian blur. In Gaussian smoothing, transformation to
elements of each pair is calculated. Mean of these mid-points
be applied to each and every pixel is calculated using two-
is calculated. A polynomial of degree m, fitting mid-points
dimensional Gaussian function. If x is the horizontal distance
previously calculated, is formed. This process is carried out
with respect to origin, and y is the vertical distance with
for every patch. Now, if more than one patch is present in a
respect to origin, then two-dimensional Gaussian function is
window, point of intersection of polynomials associated with
defined as:
these patches is calculated. Point of intersection gives the
position of tangle i.e. coordinates at which two or more wires
overlap which is nothing but a tangle. Distance of mean of (cid:16)(cid:13)(cid:17) (cid:18)(cid:13) (1)
mid-points from point of intersection, d, is calculated. (cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:3),(cid:5)(cid:6)= (cid:10)(cid:11)
(cid:12)(cid:13)(cid:14)
(cid:15) (cid:13)(cid:19)(cid:13)
Distance, d, is calculated for every patch present in a window. σ2 is variance [2] [3]. A kernel is built from the values
Now, which wire passes over other wire/s is decided.
obtained from Gaussian distribution. Amount of blurring
Section VI explains in detail about contour development, and
produced is proportional to the dimensions of the kernel.
decision making process. Blurred image is obtained by convolving image with the
kernel. New value of a pixel is the weighted average of that
III. PRE-PROCESSING
pixel and its neighbors. Highest weightage is given to the pixel
In some cases, multiple wires each with different color under consideration. Weightage given to the neighboring
may be present. Of these multiple wires only one or some pixels decreases as their distance from the pixel under
wires may be of interest. In such cases, further processing consideration increases. Compared to uniform smoothing,
should be focused on wire/s of interest. For this, wire of Gaussian smoothing is more suitable for the proposed method
interest is differentiated from the other wires based on its because it preserves edges in a more effective manner.
color. Images are acquired from a RGB digital camera. Since Preservation of the boundaries and the edges is essential for
RGB is an additive color model, a wide range of colors are subsequent steps.
reproduced by superimposition (addition) of primary (red,
blue, green) colors. An RGB image having width w and
Image blurring is more useful when tangled object has introduced by Otsu, in which, histogram shape-based image
very rough texture or is made by plying (twisting together thresholding is automatically performed [8]. The algorithm
multiple strands). Fig. 3 shows a rope which is made by assumes that the image to be thresholded contains two classes
twisting together multiple single strands. of pixels or bi-modal histogram. Two classes of pixels
represent background and foreground. The algorithm
calculates the threshold which optimally separates two classes
of pixels such that their combined spread is minimized [9].
Within-class variance is defined as:
(cid:10) (cid:10)
where, (cid:26)(cid:27)(cid:28)(cid:29)(cid:30)(cid:28)(cid:31)(cid:2) (cid:6)= !"(cid:2) (cid:6)(cid:26)"(cid:2) (cid:6)+ !$(cid:2) (cid:6)(cid:26)$(cid:2) (cid:6)
Fig. 3. First image is the original image. Second is the result blurring on the ((cid:15)(cid:9) (3)
first image. Third and fourth images show edges detected in first and second !"(cid:2) (cid:6)= ∑(cid:28))* &(cid:2)'(cid:6)
image respectively.
From the case showed in Fig. 3, it is clear that blurring
T is threshold level. is variance of pixels which are
decreases the number of edges detected. When blurring is not (cid:10)
above threshold, (cid:26) "is(cid:2) th(cid:6)e variance of the pixels which are
applied in case of rough objects, unnecessary & increased (cid:10)
below threshold.(cid:26) "I(cid:2)n te(cid:6)nsity levels range from 0 to N-1.
number of edges would be detected.
Between-class variance is defined as:
IV. EDGE DETECTION AND THRESHOLDING (5)
(cid:10) (cid:10) (cid:10)
After the pre-processing is completed, edge detection is (cid:26),-(cid:29)(cid:27)--(cid:31)(cid:2) (cid:6)= (cid:26) − (cid:26)(cid:27)(cid:28)(cid:29)(cid:30)(cid:28)(cid:31)(cid:2) (cid:6)
carried out on the image. Edge detection is accomplished by where, is the combined variance.
convolving the pre-processed image with the eight Robinson (cid:26)
compass masks. Robinson compass masks have 0, 1, and 2 as For each potential threshold T, following steps are carried out:
their coefficients [4]. Eight Robinson compass masks are
obtained by taking a single a mask and rotating it to eight 1) Pixels are separated into two groups.
different directions, namely South (S), West (W), North (N), 2) Mean of each group is found out.
East (E), South-West (SW), North-East (NE), South-East
3) Difference between the means is found out.
(SE), and North-West (NW) [5] [6]. Table 1 shows eight
4) Number of pixels in one group is multiplied by the
Robinson Compass Masks.
number of pixels in the other group.
TABLE 1: 8 ROBINSON COMPASS MASKS
At optimum threshold level, between-class variance is
−1−2−1 1 2 1 maximized.
(cid:20) 0 0 0(cid:25) (cid:20) 0 0 0(cid:25)
1 0 −1 −1 0 1
(cid:20)2 0 −2(cid:25) (cid:20)−2 0 2(cid:25)
1 (1E ) − 2 −1(W 0) 1
0 −1 −2 −2 −1 0
(cid:20)1 0 −1(cid:25) (cid:20)−1 0 1(cid:25)
2 ( N 1E ) 0 0(N W 1) 2
Fig. 4. First image shows original image. Second image shows the result of
2 1 0 0 1 2 edge detection using N compass and thresholding performed on first image.
(cid:20)1 0 −1(cid:25) (cid:20)−1 0 1(cid:25) Third image shows result of edge detection using E compass mask and
0 −(S1E )− 2 −2(S −W1) 0 thresholding performed on first image. Differences in the edges detected are
clearly visible. Some of the wire overlapping (tangles) occurring in third image
but not in second image are clearly marked by green colored circles.
Each mask is sensitive to edges oriented along only one of the
eight directions [7]. The wire/s forming tangles would be V. WINDOWING AND CONTOUR TRACING
oriented along different directions. Since each mask is
A. Windowing
sensitive to one direction, it helps in developing edge for
certain segments of wire with each mask. Since each one of Now, that the edges are detected and separated from their
the eight masks is convolved with the given image, in all 8 background, we will move on to detect tangles. For detecting
resultant images would be obtained. Following procedure is tangles, we will search for two or more patches of the
carried out for each of the 8 resultant images. thresholded edges and determine if they intersect (and equally,
After edge detection, the image is thresholded to a overlap) when they are extrapolated. Some of the e.g. of
threshold level. Thresholding is done according to the method patches and probable overlaps are shown in Fig. 5. Since
analyzing the whole image at one go will not be fruitful a) (direction + 3) modulo 4. Refer Fig. 7(c).
therefore windowing approach is taken. b) (direction + 6) modulo 8 if direction is odd.
Refer Fig. 7(e). (direction + 7) modulo 8 if
direction is even. Refer Fig. 7(d).
The first pixel whose value is equal to current
pixel is a contour element; P . Value of
direction is updated.
3) Stop if P = P and P = P , else go to step 2.
Cn C1 C(n-1) C0
Pixels starting from P to P constitute a contour.
Fig. 5. Images show patches of detected & thresholded edges. Gaps marked C0 C(n-2)
by circles show position of probable overlap of wires i.e. a probable tangle.
Windowing approach can be explained as follows. A window
of width, w and height, h is considered. Length of the diagonal
is d . Starting from the top-left corner of image, the window is
slide in right direction in a manner similar to raster scan.
Fig. 7. Four-connectivity direction notification (a), eight-connectivity
direction notification (b), pixel neighborhood search sequence in eight-
connectivity (c), pixel neighborhood search sequence in eight-connectivity
Fig. 6. Window and its sliding are shown (left image). Part of the image
(d), pixel search sequence in four-connectivity (e), contour tracing in eight-
captured in the window (right image).
connectivity (dashed lines show pixels tested during the contour tracing) (f).
The image is subdivided into a sequence of horizontal
strips known as ‘scan rows’. The window sweeps/slides VI. POST-PROCESSING AND DECISION MAKING
horizontally left-to-right, then stops when window reaches
horizontal limit of the image and rapidly moves back to the At this stage, we have contour points, starting from P to
left, where it turns back on and sweeps out the next row. P , for each of the contour present in the window. Now,
While the window slides, it ‘captures’ a small part of the following steps are carried out for each of the patches:
whole image. Parts of image ‘captured’ in window are
processed further. Following steps (i.e. contour formation and 1) ith and (n-2-i)th points are paired together. i ranges
post-processing (Section VI)) are performed for each part of
from 0 to . In all, ( ) pairs are obtained.
the image captured by the window. (cid:31)(cid:15)(cid:10) (cid:31)(cid:15)(cid:10)
2) Mid-points (cid:10)of pairs obta(cid:10)ined in step 1 are calculated.
Hence, mid-points will be obtained. Let the
(cid:31)(cid:15)(cid:10)
B. Contour Formation
mid-poin(cid:10)t o f + kth 1 pair be represented by (x k , y k).
For each of the patches ‘captured’ in a window, contours m m
3) Mean of the points obtained in step 2 is calculated.
are traced around them. A contour is a list of points that define
a tr a c c u in rv g e c i o n n t a o n u r i s m a a r g o e u n [ d 1 0 p ] a . t c F h o e l s lo : wing algorithm was used for Let mean be represented by X m = ∑ 0 1 4 2 (cid:13) 5 (cid:13) (cid:17) 3 ./ 0 , Y m =
12(cid:13)
(cid:13) (cid:17)3
12(cid:13)
1) Start to search the image from top-left pixel until a ∑ 04 (cid:13) 5 (cid:17) 3 6/ 0.
pixel, P C0 belonging to a patch (new region) is 4) A 1 p 2 (cid:13)o (cid:13) l (cid:17) y 3 nomial of degree m is fitted to the points
encountered. To store the direction of the previous
obtained in step 2 using Method of Least Squares.
move along the contour from previous move along
Following algorithm is used for determining
the contour to the current contour element, a variable,
optimum value of m:
direction is defined. direction is assigned following
values:
a) Take m = 5.
a) If the contour is detected in four-connectivity,
b) If the polynomial of degree m fits the data,
direction = 0. Refer Fig. 7(a).
go to step d, else go to step c.
b) If the contour is detected in eight-connectivity,
c) If m = 1 go to step d, else decrease m by 1
direction = 7. Refer Fig. 7(b).
and go to step b.
2) The 3 by 3 neighborhood of the pixel under
d) End.
consideration is searched in counter-clockwise
direction. Start the search at the pixel positioned in
This algorithm is used to avoid polynomial wiggle [11].
the direction:
Now, point of intersection of the polynomials found in 4 B. Tools
is calculated. Since patches are associated the wires, point of
intersection safely provides position of the tangle. Distance, d j , MATLAB 7.10.0.499, OpenCV 2.4.2 library, Visual
of mean of mid-points of jth patch, from point of intersection is Studio 2010, and ABB RobotStudio 5.15 were used in
calculated. Now, which wire passes over other wire/s at the carrying out experiments.
position of tangle is to be decided. Patch corresponding to the
wire overlapping other wires is nearest to the point of
intersection (refer Fig. 5). Therefore patch whose C. Edge Detection and Thresholding Results
corresponding d is least among all the patches present in a
window is taken (decided) to be patch belonging wire which Images were pre-processed as described in Section III to
overlaps the other wire/s. A confidence level is associated remove noise. Level of blurring used for outdoor images is
with every decision made. Confidence level is equal to the higher than that used for indoor images.
ratio of d - d to d (refer Section V. A for d ). Remember the
whole process is repeated 8 times, each time with different
kernel (starting from convolution with different kernel for
edge detection). So, there will be at most 8 decisions
(assuming a tangle is detected in every iteration), each with a
confidence level, for a tangle. Decision with the highest
confidence level is chosen as the final decision.
VII. EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS
A dataset named TANGLED-100, consisting of images
tangled linear objects was introduced. The method presented
in this paper was tested on TANGLED-100 dataset. Images in
the dataset were acquired from a digital RGB camera. The
dataset can be subdivided into two classes on the basis of the
size of images: first class contained 70 images of size 640 x
480 pixels and the other class contained 30 images of size
1280x720 pixels. Images in the dataset have the following
variations among themselves: (c) (f)
Fig. 9. (a) (b) (c) are indoor images. (d) (e) (f) are outdoor images. (a) (d) pre-
• Images were acquired in different environments; processed images, (b) (e) edges detected, (c) (f) images (b) (e) are
thresholded.
indoor and outdoor therefore have different levels of
lighting and different background. D. Windowing and Contour Formation Results
• Images contain different tangled objects such as
wires, ropes, pipes/hoses. Thickness & length of
these objects also varied.
• Multiple objects of different colors are present in
images.
The dataset will be available from
purposes.
Fig. 8. Indoor image of a tangled wire (a), outdoor image of tangled
pipes/hoses (b), indoor image of a tangled rope (c).
TABLE 2: ACCURACY OF ALGORITHM
TP TN FP FN Accuracy
0.479 0.270 0.175 0.075 0.749
F. Robotic Application Simulation
Fifteen basic robotic simulations were carried out using
ABB RobotStudio 5.15. In these simulations, arm of IRB1600
Type A robot was made to travel to the position of the tangle.
Fig. 10. Window sliding over the image (first column), patches captured by VIII. CONCLUSION
sliding window (second column), and contours traced around patches (marked
In this paper, a method for detecting tangles, determining
in red color) (third column). Since two patches are captured in the last row, it
indicates a possibility of tangle in the nearby area, which indeed is the case. position of the tangle, and which wire passes over other wire
at the tangle was proposed. The tangled objects we considered
E. Post-processing and Decision Making Results were wires, ropes, pipes/hoses, threads. The proposed method
was tested on TANGLED-100 dataset, which was introduced
with this method. The data set contained images of different
objects having different properties and placed in different
environments. Accuracy of 74.9% was achieved with this
method. Finally, robot simulations were carried out to
demonstrate the usage of this method in the field of robotics.
In this paper, it is shown that it is important to use Robinson
masks for edge detection and take a windowing approach. The
information which is output from this method can be used by
personal robots such as the PR2 by Willow Garage for
untangling tangled objects. This can be very useful in assisting
people as well as in industrial application. However,
parallelizing this method can make this method faster.