1v0208020/sc:viXra
Using the DIFF Command
for Natural Language Processing
Masaki Murata and Hitoshi Isahara
Communications Research Laboratory,
2-2-2 Hikaridai, Seika-cho, Soraku-gun,Kyoto, 619-0289, Japan,
{murata,isahara}@crl.go.jp,
Abstract. Diff is a software program that detects differences between
two data sets and is useful in natural language processing. This paper
showsseveralexamplesoftheapplicationofdiff.Theyincludethedetec-
tionofdifferencesbetweentwodifferentdatasets,extractionofrewriting
rules,mergingoftwodifferentdatasets,andtheoptimalmatchingoftwo
different data sets. Since diff comes with any standard UNIXsystem, it
is readily available and veryeasy touse. Ourstudies showed that diff is
a practical tool for research intonatural language processing.
1 Introduction
Diff, a software program that detects differences between two sets of data, has
numerous applications in natural language processing. In this paper, we first
describe diff and then give several examples of how diff can be used in natural
language processing. These examples include the detection of differences, the
merging of two sets of different data, the extraction of rewriting rules, and the
best matching of two different sets of data.
We summarize the value of this paper below.
– Since diff is one of the basic programs that comes with UNIX systems, it is
readilyavailableandveryeasytouse.Asthispapershows,diff isalsoappli-
cable to various kinds of studies in the field of natural language processing.
This combination makes the program particularly valuable.
– Paraphrasinghasbeenbecome anactiveareaofstudy[2].Section3.2shows
that we can use diff to examine the differences between a spoken language
and the corresponding written language and in acquiring the rules for the
transformations between the spoken and written languages. Diff is not only
useful for such studies, but is also applicable to other kinds of studies in
the field of paraphrasing. This paper will provide a basis for such further
application of diff.
– In general, diff is used to detect differences between two data. However, it
canalsobeusedtomergedataandtomatchdataoptimally.Section4covers
1 This papar is an English rough translation of ourpapers [1,3].
several interesting studies of the use of diff in merging and best-matching
tasks.Theseexamplesarethealignmentofapaperandacorrespondingpre-
sentation and a question-answering system. This paper thus has originality
in terms of topics researched and approach to the research.
2 Diff and Mdiff
Inthis section,we describe diff. Diff is asoftwareprogramofUnix systems that
is usedto comparefiles.The programdisplaysline-by-line differencesbetweena
pair of text files while retaining the order of the data. For example, suppose we
have the following two files:
File 1: File 2:
school. university.
When we givethese data to diff, the difference is displayedinthe followingway.
< school.
> university.
Diffhasa-Doption,whichisveryuseful.Whenweusediff withthisoption,
common parts as well as differences are displayed. That is, files can be merged
byusingthisoption.However,theoutputofdiff -Disinaformwhichisusedfor
C preprocessorsuchas“Ifdef” andthis is difficult forpeople to read.Therefore,
in this paper, we give the differences in the following way:
(The parts which only exist in the first file)
(The parts which only exist in the second file)
where,“;===== begin =====”indicatesthebeginningofthedifferences,“;====
indicates the boundary between the two sets of data. In this paper, we refer to
diff in the case where the files are mergedby using the -D optionand the differ-
ences are displayed in the above form as mdiff.
Whenwegiveourearlierpairoffilestomdiff,weobtainthefollowingresult.
school.
university.
“I go to” matchs while “school” and “university” are differences. The output of
mdiff iseasytoexamineandunderstandbecauseitalsodisplays,unlike diff,the
common parts.
We can reproduce the two original files from the output of mdiff. When we
take the common part and the upper part of the differences, we obtain the
content of the first file. When we take the common part and the lower part of
the differences,we obtainthe contentofthe secondfile.We canreproduceallof
the original data in this way.
Since mdiff only displays the common part of the data once, it is able to
reduce the amount of data. Since it is possible to fully reproduce the original
data from mdiff’s output, we are able to say that mdiff compresses the data
while retaining the original information.
Since the output of diff is difficult to read and the output of mdiff contains
allinformationoutputbydiff, weusemdiff forourexplanationsinthe following
sections. In the following sections, let’s look at some actual examples of the
application of mdiff to natural language processing.
3 Detecting differences and acquiring transformation
Inthissection,wedescribethe studies whereweusedmdiff todetectdifferences
and then acquired transformation rules from the differences. In more concrete
terms, we give the following two examples.
– Detection of differences between the outputs of multiple systems
– Examination of differences to acquire transformation rules
3.1 Detection of differences between the outputs of multiple
We have been using multiple morphological analyzers to improve the quality of
the results of morphologicalanalysis.
Suppose that we use two morphological analyzers to analyze “We like ap-
ples.”; the results are as follows.
System 1 System 2
We Noun We Noun
like Verb like Preposition
apples Noun apples Noun
The word, “like” is ambiguous in terms of part of speech (POS) and can take
“Verb”or“Preposition”.ThePOSof“like”intheabovesentenceis“Verb”and
theanalysisbySystem2waswrong.Here,whenwegivethetworesultstomdiff,
we obtain the following results.
like Preposition
apples Noun
Mdiff makes it easy for us to detect differences between the results producedby
multiple systems.Inthis case,wenotice thatthere aredifferences inthe line for
“like”. Here, we determine beforehand that a worker corrects the outputs and
judges which is correct when such differences are detected. When the output of
the first system is correct he does nothing and when the output of the second
system is correcthe marks the beginning of “;—————–” with an “x”.When
wedoso,wecanautomaticallyselectthebetterresultofeachdifferencefromthe
results marked by the worker.We simply delete the lower part of the difference
where there is no “x” and delete the upper part of the difference when there is
an“x”.As a result,weproduce amoreaccurateoverallresultthaneither ofthe
two original results. There are many cases when both parts of a difference are
incorrect. In such cases, we manually rewrite the data correctly above “;———
——–”.
When we use this method, the only incorrect data that is not corrected are
the data on which both the systems have performed exactly the same wrong
analysis. Many errors can thus be corrected. What we want to say here is that
we must prepare multiple systems that have different characteristics. If we use
two systems that often produce the same wrong analysis, we will fail to correct
a large number of errors.
Diff3, which is another unix program, is available for analysing the outpus
of three systems. Diff3 detects differences among three files.
Although we have given an example of morphological analysis, we can also
use mdiff to detect differences between the results of other forms of analysis as
long as the results are expressed in a line-by-line form.
Although we have described a study where we detected differences between
the outputs of multiple systems, we are also able to detect and correcterrors in
tagged corpora by comparing the tagged corpora and the results of analysis of
the corpora by a certain system.2
3.2 Examining differences and acquiring transformation rules
Inthissection,wedescribeourstudyoftheuseofmdifftodetectdifferencesbe-
tweena spokenlanguageandthe correspondingwritten language.In this study,
we usedthe alignmentbetweendata onthe spokenlanguageandonthe written
language to examine the differences between the spoken and written languages
on the basis of the results of mdiff. We thus acquired rules for transforming the
2 There are studies on thecorrection of errors in tagged corpora [5].
Table 1. Examples of written data and the corresponding data in spoken form
Thewritten-language sample Thespoken-language sample
paper, like
describe describe
meaning the
sort. meaning
In sort.
general, In
sorting general,
is sorting
performed is
spoken language to the written language along with the inverse transformation
rules.We used presentationsat academicconferences as examples of the spoken
language and used papers which had the same content as the presentations as
examples of the writtten language.
Forexample,wesupposedthatdatainthe spokenandwrittenlanguagesare
givenasinTable1.3 Thedatainthe table aretransformedsothateachline has
onewordbeforeweapplymdiff.Applyingmdiff tothedataproducesthe results
showninTable2.Byextractingthe differencesfromtheseresults,weobtainthe
results shown in Table 3.
The results show us that “uh” is inserted in the spoken language and that
“performed” can, in this case, be paraphrased as “done”. We can use mdiff to
detect differences between the spoken language and the written language and
thenexaminethemlinguistically.Wecanalsoconsiderthedetecteddifferencesas
rulesforthetransformationbetweenwrittenandspokenlanguages.Forexample,
the occurrence of “uh” can be regarded as indicating a rule that we may insert
“uh” into the written-language data as part of transforming it into the spoken
language. The difference in terms of whether “performed” or “done” is used
can be regarded as a rule that we transform “performed” to “done” when we
transform data from the written to the spoken language. We thus find that we
are able to use mdiff to detect the transformation rules.
Inthissection,weuseddatainthewrittenandspokenlanguage.However,we
canstudyavarietyofdatainasimilarway.Forexample,whenweapplymdiffto
writtentextsbeforeandafterspellingandgrammararechecked,wecanfindout
3 AlthoughwehavegivenEnglish sentencesinthetable,weactuallyperformed these
experiments on Japanese-language materials.
Table 2. The result of applying mdiff to the written-language sample and the
corresponding spoken-language sample
paper, meaning
we sort.
;—————– In
Today general,
I’d sorting
(Contined in theright-hand column) by
Table 3. Extraction of differences
Thewritten-language dataThespoken-language data
Inthis paper, we Today I’d like to
performed done
howweshouldmodifythesentencestoeliminatespellingandgrammaticalerrors
andthusacquirerulesforcheckingspellingandgrammar.Whenweusemdiffon
texts and the results of their automatic summarization, we can clearly see how
the texts were summarized and can thus acquire the rules used in automatic
summarization. In other cases of paired textual data, too, we will be able to
apply mdiff to examine the data in the various ways that such pairs can be
obtained and to obtain the rules for transformation.
4 The merging and best matching of two different sets of
In this section, we describe studies of the use of diff’s function of optimally
merging data.4 We describe the following two examples.
– The alignment of presentations and corresponding papers
– Aquestion-answeringsystemusingthefunctionoffindingthethebestmatch
4 In diff,best matchingis performed bymaximizing theextentof thecommon parts.
<Chapter 1>
(thecontentsof Chapter1)
</Chapter 1>
<Chapter 2>
(thecontentsof Chapter2)
</Chapter 2>
<Chapter 3>
(thecontentsof Chapter3)
</Chapter 3>
Fig.1. Structure in the paper
;=====begin ===== (contentof thepresentation only)
(content of the paperonly) (contentof thepaper and presentation)
(content of the presentation only) </Chapter 1>
(content of the paperand presentation) (contentof thepaper only)
(content of the paperonly) (contentof thepresentation only)
(Contined in theright-hand column)
Fig.2. Results of applying mdiff to a paper and a corresponding presentation
4.1 Alignment of a paper with the corresponding presentation
Inthissection,wealignapaperwiththecorrespondingpresentation[6].Thepa-
perandcorrespondingpresentationisthesameexampleaswasusedindescribing
the acquisition of the rules for transformation from written to spoken-language
data (Section 3.2). The presentation was made at an academic conference and
the papercorrespondsto this presentation.When we areable to aligneachpart
ofa presentationwith acorrespondingpartof the paper,this formofalignment
isveryuseful.Forexample,whenwelistentoapresentation,weareabletorefer
to the part of the paper that corresponds to the part of we are now listening.
When we read a paper, we are able to refer to the part of the presentation that
corresponds to the part of the paper we are now reading [6]. In this section, we
consider the use of mdiff to align a paper with the corresponding presentation.
Here,let’strytodeterminethepartsofthepresentationtowhicheachchap-
ter ofthe papercorrespondsbyusing mdiff. We supposethat the contentis laid
outinthesameorderinthe paperandinthe presentation.Inadvance,weplace
symbols such as <Chapter 1>, as shown in Figure 1, into the paper. This is so
thatweareeasilyabletorecognizethe chaptersofthe paper.Byapplyingmdiff
to the data set that consists of a presentationafter both have been transformed
sothateachline hasoneword,weobtainedthe resultsshowninFigure2.Next,
<Chapter 1>
(content of the presentation only)
(content of the paperand presentation)
(content of the presentation only)
</Chapter 1>
<Chapter 2>
(content of the presentation only)
Fig.3. Results of insertion of information on sections in a presentation
we obtained the results shownin Figure 3 by eliminating the upper parts of the
differences, i.e., those that correspond to the paper, and leaving symbols such
as <Chapter 1> in place. The symbols such as <Chapter 1> are only inserted
inthe dataofthe presentation.We arethenable to recognizethe chapterofthe
paper that corresponds with a given part of the presentation.
To put this simply, we place information to indicate chapters in the data of
presentations. We then use the merging function of mdiff to match the parts of
the paper and presentation. Then, by eliminating the content of the paper, we
are left with information on the chapters. We can easily align a paper with a
corresponding presentation at the level of chapters by using mdiff.
4.2 A question-answering system using best matching
In this section, we describe our question-answering system that utilizes mdiff’s
best-matching function [2,4].
Aquestion-answeringsystemreceivesaquestionandoutputs ananswer.For
example, when “Where is the capital of Japan?” is given, it returns “Tokyo”.
When we consider now much knowledge is in written natural language form,
we see that the system only has to match a given question with a sentence (a
knowledge sentence) that includes the knowledge then select the word in the
sentencethatcorrespondstotheinterrogativepronounofthe questionsentence.
Forexample,inthecaseofthepreviousquestion,thesystemdetectsthisknowl-
edgesentenceinaknowledgedatabase:“TokyoisthecapitalofJapan.”“Tokyo”
is output as the answer since corresponds to the interrogative pronoun in the
sentence. Here, we consider the use of mdiff in answering questions.
Firstly,wetransformtheinterrogativepronouninthe questionsentenceinto
X and change “?” into “.” at the end of the sentence. We then obtain “X is the
capital of Japan.”. We thus obtain “Tokyo is the capital of Japan.” from the
knowledge base. We obtain the results in Figure 4 (a) by applying mdiff to the
two sentences. We consider the part that is paired with X in the differences as
the answer and correctly obtain “Tokyo”.
Eveniftherearedifferencesbetweenthecomparedsentences,wecanstilluse
mdiff to correctly extract the answer.For example, suppose that the knowledge
sentence is “Tokyo is the capital in Japan.” In this case, the result of mdiff is
Tokyo Tokyo
capital capital
Japan.
(a) Case 1 (b) Case 2
Fig.4. Results of mdiff in the question-answering system
as in Figure 4 (b). Although the number of differences increased, the part that
corresponds to X remains “Tokyo” and the correct answer has been detected.
The question-answering system we have proposed repeats to transform the
questionsentenceandknowledgesentencesothatthetwosentencesareassimilar
as possible. It then extracts the answer by matching the sentences when they
are at this point. Since we use the similarity between two sentences in that
time, we have to define the degree of the similarity between sentences. Since we
can recognize the common parts and the different parts by using mdiff, we can
calculate the degree of similarity as (the number of characters in the common
part)/(the number of all characters). Here, if we suppose that we have a rule
for transforming “in” to “of”, we match the data after transforming “Tokyo is
the capital in Japan.” to “Tokyo is the capital of Japan.” and we are able to
obtain the answer more reliably by decreasing the number of differences.
5 Conclusion
Inthispaper,wedescribealotofexamplesoftheuseofdiffinvariousproblems
of natural language processing.In Section 3.1, we describe how we apply diff to
asystemthatcombinesmultiplesystemsandthusobtainhigherprecisionsthan
fromanyofindividualsystems.Studies oncombinationofsystemsareverywell
known. We describe how such combination can easily be performed by diff. In
Section3.2,weshowedthatdiffiseasilyabletoexaminethedifferencesbetween
aspokenandwrittenlanguageandacquirerulesforthe transformationbetween
5 Here,weusemdifftocalculatethedegreeofsimilarityofthesentences.Mdiffisalso
useful in this way.
the spoken and written language. We handled the paraphrasing of written lan-
guage into spoken language. However, the study on paraphrasing covers a wide
range: automatic extraction of compressed sentences, sentence polishing-up to
modify sentencescorrectly,andtransformationsfromdifficultsentencesto plain
sentences. In these studies, too, it will be easy to apply diff to various forms of
examination and to the extraction of various transformation rules. This paper
will become a basis for studies of paraphrasing,an areain which there has been
increasingactivity.InSection4,weshowedexamplesofthemergingofdataand
the optimal matching of data. Since diff is generally used to detect differences,
Section 4, which shows applications of diff to merging and matching, presents a
newandoriginalapproach.Inthesection,weshowedthatitiseasytoapplydiff
tointerestingstudiesoftwokinds,thealignmentofapaperwithacorresponding
presentation and a question-answering system.
In this paper, we have described many examples of the application of diff
to natural language processing. We hope that diff will be applied to an ever-
widening range of studies.
Acknowlegement
We were given data for the experiments on alignment of a paper with a corre-
sponding presentation by Kiyotaka Uchimoto of the Communications Research
Laboratory.