Vector Symbolic Architectures Answer Jackendoff s Challenges
for Cognitive Neuroscience
Ross W. Gayler (r.gayler@mbox.com.au)
Abstract Jackendoff's challenges are an attempt to counter this
risk by focussing attention on functionality that he sees
Jackendoff (2002) posed four challenges that linguistic as central to all linguistic phenomena. The need for
combinatoriality and rules of language present to theories these challenges is shown by the lack of connectionist
of brain function. The essence of these problems is the
models able to deal with them successfully and the fact
question of how to neurally instantiate the rapid
that, despite this lack of success, the challenges “have
construction and transformation of the compositional
not been widely recognized [as such] in the cognitive
structures that are typically taken to be the domain of
symbolic processing. He contended that typical
neuroscience community” (Jackendoff, 2002, p. 58).
connectionist approaches fail to meet these challenges Feldman (2002) broadcast these challenges to the neural
and that the dialogue between linguistic theory and network modelling community via the Connectionists
cognitive neuroscience will be relatively unproductive Mailing List. The few responses he received were
until the importance of these problems is widely unable to convince Feldman that any standard
recognised and the challenges answered by some connectionist techniques would meet Jackendoff’s
technical innovation in connectionist modelling. This
challenges.
paper claims that a little-known family of connectionist
The challenges are not exclusively linguistic and are
models (Vector Symbolic Architectures) are able to meet
Jackendoff’s challenges.
arguably fundamental to all cognition. They are “not
something that can simply be disregarded by ignoring
Introduction language, … but they certainly come to the fore in
dealing with the linguistic phenomena that linguists
Jackendoff (2002) has posed four linguistic challenges
deal with every day” (Jackendoff, 2002, p. 67).
for cognitive neuroscience. He holds that language is a
Vector Symbolic Architectures (VSAs) are a little-
mental phenomenon and that linguistic functionality
known class of connectionist models that can directly
must be neurally instantiated. However, “although a
implement functions usually taken to form the kernel of
great deal is known about functional localization of
symbolic processing (Gayler, 1998; Kanerva, 1997;
various aspects of language in the brain … nothing at
Plate, 1994; Rachkovskij & Kussul 2001). They are an
all is known about how neurons instantiate the details of
enhancement of tensor product variable binding
rules of grammar ” (Jackendoff, 2002, p. 58).
This lack of progress may be due to the cognitive networks (Smolensky, 1990). Like tensor product
neuroscientists’ choice of tools. “The term networks, VSAs can create and manipulate recursively-
connectionism has become synonymous with a single structured representations in a natural and direct
kind of network model [(the multilayer perceptron)] … connectionist fashion without requiring training.
that uses a learning algorithm known as back- However, unlike tensor product networks, VSAs afford
propagation” (Marcus, 2001, p. xii). In formulating his a practical basis for implementations because they
challenges, Jackendoff draws heavily on Marcus, who require only fixed dimension vector representations.
argues that multilayer perceptrons are incapable of The fact that VSAs relate directly, without training, to
symbol manipulation. Marcus stresses that he is not an both simple, practical, vector implementations and core
anti-connectionist and “suggest[s] that adequate models symbolic processing functionality suggests that they
of cognition most likely lie in a different, less explored would provide a fruitful connectionist basis for the
part of the space of possible [connectionist] models” implementation of cognitive functionality.
The lack of progress by cognitive neuroscientists may The approach taken in this paper is constrained by the
also be due to attempting to solve the wrong problems, required brevity. Jackendoff's analysis of the linguistic
because of holding naive views of linguistic phenomena challenges and the inadequacy of typical cognitive
(Jackendoff, 2002, chap. 3, notes 17 & 21). This neuroscience models is accepted at face value. The
apparent naivete may be a conscious research strategy, range and properties of VSAs are discussed briefly.
to start simple, with the intent that current solutions will The presentation of VSAs and their comparison with
scale up to ultimate needs. However, this strategy must other connectionist approaches is minimal, as both
fail if the initially chosen problems are not actually core topics are adequately documented elsewhere. Then I
to the ultimate problems. deal with each of Jackendoff's challenges in turn,
showing how they are answered by VSAs.
Vector Symbolic Architectures The currently available VSAs employ three types of
operation on vectors: a multiplication-like operator, an
The name “Vector Symbolic Architectures” has been
addition-like operator, and a permutation-like operator.
invented to cover a family of related approaches. These
approaches are easily implemented as connectionist The precise choice for each operator varies by VSA.
systems and share a commitment to algebraic Gayler (1998) and Plate (1997) compare the
operations on distributed representations over high- implementations of some VSAs. The multiplication-
dimensional vectors. Conceptually, all these like operation is used to associate or bind vectors. The
approaches are descended from Smolensky's (1990) addition-like operation is used to superpose vectors or
tensor product variable binding networks. Smolensky add them to a set. The permutation-like operation is
demonstrated that variable/value binding and the used to quote or protect vectors from the other
representation and manipulation of complex nested operations.
structures using connectionist methods is possible. For the sake of concreteness, in examples I will use
His tensor product approach relies on algebraic the MAP (Multiply, Add, Permute) Coding scheme
operations with simple connectionist implementations. described in Gayler (1998). In MAP Coding,
This results in structural manipulation occurring in a elementwise multiplication is used to implement the
single pass through the system, thus avoiding the need binding of vectors; elementwise addition is used to
for prolonged learning (unlike multilayer perceptrons implement the superposition of vectors; and
with back-propagation). Unfortunately, tensor product permutation of the elements is used to implement
implementations are thoroughly impractical because the quotation of vectors. These operations can be used to
vector dimensionality increases exponentially with the compose, decompose, and manipulate complex
depth of the structures to be represented. Consequently, structures without requiring any training (Gayler,
tensor product binding has been little used in 1998). Analogous descriptions of other VSAs can be
subsequent research. found in Kanerva (1997), Plate (1994), and Rachkovskij
VSAs (Gayler, 1998; Kanerva, 1997; Plate, 1994; & Kussul (2001).
Rachkovskij & Kussul, 2001) retain the advantages of The description of VSAs has so far been at the vector
tensor product binding while avoiding the problem of representation level, being purely in terms of the
increasing vector dimensionality. In all connectionist content of vectors. Corresponding to each operation
systems, entities are represented by vectors. (The there is a representational architecture primitive. For
activity levels of a set of connectionist units are example, to implement binding there would be a layer
construed mathematically as a vector.) In tensor of connectionist units taking two inputs each and
product binding, the representation of the association computing the product of those inputs. These
(or binding) of two entities is created as the outer architectural primitives are combined in some fixed
product of the vectors representing the two entities. circuit to yield a complete representational architecture.
Thus, if the entity vectors are of dimensionality n, the The cognitive architecture level deals with how a
outer product will be of dimensionality n2. VSAs cognitive problem is represented in terms of vector
overcome this problem of increasing dimensionality by representations and prior knowledge in order to obtain
applying a function to the n2 elements of the outer the desired behaviour from a given representational
product to yield a resultant vector of dimensionality n. architecture.
Thus all structures, whether atomic or complex, are
represented by vectors of the same dimensionality. Challenge 1: The Massiveness of the
The application of VSAs to cognitive problems is Binding Problem
arguably more complex than the application of
conventional multilayer perceptrons with back-
Jackendoff’s first challenge arises from the observation
that linguistic representations must be composed from
propagation. Three separate levels of description are
component representations. “The need for combining
required. These levels are: the vector representation,
independent bits into a single coherent percept has been
the representational architecture and the cognitive
recognized in the theory of vision under the name of the
architecture. This paper, like other papers on VSAs,
binding problem” (Jackendoff, 2002, p. 59). The
deals primarily with the vector representation level and
typical presentation of the binding problem in vision is
only touches on the representational architecture to the
given in terms of associating attributes with an object,
minimum extent necessary. The contention is that
for example, representing an object as both red and
VSAs examined at these levels are manifestly better square. The challenge in this problem becomes more
suited to cognitive tasks than the connectionist obvious when there is more than one object, for
alternatives and that the extension of the analyses example, a red square and a blue circle. It is clear that a
through the representational and cognitive architecture mechanism is needed to ensure that the correct
levels can be reasonably expected as a consequence of attributes are associated with each object. Nonetheless,
the ongoing VSA research program. the typical presentation of the problem is given in terms
of only a few objects and attributes. Jackendoff then blindness of binding to the contents of the vectors to be
shows that the binding problem is much larger in bound is that the entities to be bound may be composite
linguistics. structures in their own right. This allows the
Jackendoff refers repeatedly to the example sentence construction of complex recursive structures (Plate,
“The little star's beside a big star” (2002, p. 5). He 1994; Smolensky, 1990).
gives a representation of the structure encoded in the The vector representation level of VSAs clearly has
sentence on the phonological, syntactic, semantic/ the capability to deal, in principle, with the binding
conceptual, and spatial levels (fig. 1.1). My informal problem. The representational architecture primitives
count of this structure shows approximately 130 tokens have the required characteristics of speed and ability to
and 160 relations between tokens. The number of cope with novelty. It is trivially easy to construct a
bindings involved in the composition of the structure representational architecture that implements a fixed
corresponding to this simple sentence is obviously compositional template. However, there is no currently
orders of magnitude larger than in the typical visual available representational architecture and cognitive
example of binding. architecture that implements fully variable, input driven
There are two other aspects of the binding problem composition. My current research (Gayler & Wales,
that must be mentioned: novelty and speed. Although 2000) is aimed at this objective.
the individual components at the lowest level will be Connectionist recurrent associative memories (e.g.
familiar, the total composite will frequently be novel. Anderson, Silverstein, Ritz, & Jones, 1977) work by
Furthermore, this novel composite must be constructed creating attractors corresponding to each of the items to
in the time it takes to comprehend a single sentence. be remembered. My research aims to create an
Thus, approaches relying on extensive training to enhanced recurrent associative memory that has
construct each composite structure are implausible. attractors corresponding to novel, valid compositions of
familiar items. Such a memory would be able to
Response 1 recognise novel composites by retrieving the
Binding in MAP Coding is implemented as the components and generating mappings between them. A
elementwise product of the vectors to be bound. similar approach, not based on VSAs, has already been
bind(a,b) = a*b successfully demonstrated in the visual domain
Unbinding in VSAs is implemented as the binding of (Arathorn, 2002).
the inverse of the cue to the trace.
unbind(cue, trace) = bind(inverse(cue), trace) Challenge 2: The Problem of 2
These functions yield the desired behaviour for binding
Put simply, this challenge asks how multiple instances
and unbinding in that a cue can be used to retrieve
of the same token are instantiated. In terms of the
components from a bound composite.
example sentence: How are the “little star” and “big
unbind(a, bind(a,b)) = b
star” instantiated so that they are both stars, yet
unbind(b, bind(a,b)) = a
distinguishable?
The mathematical details of binding and unbinding in
VSAs and the extension to noisy cues and traces can be
Response 2
found in Plate (1994) and Kanerva (1997).
In MAP Coding (Gayler, 1998) and Spatter Coding In VSAs, superposition (implemented by the addition-
(Kanerva, 1997) each vector is its own inverse with like operator) is used to represent multiple items in the
respect to binding same representational space (over the same set of
connectionist units). The primitives at the
bind(a,a) = a*a = 1
representational architecture level can be used to add
and no separate inverse function is required. In this
items to a superposition and operate on a set of
case, the multiplication-like operation can be construed
superposed items simultaneously (Kanerva, 1997; Plate,
as implementing a number of functions (binding,
1994).
unbinding, and others), depending on the relationship
In VSAs, identical vector values can only be kept
between the vectors being multiplied (Gayler & Wales,
distinct by representing them in separate parts of the
2000).
representational architecture. That is, in a given
Binding is implemented at the representational
representational space (a set of connectionist units) only
architecture level as a simple primitive: a layer of
vector values exist. A superposition of the same vector
connectionist units computing the elementwise product
with itself is merely a rescaling of that vector, not a
of the inputs. The binding occurs in a single pass
representation of two distinct entities.
through the units as a consequence of the algebraic
star + star = 2 star
relationship between the inputs and outputs. Thus, it is
In order for multiple instances to be represented
fast and oblivious to the novelty or familiarity of the
simultaneously in a superposition those instances must
items to be bound. Another consequence of the
be distinct. In the external world, the little star is
distinct from the big star by virtue of (among other vector representations and thus be indistinguishable,
things) the difference in size. This difference can be which seems quite reasonable.
captured by representing each star with a composite Construction of a representational architecture to
structure that includes the size attribute. If the implement the make-frame function is trivial. This
composite representations are distinct they can be architecture consists of only one permutation operator
superposed without losing their identities. and one binding operator.
At the vector representation level, superposition is a
similarity preserving operation, whereas binding is a Challenge 3: The Problem of Variables
similarity destroying operation (where the similarity of
The third challenge arises from the productivity of
two vectors is measured by their dot product).
language. Language users are able to recognise and
(a + b) . a > 0 generate an infinite variety of utterances using only
(a * b) . a = 0 finite resources. This productivity is construed as
If we were to encode the representation of each star as arising from the use of variables; placeholders which
the binding of a size token with the star token, the may contain arbitrary values (Jackendoff, 2002, p. 64).
representations of the two stars would be dissimilar. A rule of a grammar can be construed as a template
little . big = 0 with variables. When those variables are instantiated,
(little * star) . (big * star) = 0 the remainder of the template relates their values to
These two vectors (little*star and big*star) may be each other. Thus, a rule can be seen as a mechanism for
safely superposed without losing their identities. constructing or recognising a composite structure, and
Unfortunately, this naive encoding scheme does not the variables of the rule as markers for the components
completely solve the problem of representing multiple to be productively replaced.
instances. Consider what happens when we want to The variables in rules are generally “typed”. That is,
represent a little star and a red star using the same the set of values with which a variable may be
encoding scheme: instantiated must be constrained. The type of a variable
(little * star) + (red * star) = (little + red) * star is the constraint on its possible values. Traditionally,
There is nothing in the encoding to differentiate
rules are seen as quite distinct from the structures that
between two stars, one little and one red, and one little
they operate on and types are annotations on variables
red star.
in rules. However, this distinction between rules and
One way to overcome this problem is to use a more
structures can be erased. In a thoroughly lexicalised
frame-like representation with role:filler pairs. The two
grammar, the information in rules is expressed as
stars could be represented abstractly as:
structural fragments (like the structures operated on by
{frame-1 is-a:star size:little}
the rules) which are combined by “the only procedural
{frame-2 is-a:star colour:red}
rule … UNIFY (‘clip’ structures together)” (Jackendoff,
with corresponding vector representations:
2002, p. 182). In such a grammar, the compatibility
frame-1 * (is-a*star + size*little)
constraints (types on variables) can be captured in the
= frame-1*is-a*star + frame-1*size*little
structure of the fragments.
frame-2 * (is-a*star + colour*red)
Response 3
= frame-2*is-a*star + frame-2*colour*red
When these two representations are superposed the Smolensky (1990) demonstrated that tensor product
properties of the stars are kept separate. connectionist systems can implement variables. VSAs
inherit this capability. Instantiation of a variable can be
This encoding begs the question of the origin of the
implemented by binding a vector representing the
frame identity tokens (frame-1 and frame-2). A good
variable with a vector representing the value. The value
solution to this problem is to calculate the frame
can be retrieved from the variable by probing the
identity as the permutation of the frame contents
binding with the identity of the variable as a cue.
(Gayler, 1998).
unbind(variable, bind(variable, value))
make-frame(a) = bind(P(a), a)
= variable * variable * value
where P() is the permutation-like operator. Then the
little star is represented as:
Note that there is nothing special about the vector
make-frame(is-a*star + size*little)
representing the identity of the variable. It is just
= P(is-a*star + size*little)*(is-a*star + size*little)
another vector and could as easily be the representation
= P(is-a*star + size*little)*is-a*star
of a complex structure as the representation of an
+ P(is-a*star + size*little)*size*little
atomic token. This allows complex structures to be
That is, each role:filler pair is bound with every other
interpreted as overlapping networks of variable/value
role:filler pair in the same frame, thus capturing the
bindings, for example:
holistic nature of the frame as an entity. Note that
frames with identical contents would have identical
Smolensky has used the traditional, imperative incompatible with gradual strengthening of synaptic
programming language interpretation of a variable as a connectivity.
location to hold a value. However, there is an
alternative interpretation of the concept of a variable Response 4
that is based on declarative programming languages and Jackendoff has cast this problem as arising from the
is more congenial to constraint-based grammar difference in physical implementation of working
formalisms (Copestake, 2002). This interpretation memory and long-term memory. I recast this problem
treats variables as targets for substitution. This as arising from differences at the vector representation
interpretation can also be implemented with VSAs. level. In typical connectionist systems, working
A substitution may be represented as the binding of memory items are represented as vectors (of
the representations to be substituted for each other activations) and long-term memory items are
(Gayler, 2000). represented as matrices (of synaptic connectivities).
make-substitution(a, b) = bind(a, b) The crucial difference here is not the physical
The substitution may be applied to a structure by implementation (activations versus connectivities), but
binding the substitution with the structure. the logical form of the representations (vectors versus
apply-substitution(substitution, structure) matrices). Of course, the synaptic matrices can be
= bind(substitution, structure) reinterpreted as vectors, but they will be of different
dimensionality to the activation vectors. That is, the
apply-substitution(make-substitution(x,b), bind(x,y)) working memory items and long-term memory items
= (x*b) * (x*y) exist in different, incommensurable representational
= b*y spaces. This is hardly surprising, as the synaptic
= bind(b,y) connectivities can be construed as relations between
Given this capability, any component of a structure working memory items. They are the mechanism by
can act as a variable (a target for substitution). The which items in working memory create other items in
only constraint is that if the same component has working memory.
multiple occurrences in the one structure the In VSAs, working memory items and long-term
substitution is applied identically to all occurrences. memory items have the same form at the vector
apply-substitution(make-substitution(x,b), (x*y + x*z)) representation level. They are both represented by
vectors of the same dimensionality. Those vectors can
This suggests a style of processing in which only literal
represent items and relationships between items both in
episodes are stored and rules arise as statistical
working memory and long-term memory. This
regularities of potential substitutions across those
equivalence of logical form makes the boundary
episodes, similar to the Data Oriented Processing of
between working memory and long-term memory
Bod and Scha (1997).
transparent.
The differences in physical implementation are
Challenge 4: Binding in Working Memory
reflected not in what can be represented but in the
vs Long-Term Memory persistence of those representations and their ability to
Jackendoff's fourth challenge concerns the transparency interact with each other. Working memory items are
of the boundary between working memory and long- able to interact with each other and items in long-term
term memory. He argues that linguistic tasks require memory, whereas long-term memory items are only
the same structures to be instantiated in working able to interact with each other via items in working
memory and long-term memory and that the two memory. This issue has been discussed with respect to
instantiations should be functionally equivalent (2002, a different set of challenges in Gayler and Wales
p. 65). (1998).
Two aspects of typical connectionist implementations The issue of speed of learning has two components:
suggest a lack of equivalence between working memory speed of binding and speed of laying down a trace. As
and long-term memory representations. Working discussed in response to the first challenge, binding in
memory representations are typically implemented VSAs arises from the algebraic properties of the
using activation levels and (possibly) temporal operations and occurs in a single pass through an
synchrony, whereas long-term memory is implemented architectural primitive. Thus, associations can be
using synaptic connectivity. The disparity of formed in a single trial.
implementation media suggests that it would be Separate from that is the issue of whether those
difficult to achieve functional equivalence. The other associations can be made persistent in a single trial. For
aspect is speed, again. Linguistic phenomena require items being made persistent in working memory this
single trial learning and single trial learning seems consists of superposing the new association on the
current activity vector. This can be done in a single
pass through the architectural primitive that implements Feldman, J. (2002, August). Neural binding.
the addition-like operation. This could have multiple Connectionists Mailing List [On-line discussion
increment to the activity levels, or short-term afs/cs.cmu.edu/project/connect/connect-archives/
potentiation of the representational units. Long-term arch.2002-08.gz see 0005.txt and also 8, 9, 18, & 21)
persistence is achieved in functionally equivalent ways Gayler, R. W. (1998). Multiplicative binding,
representation operators, and analogy [Abstract of
with different implementations, for example, long-term
poster]. In K. Holyoak, D. Gentner & B. Kokinov
potentiation of representational units, or increments to
(Eds.), Advances in analogy research: Integration of
the synaptic connectivities.
theory and data from the cognitive, computational,
and neural sciences. Sofia, Bulgaria: New Bulgarian
Conclusion
Jackendoff posed four challenges that are generally 00000502/ for full poster)
relevant to cognition but particularly relevant to Gayler, R. W., & Wales, R. (1998). Connections,
language. These challenges identify functional binding, unification, and analogical promiscuity. In
capabilities that are required for language, but arguably K. Holyoak, D. Gentner & B. Kokinov (Eds.),
not provided by typical connectionist models. VSAs, a Advances in analogy research: Integration of theory
little-known family of connectionist architectures, do and data from the cognitive, computational, and
meet these challenges. Their ability to meet these neural sciences. Sofia, Bulgaria: New Bulgarian
vector representations. These properties and the fact 00000500/ see also 501)
that they have straightforward physical implementations Gayler, R. W., & Wales, R. (2000, February).
suggest that VSAs are ideal candidates for cognitive Multiplicative binding, representation operators and
modelling. However, it has to be asked why VSAs are analogical inference. Paper presented at the 5th
so relatively little-known. Australasian Cognitive Science Conference,
There are multiple reasons that could be presented, Melbourne, Australia.
but I will offer only one. While VSAs are very easy to Jackendoff, R. (2002). Foundations of language:
work with at the vector representation level and the Brain, meaning, grammar, evolution. Oxford, UK:
level of primitives of the representational architecture, Oxford University Press.
they are very difficult to work with at the level of Kanerva, P. (1997). Fully distributed representation. In
complete representational architectures and cognitive Proceedings of 1997 Real World Computing
architectures. Typical connectionist architectures rely Symposium (RWC'97, Tokyo). Tsukuba-city, Japan:
on training procedures to achieve their effectiveness. Real World Computing Partnership.
However, VSAs provide no opportunity for training to
Marcus, G. (2001). The algebraic mind. Cambridge,
substitute for architectural effectiveness. That is, good
MA, USA: MIT Press.
performance depends on good design rather than
Plate, T. A. (1994). Distributed representations and
automated training, and this is a harder research task.
nested compositional structure. Doctoral dissertation.
Department of Computer Science, University of