Viral marketing as epidemiological model∗
Helena Sofia Rodrigues1,2 Manuel Fonseca1,3
sofiarodrigues@esce.ipvc.pt manuelfonseca@esce.ipvc.pt
1 Business School, Viana do Castelo Polytechnic Institute,
2Center for Research and Development in Mathematics and Applications (CIDMA),
University of Aveiro, Portugal
3 Applied Management Research Unit (UNIAG)
APNOR, Portugal
In epidemiology, an epidemic is defined as the spread of an infectious disease to a large
number of people in a given population within a short period of time. In the marketing
context,amessageisviralwhenitisbroadlysentandreceivedbythetargetmarketthrough
person-to-persontransmission. Thisspecificmarketingcommunicationstrategyiscommonly
referredasviralmarketing. Duetothissimilaritybetweenanepidemicandtheviralmarketing
processandbecausetheunderstandingofthecriticalfactorstothiscommunicationsstrategy
effectivenessremainlargelyunknown,themathematicalmodelsinepidemiologyarepresented
in this marketing specific field. In this paper, an epidemiological model SIR (Susceptible-
Infected-Recovered)tostudytheeffectsofaviralmarketingstrategyispresented. Itismade
acomparisonbetweenthediseaseparametersandthemarketingapplication,andsimulations
using the Matlab software are performed. Finally, some conclusions are given and their
marketingimplicationsareexposed: interactionsacrosstheparametersarefoundthatappear
to suggest some recommendations to marketers, as the profitability of the investment or the
need to improve the targeting criteria of the communications campaigns.
Keywords: viral marketing, word-of-mouth, epidemiological model, numerical simulations,
infectivity, recovery rate, seed population
2010 Mathematics Subject Classification:34A34; 92D30; 91F99
1 Introduction
Viralmarketing(VM)isarecentapproachingmarketsandcommunicationwithcustomersandcan
potentiallyreachalargeandfastaudience[8]. VMexploitsexistingsocialnetworksbyencouraging
people to share product information and campaigns with their friends, through email or social
networks. This type of communication has more impact in the customer, because the information
was recommended by friends and peer networks, instead of a standard companies. Marketing
campaignsthatleverageviralprocessesofdisseminationareconsideredwidely. Theyhavecertain
advantages over traditional mass media campaigns, especially with the cost effectiveness issues
and the ability to reach specific consumer groups [2].
∗ThisisapreprintofapaperwhosefinalanddefiniteformisinProceedingsofthe15thInternationalConference
onComputationalandMathematicalMethodsinScienceandEngineering. Pleasecitethispaperas: HelenaSofia
RodriguesandManuelJosFonseca. Viralmarketingasepidemiologicalmodel,Proceedingsofthe15thInternational
Conference on Computational and Mathematical Methods in Science and Engineering, 2015, 946–955.
]hp-cos.scisyhp[
1v68960.7051:viXra
Whenamarketingmessagegoesviral,itisanalogoustoanepidemic,sinceinvolvesaperson-to-
person transmission, spreading within a population. Using insights from epidemiology to describe
thespreadofviruses, amathematicalmodeloftheviralmarketingprocessisproposed. Themain
aims of this study is to develop a set of simulation experiments to explore the influence of various
controlled and external factors that could influence viral campaigns.
The structure of this paper is as follows. In Section 2 a theoretical framework related to viral
marketing is exposed, and it is explained the transmission process of a marketing campaign that
turns viral. Then, an epidemiological model is proposed in Section 3, that reflects the previous
theoretical concepts. An interpretation of the mathematical model in the marketing context is
presented. The relationship between epidemiology, mathematical modeling and computational
tools allows to build and test theories on the development of a viral message; thus, the numerical
simulationsusingthemodelaredoneinSection4,aswellastheanalysisofthegraphicsobtained.
Finally, conclusions are presented in Section 5 and some future work is proposed.
2 Viral Marketing - Theoretical Framework
Itis wellknownthatinrecentdecades, societieshaveundergonenumerous formalandconceptual
changes in their economic, social, political, communication, among others, standards as a result
of continuous technological innovation that occurs in the most diverse fields. It is in this context
that the process of digitization of the communications media assume itself as a significant change
engine, both in terms of interpersonal relations and marketing communications.
Currently, in this context, a co-existence between the media classified as online and offline
has been witnessing, which results in a hybridization of languages, strategies and techniques of
communication,translatedintothekeyconceptsofinteractionandbidirectionality[9]. Underthis
relation the production and dissemination of information ceased to be the monopoly of a specific
entity to take a collaborative dimension, where all individuals are connected to virtual networks,
being able to produce and share content, having the possibility of its direct manipulation [3].
Given the ineffectiveness of traditional promotional communication strategies - from mas-
sified and essentially unidirectional nature - communicators entities have responded with new
approaches, such as viral marketing, which aims to minimize the resistance of consumers to the
promotional messages: establishing a parallelism between the biological process transmission of a
virus between individuals in a real context, and the process of transmitting a message from an
internet user to another in digital context [12].
Viral marketing, in its strategic line, is directly related to the variable promotion of the mar-
keting mix, assuming as an alternative communication technique, embodied in a dissemination
process of promotional content similar to the logic of a viral epidemic. The spread of the message
on a large scale is made possible by the collaborative action of individuals in virtual networks [1].
AlsoknownasInternetWord-of-mouth(WOM)marketing[14]viralmarketinghasbeengaining
more and more fans, from professionals to researchers, as an alternative strategy to traditional
communication. In this context a divestment in the traditional media by major advertisers is
been observed, and the transfer of funds to the online marketing actions is increasing [6]. Among
companies that use this communication strategy, stand out examples such as Procter & Gamble,
Microsoft, BMW and Samsung, who take on the viral marketing as a consumer-initiated activity
that spreads the marketing message unaltered across the market or segment in a limited period
team, mimicking an epidemic [5].
In this context, the brands are transferring to consumers the power to communicate and
disseminate their promotional messages along its network of contacts, with a smaller investment
and a much higher velocity compared to the traditional media, either the Internet or on mobile
context. Woerdl [14] has rank as potential benefits of viral marketing: inexpensive; reaches
audiences within a short period of time; fast and exponential diffusion; voluntary transmission by
sender; moreeffectivetargeting; accesstodiverseaudiencethroughsocialcontacts. Concerningto
the risks associated with viral marketing, the authors stress: uncontrollable nature, in particular
loss over content and audience reach, few possibilities to measure success and timing; negative
WOM leading to boycott, ruin, unfavorable attitudes; consumers unwilling to provide referrals
unless there is some return; legal emerging issues have to be considered; consumers may feel
exploited, cheated, used.
As key attributes of a successful viral message, we can highlight features like entertainment,
humor, curiosity, surprise, useful information and relevant content. The more engaging and com-
pelling is the message, the more likely to spread successfully through a network of contacts in
continuous growth [4].
Therearecountlesspossibilitiesofspreadofaviralcontent. Thiscanbesharedthroughvideo
sharing sites, personal blogs, groups or discussion forums, or simply being sent by email, as web
page hyperlink , or as attached content. Regarding the profile of users that can enhance the
spread, there is evidence that internet users, who are more individualistic and/or more altruistic,
trend forward to more online content than others [7].
3 Epidemiological Model
The analysis of a VM campaign can be explained by a standard epidemic model [10, 13].
In this paper, it is presented a SIR model:
S(t) — susceptible (individuals who can contract the disease);
I(t) — infected (individuals who can transmit the disease);
R(t) — recovered (individuals who have been infected and have recovered).
These compartments are mutually-exclusive. In this paper, it is assumed that the total pop-
ulation is constant, which means that N = S(t)+I(t)+R(t). To describe the model is also
necessary to present a set of parameters:
δ — contact rate among individuals per period of time;
τ — probability of a contact between a susceptible and an infected that results
in disease transmission;
β — infectivity;
γ — recovery rate.
Thenumberofinfectionsamongthesusceptiblepopulationinaperiodoftimedependsonthe
constant rate (δ) at a given period and the transmissibility (τ) of the disease given contact. So,
the constant β =δτ is called the infectivitiy parameter.
The system of differential equations that translates the dynamics of VM is composed by:
and subject to initial conditions
The scheme of the model is shown in Figure 1. An arrow pointing into a compartment is asso-
ciated with a positive member of the corresponding differential equation while an arrow pointing
out of the compartment represents a negative member of the equation.
The model provides a simple and intuitive approach, modeling the viral marketing process
through epidemiological point of view, where a disease is spread by person to person contact.
In the marketing context, a susceptible individual is a potential consumer who may accept the
message or use an offering from a company; this compartment is called the target audience.
An infected individual passes the message or uses a unique product from the company and/or
recommend it. β is the probability of moving from the target audience to infective. The infected
Figure 1: SIR epidemiological model for viral marketing
individualsstarttospreadthemessagethroughsocialcontacts. Whenanindividualstopstoshare
a message, passes to the recovered compartment [5, 13].
These parameters can also be explained in the marketing context. Infectivity (β) is influenced
by transmissibility (τ) - through the marketer’s efforts to seed the market with the message and
the acceptability of the cost in time and effort to pass along the message - and the contact rate
(δ), where the extent and the suitability of the social network are key aspects [5, 11]. Here, an
target member, must perceived the message, have predisposition to deal with the message and
finally, must be motivated to share it. Factors such as exhausting mailing lists, forgetting, no
more interested by this message or divergent attentions can leave to an individual stop to sharing
themessageatarateofγ, becomingrecoveredfromtheVMcampaign. Iftheexit(recovery)rate
is high, the infective recovers rather quickly.
Thus, it is important to analyze and to assess the impact of a message to the target audience
and the number of members of the target market who have actively shared the message.
4 Simulations
The software used in the simulations was Matlab, with the routine ode45. This solver is based
on an explicit Runge-Kutta (4,5) formula, the Dormand-Prince pair. That means the numerical
solver ode45 combines fourth and fifth order methods, both of which are similar to the classical
fourth order Runge-Kutta method. These vary the step size, choosing it at each step an attempt
to achieve the desired accuracy.
4.1 Parameter Effects
Inthissectionwemadesimulationswithsystem(1),usingthefollowinginitialvaluesfordifferential
equations:
Theanalysisoftheparametersvariationwillbefocusontheinfectcompartment-tovisualize
the transmission shape - and also on the number of recovered individuals at final time, since this
population captures the cumulative number of sharing individuals. The analysis will be done
in dimensionless time, because some campaigns could came viral in days and other in hours or
minutes.
Figure 2 presents four scenarios for different values of β, while the gamma parameter remains
constant (γ = 0.1) and the initial values unchanged. Increasing the value of β implies to reach
a peak of transmissibility sooner: in Figure 2b) (for β = 0.25) is close of time 20 reaching about
300 persons, while in Figure 2d) the highest value is got close to time 10 and infected about 600
individuals. Observingtherecoveredcurve,ispossibletovisualizethatahighvalueforinfectivity
leadstoagreaternumberoftargetmembersreached. Inthefirstgraphic,themessageonlyreaches
a total of 400 persons of the target audience, approximately. Using a β at minimum of 0.5, the
viral campaign achieves almost the target audience in less than 60 units of time.
Figure 3 is related to the variation of parameter γ, using the value 0.25 for parameter β and
remaining the same values for initial conditions. The increasing of γ value leads to a decreasing
of sharing message, because an individual tends to forget or to be not interested in passing the
message, more quickly. In the first graphic (γ = 0.01), all population is affected for the viral
0 20 40 60 80 100
noitalupoP
Susceptible
Infected 900
0 20 40 60 80 100
(a) β =0.1
noitalupoP
Susceptible
0 20 40 60 80 100
noitalupoP
Susceptible
Infected 900
0 20 40 60 80 100
(c) β =0.5
noitalupoP
Susceptible
(d) β =0.7
Figure 2: SIR model varying infectivity parameter β (remaining γ=0.1)
0 20 40 60 80 100
noitalupoP
Susceptible
Infected 900
0 20 40 60 80 100
noitalupoP
Susceptible
(b) γ =0.1
0 20 40 60 80 100
noitalupoP
Susceptible
Infected 800
0 20 40 60 80 100
(c) γ =0.2
noitalupoP
Susceptible
(d) γ =0.5
Figure 3: SIR model varying recovery rate parameter γ (remaining β=0.25)
campaign, but in a long period of time; this conclusion can be taken, because in less than 40
units of time the population ceases to be susceptible. In the last graphic, (γ = 0.5) the total of
population reached by the campaign is less than 200 people.
4.2 Changing Seed Population
OneofthechallengesofpromotingaVMcampaignistoknowhowmanypeopleshouldbeinitially
affected, in order to create a huge diffusion of the product or service. However, increasing the
seeding directly may require more costs for the company [8]. Figure 4 reflects the variation of
initial value of the target population that is infected initially. As expected, when the amount
of people infected initially is high, the viral campaign reaches its peak more rapidly. However,
the most interesting conclusion is that, the costs of seeding the campaign to 20% of the target
populationproducesalmostthesameeffects(intimeandpopulationreached)asinvestonlyin10%
of the target population to diffuse the campaign. In most cases, seeding a very large proportion
ofthepopulationwouldlikelybeverycostlyinmarketingreality, andtheresultscouldnotbethe
expected ones.
5 Conclusions and directions for future work
This paper presents a model that translate the viral process of a communications marketing
campaign. The parameters used (infectivity and recovery rate) are very sensitivity. The influence
of β value is huge in the diffusion of the message: as infectivity increases, the proportion of the
target audience achieved also increases. On other hand, the growth of the γ parameter implies
0 20 40 60 80 100
noitalupoP
Susceptible
Infected 900
0 20 40 60 80 100
(a) I(0)=1
noitalupoP
Susceptible
0 20 40 60 80 100
noitalupoP
Susceptible
Infected 900
0 20 40 60 80 100
noitalupoP
Susceptible
Figure 4: SIR model varying the initial value of infected individual I(0), remaining β = 0.25,
γ =0.1 and maintaining the population constant, i.e, S(0)=N −I(0) and R(0)=0
the decreasing of the share of the viral message. In this way, the marketers should focus their
attention to increase the social network (increasing β) that has specific characteristics for the
commercialization of the product or service, accurating targeting criteria, in order to create more
interest in each person to passes the message more often, faster and for a long period of time
(decreasing γ).
Theinvestmentinseedthemessageinaninitialsetofindividuals,mustbestudiedforeachcase.
Foroursimulations,tospendmoremoneyintheseedpopulation,over10%,itisfruitless,because
the viral campaign produce similar effects, but with a higher financial burden for the company.
This measure assumes particular relevance both in an alternative communication strategy, such
as the VM, as in the context of the current economic status, where all investments in marketing
communications should be optimized.
Asfutureworkweintendtoappliedthismodeltospecificviralmarketingcampaigns, inorder
to fit our parameters to the reality.
Acknowledgements
This work was partially supported by The Portuguese Foundation for Science and Technology
(FCT), through CIDMA (Center for Research & Development in Mathematics and Applications)
within project UID/MAT/04106/2013.