]EP.oib-q[
5v8633.0111:viXra
September 28,2018 2:43 Proceedings TrimSize: 9inx6in biomat2012
VIRAL EVOLUTION AND ADAPTATION AS A
MULTIVARIATE BRANCHING PROCESS∗
FERNANDOANTONELI ANDFRANCISCO BOSCO†
Departamento de Informa´tica em Sau´de and
Laborat´orio de Genoˆmica Evolutiva e Biocomplexidade
Universidade Federal de S˜ao Paulo, S˜ao Paulo, SP, Brazil.
Email: fernando.antoneli@unifesp.br, fbosco@unifesp.br
DIOGO CASTRO ANDLUIZ MARIO JANINI
Departamento de Microbiologia, Imunologia e Parasitologia and
Departamento de Medicina,
Universidade Federal de S˜ao Paulo, S˜ao Paulo, SP, Brazil.
Email: diogo.castro@unifesp.br, janini@unifesp.br
In the present workwe analyze the problem of adaptation and evolution of RNA
viruspopulations,bydefiningthebasicstochasticmodelasamultivariatebranch-
ing process in close relation with the branching process advanced by Demetrius,
SchusterandSigmund(“Polynucleotideevolutionandbranchingprocesses”,Bull.
Math. Biol. 46 (1985) 239-262), in their study of polynucleotide evolution. We
show that in the absence of beneficial forces the model is exactly solvable. As a
result it is possible to prove several key results directly related to known typical
propertiesofthesesystemslike(i)proof,inthecontextofthetheoryofbranching
processes,ofthelethalmutagenesiscriterionproposedbyBull,Sanju´anandWilke
(“Theoryoflethalmutagenesisforviruses”,J.Virology18(2007)2930-2939); (ii)
a new proposal for the notion of relaxation time with a quantitative prescrip-
tionforitsevaluationand(iii)thequantitativedescriptionoftheevolutionofthe
expected values in four distinct regimes: transient, “stationary” equilibrium, ex-
tinctionthresholdandlethalmutagenesis. Moreover,newinsightsonthedynamics
ofevolvingviruspopulationscanbeforeseen.
Unabridged version of Viral Evolution and Adaptation as a Multivariate Branching
Process3,inBIOMAT2012, pp. 217–243. Ed.: R.P.Mondaini. WorldScientific, 2013.
∗ThisworkissupportedbyCAPES,CNPqandFAPESP.
†InmemoryofFranciscoA.R.Bosco(1955–2012).
September 28,2018 2:43 Proceedings TrimSize: 9inx6in biomat2012
1. Introduction
RNA viruses exhibit a pronounced genetic diversity22. This variability al-
lowsRNAvirustobetter adapttoenvironmentalchallengesasrepresented
byhostandtherapypressures21. Due tothe lackofaproofreadingactivity
of viralRNA polymerases (averageerror incorporationrate in the order of
10−4 per nucleotide, per replication cycle78), short generation times and
huge population numbers, RNA viral populations may be viewed as a col-
lection of particles bearing mutant genomes. As a consequence of high
mutation rates, frequencies of mutants depend not only on their level of
adaptationbutontheprobabilityofbeingfaithfullyreplicatedduringviral
genomicRNAsynthesis. Severalstudieshavelookedatviraldiversification
processes as a contributing cause of disease progressionand of therapeutic
strategies shortcomings including vaccine trials21,26. It has become im-
portantto understandthe processbywhichvirusacquirediversityandthe
dynamicsandfluctuationsofthisdiversityintime. However,understanding
viralevolutioninvivo hasproventobeaverycumbersomeaccomplishment
duetothesomanyvariablespresentintheinterplaybetweenvirusandtheir
hosts. To name a few; the host defense pressures as the innate and “cog-
nitive” immune responses, the use of antiviral drugs, the turnover rate of
viruspopulationscomposedbyviralreplicationandclearance,theelevated
mutationalratesof RNA virus,andthe possible existence ofstructuredvi-
ral reservoirsin infected patients. It is also important to take into account
the size of the viral innoculums at the moment of infection, how frequent
viral populations undergo bottleneck passages within a host, how differ-
ently each infected individual may react to an incoming virus and finally
how many viral variants are tightly associated with differential biological
capabilities.
Traditionally,in aneffort to make the viralevolutionprocess more pal-
pable, several groups have addressed this subject from different points of
view. Thereisasubstantialamountofpublicationsthatstudiedviruspop-
ulations during their evolution in experimental settings, for instance, cell
cultures28, by challenging the virus with population bottlenecks66,65, or
the introduction of antiviral drugs16, including mutagens, or another com-
peting viral population. Experiment outcomes were evaluated using viral
replication kinetics, the intensity and quality of the observed mutational
spectra and virus survival/extinction as final parameters. Several other
groupshavestudiedtheprocessofviralevolutionawayfromthe benchbut
using mathematical and computational tools83,54,60,10,1. These models are
September 28,2018 2:43 Proceedings TrimSize: 9inx6in biomat2012
quite tractablebut there is alwaysthe risk ofoversimplification. To escape
fromoversimplifyingtheinterplaybetweenvirusandhostsamodelneedsto
incorporateafewhardrulesbasedonpreviousexperimentaldatawhichhas
been generated by the whole community of investigators addressing viral
evolution. Based on other groups experimental data and previous mathe-
matical models put forwardby other investigators as the one presented by
La´zaro et al54 we sought to study a stochastic model for virus evolution
that would be able to describe some general aspects of RNA virus evolu-
tion. Here, RNA viral evolution is described by a multivariate branching
processduringwhicheachroundofreplicationisaccompaniedbytheintro-
duction of a single point mutation per genome in the viral progeny. More
explicitly,byare-interpretationoftotalmutationprobabilitiesofagenome
as probabilities of “replicative effects” we obtain a non-trivial multivariate
generalization of the single-type branching process of Demetrius et al20.
DrakeandHolland24 backin1999haveinferred,basedonlimited data,
acentralvaluefortheRNAvirusmutationratepergenomeperreplication
of µ ≈0.76 and suggested the rate per round of cell infection of µ ≈1.5.
In2010,Sanju´anetal75 revisitingthisthemebyreviewingalistofprevious
publications encountered RNA virus mutational rates in the order of 10−4
to 10−6 with µ ≈ 4.64 for the bacteriophage Qβ (Batschelet et al7) and
µ ≈1.15 for hepatitis C virus (Cuevas et al19).
It has been demonstrated that virus populations may be reduced at
the moment of infection, and only a few particles are able to start a new
infectionprocessinnaivehosts86,47. AbruptreductionsonRNAviralpopu-
lationsknownaspopulationbottlenecksmayeliminatepopulationdiversity
and lead the virus to pathways towards extinction due to the exacerbated
effects of genetic drift. An incoming virus population recovering from a
transmissionbottleneckeventmayshowanasymptoticbehaviorresembling
stationary equilibrium represented by the balance between two opposite
forces classically identified with mutation and selection. This asymptotic
behavior would occur if the environment is constant and enough time is
allowedbetween two successive bottleneck events. The relaxationtime be-
tween the bottleneck and the establishment of stationary equilibrium has
been referred to as the “recoveringtime” by Aguirre et al1.
As pointed out by Drake and Holland24, the basal value of RNA virus
mutation rates is so large and RNA virus genomes are so information-
ally dense, that even a modest rate increase extinguishes the population.
Thefrequentappearanceofoverlappingreadingframesandmultifunctional
proteins augments the risk of a random mutation to have a deleterious
September 28,2018 2:43 Proceedings TrimSize: 9inx6in biomat2012
impact and even more, multiply the effect of deleterious mutations. For
example, the fraction of deleterious mutations out of random mutations
occurring in vesicular stomatitis virus is around 70% (Sanjua´n et al74). If
the introduction of a mutagen to a replicating virus population is able to
cause its extinction by increasing mutational rates, the process is known
as chemical lethal mutagenesis and has been demonstrated in a number of
viruses including the vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV)39,55, human immun-
odeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1)57, poliovirus type 116,39, foot-and-mouth
disease virus77, lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus34, Hanta virus76 and
Hepatitis C virus85. Accordingly, in the model, increases on mutational
rates, and more specifically, on the deleterious component of the muta-
tionalspectrumareableto pushviralpopulationstowardsextinction. Our
resultscorroboratewiththestudyfromBull,Sanju´anandWilke10byshow-
ing that the sufficient condition for lethal mutagenesis involves mutational
and ecological aspects. Bull et al10 arrived at a conjectural criteria for
lethalmutagenesisbyaheuristicandintuitiveapproachofpossiblegeneral
applicability. By applying the branchingprocesstheory to the evolutionof
RNA viruses the lethal mutagenesis inequality proposed by Bull et al10 is
rigorously proven here. Furthermore, we describe four distinct regimes of
RNA virus populations: transient regime, stationary equilibrium, extinc-
tion threshold, and extinction through lethal mutagenesis.
We note that in previous works1,12,18,60 the properties of phenotypic
models are discussed starting from a mean field linear model described by
ameanmatrixwithoutreferencetoanyunderlyingstochasticprocessmod-
eling the microscopic dynamics of particle replication. In fact, almost any
stochastic model of asexual replication has an underlying branching pro-
cess, which remains implicit and undefined in most of the studies in this
subject. However,there are a few of them20,38,82 that take a different path
andexplicitlydefinethestochasticprocessinordertobringthemathemat-
ical theory of branching processes to bear. This attitude has some virtues,
sinceitprovidespowerfultools,thathavebeenperfectedinthepastseveral
decades, allowing one to extract quantitative results on a rigorous basis in
clearconceptualframework. Therefore,weshallfollowthispath,bydeduc-
ing the matrix of first moments from a generating function of an explicitly
defined stochastic process and explore the mathematical consequences of
such conceptual framework.
September 28,2018 2:43 Proceedings TrimSize: 9inx6in biomat2012
Structure of the Paper. In section 2 we describe a class of models for
viral evolution and show that they define a multitype branching process.
We explicitly compute the generatingfunctionandderivesomeelementary
properties. In section 3 we solve the spectral problem for the mean matrix
ofthe modelwhichallowsus to applythe theoryofofmultitype branching
processes in order to obtain our results. Finally, in section 4 we present
our conclusions and directions for future research. For the convenience of
the reader,in the Appendix A we briefly summarize all the definitions and
results from the theory of multitype branching processes that are used in
our proofs.
2. Phenotypic Models for Viral Evolution
Inthis sectionwedescribeamodelforviralevolutionthatisnaturallyrep-
resented by a multivariate branching stochastic process generalizing, in a
non-trivial way, the single-type branching process studied by Demetrius et
al20. For the sake of motivation we startby recallinga probabilistic model
introduced by La´zro et al54. We interpret the notion of mutation proba-
bility as a general effect of probabilistic nature acting on the replication
capability of individual viral particles, considered here as a measure of the
particle’s fitness characterizing its phenotype. This effect is summarized
by the definition of a stationary probability distribution which is used to
set up a Galton-Watson branching process (Watson and Galton81) for the
temporal evolution of the viral population. This probability distribution
gives appropriate parameters to classify the asymptotic behavior of the vi-
ral population and to describe some of the non-equilibrium properties of
the model.
In other related publications the concept of mutation is extensively
usedasthe causeofreplicationcapacitychange. Understandingthatthose
changes constitute an observable output due to many different factors (of
genetic and non-genetic nature), we prefer to use the general term “ef-
fect”overthereplicationcapacitytocharacterizethethreepossiblechanges
(deleterious,beneficialandneutral)thatmayhappenwiththeviralparticle
when it replicates. The precise definition of the three types of changes are
given in the next section.
2.1. Definition of the Model
A number of viral infections starts with the transmission of a relatively
small number of viral particles from one host organism to another one.
September 28,2018 2:43 Proceedings TrimSize: 9inx6in biomat2012
The initial viral population starts replicating constrained by the unavoid-
able interaction with the host organism and evolves in time towards an
eventualequilibrium. Eachparticlecomposing the populationreplicates in
thecellularcontextthatmaydifferfromcelltocell. Moreovereachparticle
has different replication capabilities due to the natural genomic diversity
found in viral populations in general. Therefore, it is reasonable to con-
sider the viralpopulationas a setofparticlesdivided ingroupsofdifferent
replication capabilities measured in terms of the number of particles that
one particle can produce. Eachof those groups we call a class; the replica-
tion capability of a viral particle is an output of the process of interaction
of that particle carrying its genetic information with the cell environment.
The replication capability is considered as a phenotypic character of the
particle and therefore each class is considered as a set of particles with
a possible genotype diversity expressing the same phenotype trait. The
model we consider here does not take into account any information about
the genomic diversity of any replicating class and therefore it should be
classified as phenotypic model.
We consider that the whole set of particles composing the viral popu-
lation replicates at the same time in such a way that the evolution of the
population is described as a succession of discrete viral generations. This
assumption crucially depends on the clear definition of the time needed
for a particle to replicate, referred by virologists as generation time. As it
depends on the cell environment it is clear that this time period may vary
fromparticle to particlereplicating indifferent cells insucha waythat the
meaningful concept is a distribution of replication times with a possible
clear mean value. The dispersion of the replication times can be consid-
ered small if we restrict ourselves to homogeneous cell populations. Under
these conditions we consider that no particle can be part of two successive
generations. Thepossibleimpactofasubsetofnonreplicatingparticleson
the dynamics of the viral population is left to further studies.
Suppose that we have a population of viruses that start evolving from
an initial set of particles (population at t = 0), which is partitioned into
classes accordingto the replication capacity ofeachparticle,thatis, where
eachparticleofclass0producesnocopiesofitself,eachparticlewithclass1
producesonecopyofitself,andsoon. Weassumethatthereisamaximum
replication capacity R imposed by the natural limiting conditions under
which any particle of the population replicates. Moreover, as the process
ofreplicationis controlledbychemicalreactionsinvolvingspecificenzymes
and the template, it is reasonable to assume a mean bounded replication
capacity per particle that is possibly typical for each specific virus.
September 28,2018 2:43 Proceedings TrimSize: 9inx6in biomat2012
In the process ofreplicationof a viralparticle errorsmay occur at each
replicationcycleintheformofpointmutationswithpossibleimpactonthe
replicationcapacityoftheprogenyparticles. Duetotheintrinsicstochastic
componentofchemicalreactionsitisnaturaltotreatthispointmutational
cause as probabilistic. Another possible cause of change in the replication
capabilityintheviraloffspringisclearlyrelatedtothecellularenvironment
where the replicationprocesstakes place. As a resultthe time evolutionof
viralpopulationsshouldbeviewedasaphysicalprocessstronglyinfluenced
bystochasticity. Thereforeweconsiderthatthe combinedactionofgenetic
and non-genetic causes may produce basically three types of replicative
effects namely:
• deleterious effect: the replication capacity of the copied particle
decreases by one. When the particle has capacity of replication
equal to 0 it will not produce any copy of itself.
• beneficial effect: the replication capacity of the copy increases by
one. If the replication capacity is already the maximum allowed
then the replication capacity of the copies will stay the same.
• neutral effect: the replicationcapacity of the copies is the same as
the replication capacity of the parental particle.
For each type of effect we associate a probability at the particle scale ap-
plicable to every single replication event: d for the probability of the oc-
currence of a deleterious effect, b for the probability of the occurrence of
a beneficial effect and the complementary probability c = 1−b−d is the
probability of the occurrence of a neutral effect. In the case of in vitro
experiments with homogeneous cell populations the parameters c, d and b
may be considered as mutation probabilities.
The simple phenotypic model is obtainedby requiringthatthere areno
beneficial effects in time, that is b = 0. This assumption is justified by
several experimental results. The frequencies between beneficial, deleteri-
ous andneutralmutations appearingina replicatingpopulationhavebeen
already measured by prior studies62,40,68,74,13,29,69,73. Taking their results
together, it is reasonable to conclude that beneficial mutations could be as
low as 1000 less frequent than either neutral or deleterious mutations. As
a result the viral population would be submitted to a large number of suc-
cessive deleterious and neutral changes and a comparatively small number
of beneficial changes. Here we shall focus on the case b = 0 which allows
us to obtain exactresults. The case b≈0 can be treated perturbatively as
discussed in Antoneli, Bosco, Castro and Janini4.
September 28,2018 2:43 Proceedings TrimSize: 9inx6in biomat2012
From what is described above it should become clear that the model
assumesascenariowhereaprobabilisticprocessesatthecellular/viralscale
take place in the context of the interaction between the viral particle and
the host cell. The combined effect of small scale processes are observed at
the viral population scale in terms of collective (stable or not) properties.
Based on the general aspects of the phenomenon of viral replication it
is compelling to to model it in terms of a branching process. In this per-
spective we define a discrete multitype Galton-Watson branching process
for the evolution of the initial population, where the classes will be repre-
sented by the replication capabilities 0,1,...,R. The branching process is
described by a sequence of vector-valued random variables {Z : n ∈ N}
giving the number of particles in each replication class in the n-th genera-
tion. Thus Z are vectors of non-negative integers satisfying the following
assumption: if the size of the n-th generation is known, then the proba-
bility laws governing the later generations does not depend on the sizes of
generations preceding the n-th, that is the sequence {Z : n ∈ N} forms
a markovian process. The initial population Z is represented by a vec-
tor of non-negative integers Z = (Z0,Z1,...,ZR), which is non-zero and
non-random. The temporal evolution of the population is obtained from a
vector-valued discrete probability distribution ζ = (ζ ,ζ ,...,ζ ) defined
on the set of vectors with non-negative integer entries called the offspring
distribution of the branching process. For any vector with non-negative
entries i=(i0,...,iR) one has that
where e = (0,...,1,...,0), with 1 in the r-th position. Thus, ζ (i) is
the joint probability that an individual particle of class r (0 6 r 6 R)
generates i0 progeny particles in the class 0, i1 progeny particles in the
class 1, ..., iR progeny particles in the class R. Note that any vector
Z = (Z0,Z1,...,ZR) may be written as a sum Zre and since each
n n n n r n r
particle in Z may be seen as the initial condition of a new branching
processindependentlyoftheothers,equation(1)determinestheprobability
laws for a general branching process as follows
(i)Zn r .
(cid:0) P (cid:1) Y
Inordertocomputetheoffspringprobabilitydistributionζ forthesim-
ple phenotypic model, we start by observing that ζ is non-zero only when
i is of the form i = (0,...,ir−1,ir,...,0) since a particle with replication
capabilityrcanonlyproduceprogenyparticlesofthereplicationcapability
September 28,2018 2:43 Proceedings TrimSize: 9inx6in biomat2012
r or r−1, moreover the entries ir−1 and ir should satisfy ir−1+ir = r.
Thuswejustneedtocomputetheprobabilitiesζ onthevectorsoftheform
i = (0,...,r−k,k,...,0). Suppose that a viral particle v with replica-
tion capacity r (0 6 r 6 R) replicates itself producing new virus particles
v ,...,v . For each new particle v , there are two possible outcomes re-
garding the type of change that may occur: neutral or deleterious, with
probabilities c = 1−d and d, respectively. Representing the result of the
i-th replication event by a variable X , which can assume two values: 0 if
the effect is deleterious (failure) and 1 if the effect is neutral (success), the
probability distribution of X is that of a Bernoulli trial with probability
of occurrence of a neutral effect c=1−d (success), that is,
The totalnumber of neutraleffects that occur when the originalvirus par-
ticle reproduces is a random variable S given by the sum of all variable
X , since each copy is produced independently of the others,
S =X +X +...+X .
That is, S counts the total number of neutral effects (successes) that oc-
curred in the production of r virus particles v ,...,v . It also represents
the total number of particles that will have the same replication capacity
r of the original particle v. It is well known (see Feller30) that a sum of
r independent and identically distributed Bernoulli random variables with
probability c=1−d of success has a probability distribution given by the
binomial distribution:
(cid:18) (cid:19)
Sincethisistheprobabilitythataclassrvirusparticlevproduceskprogeny
particles with the same replication capability as itself one has therefore
ζ (0,...,r−k,k,...,0)=P(S =k)=binom(k;r,1−d).
Given the offspring probability distribution ζ one may set up a proba-
bility generating function f = (f ,...,f ) which is defined by the power
f (z ,z ,...,z )= ζ
(i)zi0 ...ziR
.
r 0 1 R r 0 R
September 28,2018 2:43 Proceedings TrimSize: 9inx6in biomat2012
The probability generating function of the simple phenotypic model is
f (z ,z ,...,z )=1
f (z ,z ,...,z )=dz +cz
1 0 1 R 0 1
f (z ,z ,...,z )=(dz +cz )2 (2)
2 0 1 R 1 2
.
.
.
f (z ,z ,...,z )=(dz +cz )R
R 0 1 R R−1 R
Note that the functions f are polynomials whose coefficients are exactly
binom(k;r,1−d). This function completely determines the branchingpro-
cess.
Now it is easy to obtain the general case where the beneficial effects
have a non-zero contribution b. In this case, the binomial distribution
is replaced by a trinomial distribution (see Feller30) and the probability
generating function of the general phenotypic model is
f (z ,z ,...,z )=1
f (z ,z ,...,z )=dz +cz +bz
1 0 1 R 0 1 2
f (z ,z ,...,z )=(dz +cz +bz )2
2 0 1 R 1 2 3 (3)
.
.
.
f (z ,z ,...,z )=(dz +cz +bz )R−1
R−1 0 1 R R−2 R−1 R
f (z ,z ,...,z )=(dz +(c+b)z )R
R 0 1 R R−1 R
Remark2.1. Itisworthtomentionthatthereareothervariationsofthese
models that share the same essential properties and are more adequate in
different contexts.
• With Zero Class: Inthis variation,whichis the versiondeduced
above, particles of class r = 0 are generated by the particles from
class r=1.
• Without Zero Class: In this variation, the particle class 0 is
omitted and thus the probability generating function has R vari-
ablesandRcomponents: omitthevariablez ,thefirstcomponent
f and define f (z ,...,z ) = d + cz + bz . Particles of class
0 1 1 R 1 2
r = 1 undergoing a deleterious change are eliminated in the next
generation.
2.2. Basic Properties of the Phenotypic Model
Westartbyrecallingthat,whencalculatingprobabilitiesandexpectations,
there is no loss of generality if one considers only initial populations con-
September 28,2018 2:43 Proceedings TrimSize: 9inx6in biomat2012
sistingofjustoneparticleofclassr (06r 6R),sincethe generalcasecan
be decomposed as a sum of independent processes with this kind of initial
population. All the relevant properties of the model can be deduced with
this simplification.
WeshallintroducethenotationZr =1fortheconditionZ =e ,which
istheinitialpopulationconsistingofoneparticleofclassrandzeroparticles
of other classes. Thus P(Z = i|Zr = 1) = ζ (i). A basic assumption in
the theory of branching processes is that all the first moments are finite
and that they are not all zero. Then one may consider the mean evolution
matrix orthematrixoffirstmoments M ={M }whichdescribeshowthe
averagesofthesub-populationsofparticlesineachreplicationclassevolves
in time:
M =E(Zi|Zj =1), ∀i,j =0,...,R.
In terms of the probability generating function one has
M = (1,1,...,1).
Denoting by f′ the jacobian matrix of f one may write
M =f′(1), where 1=(1,1,...,1).
The evolution of the averageshZ i of Z is given by
From the generating functions (2) and (3) it is trivial to compute the
mean matrix of the phenotypic model. The mean matrix of the simple
phenotypic model is
0d 0 0 0 ··· 0
0 c 2d 0 0 ··· 0
0 0 2c 3d 0 ··· 0
  0 . . 0 . . 0 . . 0 . . 4 . . c · . · . · 0  
. . . . . . Rd
0 0 0 0 0 0 Rc
Note that it is an upper triangular matrix.
September 28,2018 2:43 Proceedings TrimSize: 9inx6in biomat2012
In the case of the general phenotypic model the mean matrix is
0d 0 0 0 ··· 0
0 c 2d 0 0 ··· 0
0 b 2c 3d 0 ··· 0
M =0 0 2b 3c 4d··· 0  . (6)
   0 . . . 0 . . . 0 . . . 3 . . . b 4 . . . c · . · . · . R 0 d   
Interestingly, the mean matrix M provided by this class of models is a
tridiagonal matrix,whichis anubiquitous type ofmatrix appearingin sev-
eralfieldsrangingfromstatisticalsignalprocessing35,informationtheory36,
lattice dynamical systems5.
Remark 2.2. In Demetrius et al20 a single type branching process is pro-
posed as a model for the evolution of polynucleotides, moreover they state
that state that the results they obtained for the single type model are still
validinamultitypesituation,providedoneexcludesthepossibilityof“back
mutations”, i.e., if for every replicative class r the mutation rates from the
classes s to r, with s 6 r, can be neglected. This implies, in particular,
that the mean matrix is upper triangular. In fact, it is easy to see that, in
the simplest case where the mutation rates are non-zero only for adjacent
classes, it is formally identical to the mean matrix (5). Moreover, one of
the main assumptions of the basic theory of multitype branching processes
is that the mean matrix is primitive37,6, that is, some power of the matrix
is positive. However, an upper triangular mean matrix is never primitive
and hence the underlying branching processes, in principle, are out of the
reach of the theory. Fortunately, as it will be shown here, there is a gen-
eralizationof the theory of multitype branching processes which is capable
of embracing the simple phenotypic model.
The mean matrix of the phenotypic model can be viewed as the adja-
cency matrix of a directed weighted graph where the nodes represent the
particle classes according to their replication capacity and the arrows rep-
resent the effect of decrease or increase of the replication capacity due to
the replication process (see Figure 1).
September 28,2018 2:43 Proceedings TrimSize: 9inx6in biomat2012
Figure 1. Graphs of mean matrices. (a) Simple phenotypic model. (b) General phe-
notypicmodel. Thearrowsarenumberedaccordingtowhichthereoccursadeleterious
effect(d–dashedarrows)orabeneficialeffect(b–dottedarrows)orneutraleffect(c–
solidarrows).
3. The Simple Phenotypic Model
For the simple phenotypic model it is easy to compute the eigenvalues λ
of the mean matrix M:
λ =rc=r(1−d) r =0,...,R.
In particular, the malthusian parameter is the largest positive eigenvalue
Therefore we have the following immediate result.
Theorem 3.1. The simple phenotypic model has three distinct regimes.
(i) If R(1−d) < 1 then the branching process is sub-critical. That is,
with probability 1, the virus population becomes extinct in finite time.
(ii) If R(1 −d) > 1 then the branching process is super-critical. That
is, with positive probability, the virus population survives and grows
indefinitely at an exponential rate proportional to mn when n→∞.
(iii) If R(1−d) = 1 then the branching process is critical. That is, with
probability 1, the virus population becomes extinct but this may take
an infinite time to happen.
Proof. This is a straightforward consequence of the classification of mul-
titype branching processes, as generalized by Sevastyanov37,42, which is
necessary to include the simple phenotypic model, and equation (7).
September 28,2018 2:43 Proceedings TrimSize: 9inx6in biomat2012
Theorem 3.1 provides a partition of the parameter space of the simple
phenotypic model {(d,R) : d ∈ [0,1], R ∈ N} into two regions (see Fig-
ure 2). The survival region defined by R > 1/(1−d) and the extinction
region defined by R < 1/(1 − d). The curve R = 1/(1 − d) gives the
extinction threshold.
Survival Region
Extinction Region
0 0,08 0,16 0,24 0,32 0,4 0,48 0,56 0,64 0,72 0,8 0,88 0,96
Figure2. Graphof the functionR=1/(1−d) (inblue). Theregionbelow this curve
corresponds to the sub-critical parameters (d,R) and the region above this curve cor-
responds to the super-critical parameters (d,R). The curve itself corresponds to the
criticalparameters(d,R).
It is also important, specially in order to describe the asymptotic be-
haviourin the super-criticalcase, to know the left eigenvectorsv and right
eigenvectorsucorrespondingtotheeigenvalueλ Letuswritethe leftand
right eigenvectors in components as
v =(v ,v ,...,v ) and u=(u ,u ,...,u )
0 1 R 0 1 R
and assume that they are normalized in the following way:
vtu=1 and 1tu=1.
Then we have the following.
September 28,2018 2:43 Proceedings TrimSize: 9inx6in biomat2012
(i) In the version “with zero class” the left eigenvector v is given by
v = (0,...,0,1)
and the right eigenvector u have coordinates u given by
u = (1−d)kdR−k =binom(k;R,1−d).
(cid:18) (cid:19)
(ii) Inthe version“withoutzeroclass”there is no components v andu .
The left eigenvector v is given by
v = (0,...,0,1)
and the right eigenvector u have coordinates u given by
(cid:18) (cid:19)
It is interesting to note that the simple phenotypic model is a “completely
solvable” branching process in the sense that we may explicitly solve the
spectralproblemforitsmeanmatrixindependentlyofthenumericalvalues
of the parameters.
Next we turn to the computation of the extinction probabilities γ .
In this case, it is necessary to solve a non-linear system of polynomial
equations:
.
.
(cid:0) (cid:1) R
This may be done in a recur(cid:0)sive way, since the(cid:1)equation for z is already
solved z = 1 and the equation for z depends only on z and z . Thus
we get for R=0,1,2:
d2/(1−d)2 for 06d6 1
(1 for 1 6d61
September 28,2018 2:43 Proceedings TrimSize: 9inx6in biomat2012
When R > 3 the formulas become very complicated and when R > 5 the
equationmaynotevenbesolvablebyradicals,butingeneralonemaywrite
f(d) for 06d6d
where d = r−1 and f(d) is a strictly increasing smooth function on [0,1[
satisfying: (i) f(0) = 0, (ii) f(d ) = 1, (iii) f(d) < 1 for 0 6 d < d
and (iv) lim f(d) = +∞. This expression suggests that the surviving
probabilitiesω =1−γ canbeinterpretedasanorderparameter associated
to the occurrence of a phase transition when the deleterious probability d
attains the criticalpoint d = r−1, which marks the transitionfrom super-
criticality to sub-criticality,
g(d) for 06d6d
where g(d) = 1 − f(d) and thus satisfies: (i) g(0) = 1, (ii) g(d ) = 0,
(iii) g(d) > 0 for 0 6 d < d and (iv) lim g(d) = −∞. Observe that
for a fixed numerical value of d, the system of equations (8) can be easily
solved by numerical approximation using Newton’s method. For instance,
inFigure3weshowthecurvesforthesurvivingprobabilityfunctionω (d).
Figure3. Curvesforthesurvivingprobabilityωr(d)asfunctionofdforr=2,...,7.
September 28,2018 2:43 Proceedings TrimSize: 9inx6in biomat2012
The result shows that, with respect to ω , the model has a critical
behavior in complete analogy to a second order phase transition (see Fig-
ure 3). Therefore,the criticalproperties of the model can be characterized
by means of relevant critical exponents.
Finally, it is not difficult to see that for fixed d, the numbers γ satisfy
1 > γ > γ > ... > γ and therefore the extinction probability for a
generalinitial condition Z =(Z0,...,ZR) may be estimated far from the
critical deleterious probability d =(R−1)/R by
P(Z =0for some n|Z ) ≈ γ
where |Z′|=Z2+...+ZR and near d =(R−1)/R by
P(Z =0for some n|Z ) ≈ γ Z0 R . (10)
It has been demonstrated that large population passages are able to
increase the adaptability of virus populations54. On the other hand, small
population passages represented by bottleneck events are capable to in-
creasethe risktowardsviralextinction. Among the aspects ofabruptpop-
ulation reductions are the exacerbated effects of drift that coupled with
the Muller’s hatchet principle63 may lead to the random and progressive
lost of the best adapted virus in a population. It also has been suggested
that large virus populations bearing a significant phenotypic diversity are
more adaptable to environment fluctuations and robust. It is correct to
assume that large initial virus populations colonizing new hosts may show
better survival probabilities than populations recovering from bottlenecks.
In this way the size of the viral innoculums may have an impact in the
survival rates of different virus populations. It is important to note that
the existence of a clear cut between regimes of survival and non survival
populations by means of a critical state is directly related to the problem
of lethal mutagenesis for viral populations.
Fromnow onwe shallsplit the analysisof the simple phenotypic model
according to which it is sub-critical, super-critical or critical.
3.1. The Sub-critical Regime: Lethal Mutagenesis
The first consequence of our results is a generalization, in the context of
the phenotypic model (provided one assumes that all effects are of purely
mutationalnature),oftheconjectureoflethalmutagenesis ofBull,Sanju´an
and Wilke10. Recall that Bull et al10 assume that all mutations are either
neutral or deleterious and write the mutation rate U =U +U where the
September 28,2018 2:43 Proceedings TrimSize: 9inx6in biomat2012
component U comprises the purely neutral mutations and the component
U comprises the mutations with a deleterious fitness effect. Let R
denote the maximumreproductivecapacityamongallparticlesinthe viral
population. The extinction criterion proposedbyBull et al10 statesthata
sufficient condition for extinction is
e−UdR <1. (11)
According to Bull et al10, the factor e−Ud is both the mean fitness level
and also the proportion of offspring with no non-neutralmutations. In the
absence of beneficial mutations the only type of non-neutralmutations are
the deleterious mutations and hence
e−Ud = c = 1−d. (12)
More precisely, if hZ i=(Z0,...,ZR) denotes the mean population at
time n then the offspring at time n+1 is given by hZ i = MhZ i and
cZ1+2cZ2+...+RcZR
dZ1+cZ1+2dZ1+2cZ2+...+RdZR+RcZR
c Z1+2Z2+...+RZR
d+c Z1+2Z2+...+RZR
=c=1−d.
Sincethe maximumreproductivecapacityamongallparticlesinthevi-
ralpopulationinourmodelisgivenbythemaximumnumberofreplicative
classes R, it follows that R = R. Therefore, the extinction criterion
(11) is equivalent, in the context of the simple phenotypic model, to
which is exactly the condition for the model to be sub-critical.
Corollary 3.1. In the simple phenotypic model, the virus population be-
comes extinct in finite time, with probability 1, if the product of the neutral
effectprobability(1−d)withthe maximumreplicationcapacityRisstrictly
less than 1.
In another work, Bull et al11 suggest a modification of the extinction
thresholdeq. (11)thataccountsforbeneficialeffectsaslongastheydonot
couple the deleterious ones (see Antoneli et al4 for a more general result).
The main conclusion here is that the existence of lethal mutagenesis
depends on “genetic components” (mutational rates) and other additional
September 28,2018 2:43 Proceedings TrimSize: 9inx6in biomat2012
deleterious effects (host driven pressures intensifications), as well as on
strict “ecologicalcomponents”, namely, the maximum replication capacity
of the particles in the population and on the initial population size. As a
result the viral population may reach extinction by increasing the number
of deleterious mutations per replicationcycle, by decreasingthe value of R
in the population or by a combination of the two mechanisms. The mu-
tational strategy is the basis of treatments using mutagenic drugs16 that
induce errorsinthe generationprocessofnew viralparticlesreducingtheir
replication capacity. A straightforwardconsequence of extinction criterion
eq. (11) or eq. (13) is that a single particle showing the maximum replica-
tion capacity R is able to rescue a viral population driven to extinction by
mutagenic drugs. If it is assumed that RNA virus populations correspond
to a swarm of variants with distinct replication capacities, for a therapy
to become effective it is important that it will eliminate the classes repre-
sented by particles with highest replication capacities. As a conclusion the
higher the replication capacity of the first particles infecting the organism
the larger should be the number of deleterious mutations (or effects) and
therefore the larger should be the drug concentration. This can be a clear
limitation for treatments based on mutagenic drugs.
3.2. The Super-critical Case: Relaxation and Equilibrium
In the super-critical regime, the population grows at a geometric pace in-
definitely. Nevertheless, there are two distinct phases that occur during
this growth: a transient phase (“relaxation”or “recovery time”) and a dy-
namical stationary phase.
3.2.1. Relaxation towards equilibrium.
An important question concerning the adaptation process of a viral pop-
ulation to the host environment is the typical time needed to achieve the
equilibrium state. As the equilibrium is characterized by constant mean
replication capacity an obvious criteria to measure the time to achieve
equilibrium would be by the vanishing variation of this variable as used
in other studies (Aguirre et al1). Nevertheless, this method is clearly sub-
jected to the limitations of numerical accuracy with evident disadvantages
if one wants a sharp and universal criterion to differentiate populations
from the point of view of how fast a population can be typically stabilized
in a organism.
September 28,2018 2:43 Proceedings TrimSize: 9inx6in biomat2012
Viral populations are commonly submitted to transient regimes. As
pointedoutearliertheinfectiontransmissionprocessrepresentsthepassage
of a small number of particles from one organismto another in such a way
thatinthisprocesstheviralpopulationissubmittedtoasubsequentbottle-
neck effect during spreading of viruses in the host population. In order to
approach the problem of relaxation after a bottleneck process in a more
soundbasisthe naturalquantity tobe consideredisthe characteristictime
derivedfromthedecayofthemeanauto-correlationfunction. Thetemporal
correlation function C(n) is typically of the form exp(−αn) and the decay
rateisgivenbytheparameterα. Thenaturalwaytodefineacharacteristic
time T to achieve equilibrium is by setting T = 1/α. In order to find the
characteristic decay rates one should consider the recursive application of
the mean matrix M on the initial population: ZtMnZ . In fact, it is
enough to consider the canonical initial population Z =e =(0,0,...,1).
By direct inspection it is easily verified that the decay of correlations is
typically exponential and given by
where m=R(1−d) is the malth(cid:0)usian parameter. T(cid:1)he decay rate is there-
fore given by α=log(R(1−d)).
Amongothers,onepossible applicationofthis resultrelatesto the very
initial phase of the infection process. If we consider that during this phase
the hostimmune systemhasnotbeenyetstimulatedagainstthe virus,one
can assume that the deleterious effects would be solely represented by the
viral intrinsic mutation rates. Therefore, the largest the value of R, i.e.,
the largest the replication capacity of the initial viral particle the fastest
theprogenyauto-correlationdecaysandreachesequilibriumstabilizingthe
viralpopulation;intuitivelytheparameterRdefinesthedegreeofvirulence
of the infection during the early stage of the infective process. The incre-
ment of deleterious effects plays an opposite role on the decay rates. In
fact, as it will be shown below the closest the parameter d is to its critical
value d more time is needed to achieve equilibrium.
3.2.2. The Dynamical Stationary State.
When the simple phenotypic model is super-critical and is initialized with
exactly one particle in the class r (Zr = 1) the effective malthusian pa-
rameter is m = λ = rc = r(1 − d) with corresponding normalized
righteigenvectoru(r)= u (r),...,u (r),0,...,0 , where the components
(cid:0) (cid:1)
September 28,2018 2:43 Proceedings TrimSize: 9inx6in biomat2012
u (r), with k=0,...,r, are
(cid:18) (cid:19)
Therefore, the simple phenotypic model has R−1 distinct asymptotic
distributions of types of particles, describing R − 1 distinct dynamical
stationary states, characterized by their asymptotic distribution of classes
givenby(14)(uptoarandomscalarperturbation),eachoneofthesebeing
achievedwhenthe branchingprocessisinitializedwithexactlyoneparticle
in the class r (Zr = 1) for r = 2,...,R, respectively. Note that when
r =0,1 the process is always sub-critical.
Theorem3.2. Ifthesimplephenotypicmodelissuper-criticalwithmalthu-
sian parameter m=R(1−d)and starts with at least oneparticle of class R
then, in the long run, the relative number of particles in each class reaches
a stable stationary dynamical state and is (up to a random scalar perturba-
tion)distributedaccordingtothe BinomialDistribution: binom(k;R,1−d),
where k =0,...,R are the replication classes.
Proof. This is consequence of the generalized Kesten-Stigum 50,49,51 re-
sults about the asymptotic behaviour of decomposable (i.e., with non-
primitive mean matrix) super-critical multitype branching processes and
the computation of the normalized right eigenvector associated to the
malthusian parameter m=R(1−d) given by equation (14).
From theorem 3.2 we immediately obtain:
• The mean replication capacity is
• The phenotypic diversity is
It is well accepted that the phenotypic diversity is an important charac-
teristic of the viral population intuitively related to the idea of population
robustness 27. In fact, a homogeneous population would be less flexible
from the point of view of adaptation. The variance associated with the
stationarystate canbe understoodasa naturalquantity to measurediver-
sity. It shows that the maximum value of the phenotypic diversity r/4 is
reached if d= 1/2 for any value of r. If R>2 the variation of the pheno-
typicdiversityasafunctionofdshowsthattherearetwodifferentdomains
September 28,2018 2:43 Proceedings TrimSize: 9inx6in biomat2012
to be considered: below d = 1/2 the diversity is an increasing function of
d. It implies that if the population has a typical value of d < 1/2 the
effect of inducing an increment of d (for instance using mutagenic drugs)
increases the phenotypic diversity. For 1/2 < d < d this effect reverses
and diversity decreases with increasing d. This result raises the question
if in normal conditions the viral population adapt to the host environment
guided by a principle of maximum phenotypic diversity or if the environ-
mental conditions simply contribute to fix one possible value of diversity
for the population that may vary from one to another host organism. In-
teresting enough, the natural deleterious mutations has been measured for
certain viruses and, as shown in the Table 1, they are close to the value
d=1/2. In the first case one could preview that the set point of the viral
disease should be invariant (or with small variation) for all hosts. On the
other hand the second hypothesis leads to the idea of different responses
to treatment depending on the initial value of d before the adoption of
treatment strategies to improve d. At the present the two scenarios may
apply to different type of viruses and this point clearly has to be decided
experimentally.
Table 1. Experimental results of deleterious
mutation rates: (VSV) vesicular stomatitis
virus, (TEV) Tobacco etch virus and (ΦX174,
Qβ)bacterial viruses.
Virus Ud (1−d)=e−Ud REF.
VSV 0.692 0.500 74
TEV 0.773 0.461 13
ΦX174 0.72-0.77 0.48-0.46 23
Qβ 0.74-0.86 0.47-0.42 23
Another important consequence of the above results concerns the effi-
ciencyoftheuseofmutagenicdrugs. Intheregiond<1/(R+1)<1/2the
viral population’s most representative particle is the fittest one (class R).
If we assume that the drug action is deeply influenced by drug transport
coefficients indifferenthosttissues,it is importantto be assuredthat local
drug concentrations will still eliminate the set of class R particles. If d
increases beyond 1/(R+1) the representative particle of the population is
not anymore the fittest one but a set of particles from different replication
classes. Thereforethemaindrugtargetrepresentsagroupofaveragerepli-
September 28,2018 2:43 Proceedings TrimSize: 9inx6in biomat2012
cating particles of a population with higher phenotypic diversity in which
resistance drug mutants can be contained. In this case one would say that
the viral population displays a kind of endogenous strategy to scape the
deleterious action of the mutagenic drug. If we assume that deleterious
effectsaresmallintheearlystageoftheinfectionprocessweshouldexpect
that at this stage the drug efficiency would be maximum reinforcing the
successful practice of post exposure therapy, currently adopted in the case
of HIV infections46.
3.3. The Critical Case: Extinction Threshold
The clearest way to characterize the time behavior of the viral population
at or around the critical point is through the typical time T to approach
equilibrium derived from the decay of correlations described above.
The expression T = 1/log(R(1−d)) shows that at the critical point
the equilibrium state is never reached, i.e., the decay to equilibrium is at
least non-exponential. A scaling exponent characterizing the behavior of
T in the neighborhood of the critical point d can be easily obtained. The
expansion around d =(R−1)/R gives
Although it is always possible to calculate intermediate distributions of
progeny, it is quite easy to see that at the critical point the time evolution
of densities never achieves an invariant density.
Unlike in the super-critical regime, the relative number of particles in
each class/sub-population is never stable. Nevertheless, our preliminary
results concerning the dynamics of fluctuations show that the time varia-
tion of the numbers of particles in each separated class follows a pattern
such that the variation observed in one class is rigorously the same ob-
served in all the others. This indicate a high level of correlation between
the classes in complete analogy with critical phenomena of many physical
systems. We conjecture that in the critical regime the highly correlated
classes in the population behave as an inseparable whole such that the no-
tionofthepopulationdividedinseparatedclassesbecomesmeaningless. In
other words the correlation between classes makes them behave as if they
constitute one unique class, which reminds one of the basic properties of
the error threshold in Eigen’s theory25. In fact, according to Eigen, when
mutationalratesareincreasedbeyondathreshold,infiniteviralpopulations
are not anymore able to retain its best adapted variants. At this critical
mutation level, selection is overruled by mutation and all variants share
September 28,2018 2:43 Proceedings TrimSize: 9inx6in biomat2012
the same fitness status. Moreover, populations at Eigen’s error threshold
do not become extinct, but welldefined replicationclassescease to exit, as
particles hazardously wander through the surface of a flat landscape.
If in the super-critical case the notion of the mean replication capacity
and therefore that of the “mean viral particle” exists defining a typical
scale in the system, in the critical case this notion is absent. Therefore, in
using branching processes to model the time behavior of viral populations
the concept of error threshold should be identified with that of criticality.
In the same direction of reasoning, in terms of branching processes the
existence of lethal mutagenesis should be identified with that of critical
behavior of the model.
The critical behavior of the model can also be observed through the
survivalprobabilityfunctionω(d)ford.d asshowinFigure3. Expansion
of the survival probability function ω(d) around the critical point d using
the system of equations for the extinction probabilities (8) gives directly
Itisinterestingtonote thatthe criticalexponents ofT andω arethe same
found in criticalbehavior ofa largeclass ofdynamical randomnetworks72.
However, it is noteworthy that here we talk about criticality of a process
takingplaceintime,andthereforethetermcritical phenomenon (imported
fromequilibriumstatisticalmechanicsofspacedistributedsystems)isused
to highlight the fact that the survival probability behaves like an order
parameterandthe amountof deleteriouseffects quantifiedby dbehaves as
a control parameter that can be changed by external means.
Thisfactisreminiscentfromthedeeprelationexistingbetweenbranch-
ing process and random network theory, where the survival probability
functionofabranchingprocessis identifiedwiththe orderparameterasso-
ciatedtotheemergenceofthegiantclusterinadynamicalrandomnetwork.
ThisfundamentalobservationgoesbacktoKarp45andmorerecentlyithas
become the central technique in the study of more general models of ran-
dom networks8. In this direction, it is worth to also note that there is a
correspondencebetweenEigen’smodelofmolecularevolutionandtheequi-
libriumstatisticalmechanicsofaninhomogeneousIsingsystem56,againan
indication of a relation between statistical mechanics, random networks
and branching processes. The relation between these theories is certainly
expected to bring important new insights to virus evolution in the future.
September 28,2018 2:43 Proceedings TrimSize: 9inx6in biomat2012
4. Conclusions and Outlook
UsingtheprevioustheoreticalmodelforvirusevolutionproposedbyLa´zaro
et al54 and Aguirre et al1 as a starting point we show that virus evolution
can be described by an exact solvable multivariate branching process. By
applyingourapproachweareabletoidentifycrucialaspectsofthedynam-
ics of replicating viral populations on a sound theoretical basis. Among
these severalaspects we are able to demonstrate that – as long as the ben-
eficial effects are close to zero – the two main driving features of a virus
population are the maximum replication capacity and the fraction of the
populationnotaffectedbydeleteriouseffects. Basedonthisresultweshow
that,asproposedbyBulletal,iftheproductbetweentheabovementioned
parameters m = R(1−d) yields a value less than one the population un-
dergoesextinction. Onthe other hand, ifm=R(1−d)is greaterthanone
andthe environmentis constantweshowthat the populationwillreachan
asymptoticstationarystate characterizedby the stability ofthe replicative
classes. However, the time to reach the stationary equilibrium strictly de-
pends on how intense is the deleterious effect, more precisely, the higher d
the longer is the transient phase and when d approaches its critical value
d the transient tends to infinity.
According to our explicit formulas for the progeny distribution, we
demonstrate that virus populations maximize their phenotypic diversity
by replicating with d near 1/2, for any value of R. We speculate that
this might be a universal property for RNA viruses that replicate under
high mutational rates. In this way by increasing their phenotypic diversity
viruses augments their chances of survival escaping and adapting to envi-
ronmentalpressures. Maintenance ofhighmutationratesmakesitdifficult
for a population to retain their best replicative classes. As a consequence,
the best adapted classes are not the most represented ones in the popula-
tion, thus not characterizing a classical Darwinian evolution process. As
far as branching process modeling of viral evolution is concerned its crit-
ical behavior partially resembles the concept of error threshold in Eigen’s
theory of molecular quasispecies. In this regime the replicative classes lose
their independence in the sense that they become so much correlated that
the whole set of classes behaves as a single one.
We also demonstrate that by keeping the deleterious effects constant
thesurvivalprobabilityofaviruspopulationwilldependonitsinitialpop-
ulation size. By increasing the population size at time zero we push the
survival probability curves, in the region before the critical point, towards
September 28,2018 2:43 Proceedings TrimSize: 9inx6in biomat2012
one (see Figure 3 and equations (9), (10)). According to this result it can
be speculated that virus with greater innoculums have a better chance of
survival colonizing new hosts. Interestingly enough and in a frontal dis-
agreementto the above observations it has been shownthat only a limited
number ofparticles,andinsomecasesevenone particle,is enoughto start
a new infectious process in a host47,86. However, according to the model
and as discussed before, the R parameter determines the success of an in-
coming virus population because the corresponding value of d is uniquely
given by R. The present work suggests that minimum innoculums must
haveatleastone particlewithreplicativecapacitylargeenoughinorderto
survive in the new host. We speculate that those particles with maximum
replicative capacity should constitute the effective innoculum described in
Zwartet al86. Infact, the experimentaldata about viralloadin HIV early
infectedpatientsstronglysuggeststhatthehostdeleteriouseffects overthe
viral population are minimal and increase after the onset of the immuno-
logicalresponse71. We notethatthe characteristicformofthis datacanbe
easily reproduced by the model (see Castro et al14,15).
Finally, it is important to mention that the close relation of the theory
ofbranchingprocesses(as used inthe presentwork)anddynamicalErdo¨s-
Renyi type networks indicates that the latter may be brought to bear in
the modelingofviruspopulations. Therelationbetweenthesetwotheories
is undoubtedly a research avenue with promising potential to improve our
knowledge of the dynamical laws governing the evolution and adaptation
of viral populations.
Acknowledgments
FA wish to acknowledge the support of CNPq through the grant PQ-
313224/2009-9 and thanks FAP-UNIFESP and BIOMAT Consortium for
thefinancialsupporttopresentthisworkatthe“12thInternationalSympo-
sium on Mathematical and Computational Biology”. FB recieved support
fromtheBrazilianagencyFAPESP.DCreceivedfinancialsupportfromthe
Brazilian agency CAPES.
Appendix A. Review of the Theory of Branching Processes
In this section we collect a few definitions and results from the theory of
branching process that will be necessary in our analysis of the phenotypic
model.
September 28,2018 2:43 Proceedings TrimSize: 9inx6in biomat2012
The Mean Matrix of a Branching Process
Consider a multitype branching process Z with offspring probability dis-
tribution ζ and probability generating function f. Suppose that ζ has all
its first moments finite and not all zero. Then conditioning on the elemen-
taryinitialpopulationsZr =1onmaydefinethemeanmatrix M ={M }
of the multitype branching process Z by
M =E(Zi|Zj =1) ∀i,j =0,...,R.
In general, a multitype Galton-Watson branching process can be classified
into decomposable and indecomposable accordingto which its mean matrix
isreducibleorirreducible,respectively. Anon-negativematrixM ={M }
(0 6 i,j 6 R) is called irreducible if for every pair of indices i and j,
there exists a natural number n such that Mn > 0 and it is called
reducible otherwise(seeGantmatcher33). Thereisanothercharacterization
(cid:0) (cid:1)
of irreducibility in terms of the graph of the matrix.
The graph G(M) of M is defined to be the directed graph on R nodes
{0,1,...,R}, each corresponding to a type of particle, in which there is
a directed edge leading from node i to node j if and only if M 6= 0. A
graphG(M) is called path connected if for eachpair of nodes (i,j) there is
asequenceofdirectededgesleadingfromitoj. AmatrixM isirreducible
if and only if G(M) is path connected (see Meyer61).
A multitype Galton-Watson branching process is called positively reg-
ular if its mean matrix M is primitive, that is, Mn is positive for some
positive integer n. In particular, a positively regular branching process is
indecomposable,sinceaprimitivematrixisirreducible(seeGantmatcher33
or Meyer61). Positive regularity is a standard assumption in the study of
multitypebranchingprocesses,asitopensupthewaytoapplythepowerful
Perron-Frobenius theory (see Harris37 or Athreya and Ney6).
Example A.1. The classification of the phenotypic model according to
the irreducibility or reducibility of its mean matrix is the following:
(i) In the version “with zero class” the mean matrix (6) or (5) will have
thefirstcolumnfilledwithzeros,thatis,theyarenotprimitivematri-
cesandthus the correspondingbranchingprocessesarenotpositively
regular. Moreover, a quick look at the graph G(M) in Figure 1 (b)
shows that the process is decomposable since the node corresponding
to particles of type 0 does not have a direct arrow leading to other
nodes. Inthe case ofthe simple phenotypic model, the corresponding
September 28,2018 2:43 Proceedings TrimSize: 9inx6in biomat2012
graphG(M) is shownFigure 1 (a). Note that there are no dotted ar-
rowssince the probability of beneficial effects is 0 and so the graphis
totally path disconnected, in other words, each “path component”of
the graph consists of exactly one node.
(ii) In the version “without zero class” the mean matrix of both models
can be obtained from (6) and (5) by removing the first row and the
first column. Now the general phenotypic model becomes positively
regular,since the node corresponding to particles of class 0 no longer
exists. Thesimplephenotypicmodelstillisdecomposable,evenwith-
out the node corresponding to particles of class 0.
Malthusian Parameter and Extinction Probability
Let ̺(M) denote the spectral radius of M, that is, if λ ,...,λ are the
eigenvalues of M then
Since M is a non-negative matrix, it has(cid:8)at l(cid:9)east one largest non-negative
eigenvalue which coincides with its spectral radius (see Gantmatcher33 or
Meyer61). When the largest eigenvalue is positive we shall call it, follow-
ing Kimmel and Axelrod52, the malthusian parameter m of the branching
process (see also Jagers et al41).
ThemalthusianparameterofamultitypeGalton-Watsonbranchingpro-
cess plays the same role as the mean of the probability distribution of the
offspring in a simple Galton-Watson process and its name is motivated by
equation(4), whichimplies that̺(Mn)=mn, the averagepopulationsize
increasesordecreasesatageometricrate,inaccordancewiththe “Malthu-
sian Law of Growth”.
Finally, it follows from the theory of non-negative matrices that there
is a left non-negative eigenvector v and a right non-negative eigenvector u
corresponding to the eigenvalue m:
vtM =mvt and Mu=mu,
which can be normalized so that
vtu=1 and 1tu=1,
wherevt isthetransposedofthevectorv. Moreover,whenM isirreducible
theleftandrighteigenvectorsarepositive(seeGantmatcher33orMeyer61).
Let γ =(γ ,...,γ ) be the vector of extinction probabilities
γ =P(Z =0for some n|Zr =1),
September 28,2018 2:43 Proceedings TrimSize: 9inx6in biomat2012
the probability that the process eventually become extinct given that ini-
tiallythereisexactlyoneparticleofclassr. Ingeneral,whentheinitialcon-
dition is given by a vector of non-negative integers Z = (Z0,Z1,...,ZR)
the extinction probability is
=0for some n|Z
Z0 i .
A basic result of the theory of branching processes is that the vector of
extinctionprobabilitiesγ isthesolutionin[0,1]Rwithsmallestcomponents
of the equation
where f is the probability generating function. Observe that 1 is always a
fixed point of f, that is, a solutionof equation(A.1). Therefore,if there is
noothersolutionofequation(A.1)intheunitcube[0,1]R thentheprocess
always has probability 1 to become extinct.
The main classification result in the indecomposable case, states that
there are only three possible regimes (see Harris37 or Athreya and Ney6):
(i) If m > 1 then 0 6 γ < 1 is the unique stable fixed point of f in the
unit cube [0,1]R different than 1 and the branching process is called
super-critical. Therefore, with positive probability, the population
will survive indefinitely.
(ii) If m< 1 then γ =1 is the unique stable fixed point of f in the unit
cube[0,1]Randthebranchingprocessiscalledsub-critical. Therefore,
with probability 1, the process will become extinct in finite time.
(iii) If m = 1 then γ = 1 is the unique marginal fixed point of f in the
unitcube[0,1]R andthebranchingprocessiscalledcritical. Here,the
expectedtimetoextinctionisinfinite,despitethefactthatextinction
is bound to occur almost surely.
Unfortunately this theoremdoes not coverall the interesting cases,one
important example for us being the phenotypic model for viral evolution.
Nevertheless,oneoftheearliestresultsaboutdecomposablebranchingpro-
cesses is the generalization of the classification, due to Sevastyanov (see
Harris37 and Jiˇrina42). In the general decomposable case, there is a fourth
alternative identified by Sevastyanov37,42 and in order to formulate this
condition we need to introduce another important concept.
A multitype Galton-Watson branching process is called singular if its
probability generating function is linear without constant term, that is,
September 28,2018 2:43 Proceedings TrimSize: 9inx6in biomat2012
f(z)=Mz. Inthiscase,thereisnobranchingsinceeachparticleproduces
exactlyoneparticlethatcanbeofanyclassandtheprocessisequivalentto
an ordinary finite Markov chain. More generally, a decomposable process
may have singular path components. Two nodes i and j are said to be in
same path component if there is a sequence of directed edges leading from
i to j and a sequence of directed edges leading from j to i. This procedure
defines a partition of the set of nodes into equivalence classes, called path
components ofthegraphG(M). WesaythatapathcomponentC ofG(M)
is a singular path component, if any particle whose class is in C has prob-
ability 1 of producing, in the next generation, exactly one particle whose
classisinC. Equivalently,the componentfunctions ofthe probabilitygen-
erating function corresponding to the classes in a path component C are
linear functions of the variables corresponding to the classes in the path
component C. In other words, the “part” of the probability generating
function corresponding to the classes in C is that of a singular branching
process. The existence of singular components is obviously an obstruction
toextinction,forinstance,inadecomposablesingularprocessallpathcom-
ponents are singular. In fact, the result of Sevastyanov states that if there
is at least one singular path component then the branching process never
become extinct, no matter what is the value of the malthusian parameter.
Example A.2. Thegraphcorrespondingto the generalphenotypic model
(Figure 1 (b)) have two path components: {0} and {1,2,3,...,R}. In the
simple phenotypic model (Figure 1 (a)), the path components are exactly
the sets containing one node, {0}, {1}, ..., {R}. From the expressions of
the generating functions (2) and (3) it is clear that there are no singular
pathcomponentsinanyofthemodels–simpleorgeneral,“withzeroclass”
or “without zero class”. Moreover,the generalphenotypic model “without
zero class” is positively regular. Therefore, the phenotypic model displays
only the three regimes determined by the malthusian parameter, which
depends on the values of the parameters b,c,d and R.
Itisimportanttostressthattheregimeofamultitypebranchingprocess
can not be read from the mean matrix alone (i.e, the malthusian param-
eter). Essentially this happens because of the existence of decomposable
branching processes with singular components.
Example A.3. Consider the following generating functions:
h(z,w)=(cid:0)z,(dz+cw)2 , (cid:1)
(cid:0) (cid:1)
September 28,2018 2:43 Proceedings TrimSize: 9inx6in biomat2012
where 0<c,d<1 and c+d=1. They have the same mean matrix given
by M = 12d and so the malthusian parameter is m = max{1,2c}. It
is easy to solve the fixed point equation (A.1) in both cases and compute
(cid:0) (cid:1)
the respective extinction probability vectors(γ ,γ ): for the function g we
have that γ =1 and γ =d2/c2 if 06d6 1 and γ =1 if 1 6d61. For
the function h we havethat γ =γ =0. Therefore,the branchingprocess
defined by g becomes extinct if and only if c 6 1/2 while the branching
process defined by h never becomes extinct irrespective of the value of the
malthusian parameter!
Asymptotic Behaviour of Surviving Populations
According to the “Malthusian Law of Growth” it is expected that a super-
critical branching process will grow indefinitely at a geometric rate pro-
portional to mn and we would like to write Z ≈ mnW , where W is
a random vector with a finite “asymptotic distribution of classes” when
n → ∞. The formalization of this heuristic argument is due to Kesten
and Stigum (see Kesten-Stigum50,49 for the case of indecomposable mul-
titype branching processes and Kesten-Stigum51 for the case of a general
decomposable multitype branching processes).
Letusfirstrecalltheresultintheindecomposablecase(seeAthreyaand
Ney6). Considerasuper-criticalbranchingprocesswithm>1andsuppose
that the vector valued random variable ζ satisfies a technical condition
calledKesten-Stigum“ζlogζ”condition (seeLyonsetal58andOlofsson67),
which is always satisfied in our case, since the probability distribution of
the offsprings has finite support. It is natural to define the normalized
random vector W =Z /mn. This normalized random vector has a limit
when n → ∞, that is, there exists a scalar random variable W 6= 0 such
that, with probability one,
lim W =W u,
whereuisthenormalizedrighteigenvectorcorrespondingtothemalthusian
parameter m (1tu=1) and
where v is the normalizedleft eigenvectorcorrespondingto the malthusian
parameter m (vtu=1).
September 28,2018 2:43 Proceedings TrimSize: 9inx6in biomat2012
AnimportantstepintheproofofKesten-StigumtheoremistheKurtz53
convergence of classes theorem:
lim =u (almost surely). (A.2)
n→∞ |Z n |
Combining this with the Perron-Frobenius theorem (see Meyer61) one ob-
lim n = lim n =u, (A.3)
where the convergence in the first limit is in probability. The approach
adopted in Cuesta et al18,12 relates only to the second equality involving
the limit of mean values of equation (A.3). By explicitly considering the
microscopic model as a multivariate branching process the equality of the
two limits in equation (A.3) is guaranteed. This result may be useful for
computationalsimulations ofthe model, since one maycompute the eigen-
vector u by sampling the population and taking averages.
The meaning of the Kesten-Stigumtheorem is that the total size of the
population divided by mn, converges to a random vector, but the relative
proportionsof the various “classes”approachfixed limits. Since we are as-
sumingthattheprocessisindecomposablethenormalizedrighteigenvector
u = (u ,...,u ) is positive and is normalized so that u = 1, there-
fore it defines a probability distribution on the set of classes {0,...,R}. It
is called the asymptotic distribution of classes of the multitype branching
process.
Inordertoextendtheseresultstothe casewherethe branchingprocess
isdecomposableoneshouldemploytheFrobenius normal form ofthemean
matrixM,whichisreducibleinthiscase(seeGantmatcher33). Kestenand
Stigum51 show that it is possible, by rearranging the rows and columns,
to rewrite the mean matrix in a block upper triangular form in such a
way that the diagonal blocks are irreducible square matrices associated to
components of the decomposable branching process. By a component of
a decomposable branching process we mean a subset of classes such that
their associated nodes in the graph G(M) forms a path component. Let
{C : 0 6 k 6 N} be the set of components of G(M) ordered according
to which C ≺ C if there is a sequence of directed edges leading from
some i ∈ C to some j ∈C . Given two components C and C define the
sub-matrix
M(k,l)=M with i∈C ,j ∈C .
September 28,2018 2:43 Proceedings TrimSize: 9inx6in biomat2012
Then,foreachk,thesquaresub-matrixM(k)=M(k,k)istheirreducible
mean matrix of the sub-process
Now the order of the components C allows us to rearrange the rows and
columns of M in such a way that
 . . . . . . .. . . 
 . . . . . 
 0 0 0 0 M(N) 
Therefore, the sub-process Z (k) “receives input” from the sub-process
Z (l), with k < l, throughout the sub-matrix M(k,l). Note that if the
sub-matrices M(k,l) are all zero then the branching process splits as a
sum of independent indecomposable branching processes.
Example A.4. The matrices (5) and (6) of the simple and the general
phenotypic models, respectively, already are in the normal form:
(i) In the simple phenotypic model we have that N = R, with one-
dimensional diagonal sub-matrices M(k) = k(1 − d) , with one-
dimensional sub-matrices M(k,k + 1) = (k + 1)d and one-
(cid:0) (cid:1)
dimensional sub-matrices M(k,l)=0 if l>k+1.
(cid:0) (cid:1)
(ii) In the general phenotypic model we have N = 1, with the first diag-
onal sub-matrix M(0) = 0 (or M(0) = 1 for the first variation
of the model), the second diagonal sub-matrix M(1) = M , with
(cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:1) ij
i,j =1,...,R and M(0,1)= d 0···0).
Now observe that if Zi =1 with(cid:0)i∈C then for l >k, the sub-process
Z (l) = 0 for all n > 0. That is, the branching process behaves as if the
sub-processesZ (l)foralll >kdidnotexist. Sinceeachnon-zerodiagonal
sub-matrixM(l)isirreducible,ithasalargestpositiveeigenvaluem(l)and
then we may define the effective malthusian parameter of the sequence of
sub-processes (Z (0),...,Z (k)) to be
Thesimplestcaseiswhenallm(l)aresimpleeigenvaluesoftheirrespective
sub-matrices M(l) – they are distinct amongst eachother – this is exactly
the case for matrices (5) and (6).
September 28,2018 2:43 Proceedings TrimSize: 9inx6in biomat2012
In Kesten and Stigum51 the result about the asymptotic behaviour of
irreducible super-critical branching process is generalized to the reducible
case. The main theorem applied to the case where all m(l) are simple
eigenvaluesoftheirrespectivesub-matricesM(l)statesthatiftheeffective
malthusian m (k) > 1 and the “ζlogζ” condition holds then for the nor-
malizedrandomvectorW (k)=Z /(m (k))n thereexistsascalarrandom
variable W 6=0 such that, with probability one,
lim W (k)=W u(k),
whereu(k)isthenormalizedrighteigenvectorcorrespondingtotheeffective
malthusian parameter m (k) and
where v(k) is the left eigenvector corresponding to the effective malthu-
sian parameter m (k). Moreover, Kurtz’s convergence of classes theo-
rem (A.2) still holds. But one should note that the normalized right and
left eigenvectors are not positive anymore. In fact, v(k) may have nega-
tive entries, but only those associated to the components C with l 6 k,
for which Z is zero. The right normalized eigenvector is of the form
u(k) = (u ,...,u ,0,...,0), where (u ,...,u ) is the non-negative right
normalizedeigenvectorofthesub-matrixcorrespondingtothethesequence
of sub-processes (Z (0),...,Z (k)), and so is a probability distribution.
Critical Behavior and Regime Transition
The critical state separates the super-critical and the sub-critical regimes
where the branching process has two distinct behaviors in time and thus
characterizestheexistenceofregimetransitionwithgenuinecriticalbehav-
ior. Infact,the decayofcorrelationfunctions describedinthe nextsection
for the case of the simplest model clarifies this point.
Although in a critical branching process Z → 0, almost surely, when
n→∞, one still may obtain a meaningful asymptotic law by conditioning
onnon-extinction. See Mullikin64 and Joffe andSpitzer43 for the indecom-
posable case and Foster and Ney32 for certain decomposable cases.
In the indecomposable critical case Z grows at a linear rate propor-
tionalto n (see Harris37 or Athreya and Ney6), and so one shouldconsider
the normalized random vector Y = Z /n. If the second moments are
finite and the branching process is non-singular, there is a scalar random
variable Y 6=0 such that
lim Y =Yu given that Z 6=0,
September 28,2018 2:43 Proceedings TrimSize: 9inx6in biomat2012
whereuisthenormalizedrighteigenvectorcorrespondingtothemalthusian
parameter m and with convergence only in distribution, which is weaker
than the almost surely convergence in the super-critical case.