Virtual Labs in Electrical Engineering Education -
The VEMA Environment
M. Travassos Valdez, Maria João M. Martins F. P. Maciel Barbosa
C. Machado Ferreira Academia Militar Departamento de Engenharia
Instituto Superior de Engenharia de DCTE & INESC-ID Eletrotécnica e de Computadores
Coimbra Lisboa, Portugal Faculdade de Engenharia da Universidade
IPC/ISEC mariajoaomartins2@gmail.com do Porto (FEUP) and INESC TEC
Coimbra, Portugal Porto, Portugal
valdez@isec.pt fmb@fe.up.pt
Abstract—3D worlds provide excellent platforms to achieve
I. INTRODUCTION
performance results when designed for the needs of students,
helping them to improve acquisition and allowing greater
interaction with contents in a unique way. Technology is crucial to integrate activities based teaching and
Virtual Labs are the future of education. Simulations, in learning methods. The type of software and hardware required is a
which environmental measurements and data analysis can be matter of consideration as the technology involved should be easy for
simulated, are being created to combine real-world environments students and teachers to use and viable to set up. Different
with information supplied by devices. Virtual Labs (VL) educational topics may require different technological solutions [1].
designed for educational purposes in Electrical Engineering The implementation of educational technology can increase current
provide tasks or problems within a virtual environment or learning, teaching and assessment processes by immersing students
context. Users can explore the environment and examine digital and teachers in an activity that is creative and pleasant for all. A
objects as they are designed to support inquiry-based learning carefully implemented activity that uses 3D visualization technology
and conceptual understanding. can improve current teaching and learning methods [2].
Online virtual labs simulate learning environments and are The use of simulations in teaching is becoming increasingly
designed to be highly attractive. They can complement the common. Simulations focus students on the essence of the problem,
traditional formal learning programs, providing the opportunity contributing to a more efficient assimilation of the topic viewed in
for an interaction across a range of learning experiences in 3D. each computer experiment. The use of simulators also allows
Online learning such as virtual classrooms will become the major students to investigate situations which may be demanding or even
part of training education in the future. Virtual lab applications impossible to perform in a laboratory, thus providing a better and
are an engaging and agreeable learning system. Educational deeper understanding of the phenomena involved {3-7].
virtual labs should not merely focus on the virtual environment; This work is the result of an investigation integrating the use of
they are useful to help students learn to think creatively and new technologies, especially the manipulation of computer
understand the complexities of solving meaningful problems, but simulations to teach selected topics of Circuit Theory. The choice of
the support from the teacher is also important. topics was based on the reported difficulty students have/feel when
This study presents a virtual scenario of an instrumentation learning concepts related to these contents, and also due to the
and measurements laboratory. Students work with relevance of this subject, mainly its connection with natural
representations of electrical circuits focused on learning phenomena and technology.
electrical concepts and circuit analysis, also studying and Technology alone cannot improve learning, as it is necessary to
developing action procedures. The goal is to help them learn to be smoothly integrated in activities based on teaching strategies.
think like engineers. While they are learning about circuit The activities were devised based on an initial problem, its
theory, they are also learning to apply the many skills of an organization and use of previous learned concepts. The first activities
engineer such as organizing information for writing technical present situations or equipment already familiar to the user.
reports. It is necessary to discuss first the phenomenon and use of
This work was developed to demonstrate how a desktop equipment to reach the specific concepts in order to organize the
Virtual Reality (VR) prototype, “Virtual Electric Manual”- knowledge. Then, the concepts must be organized and extended to
VEMA, can be applied to an engineering unit and used to electrical mounts /situations as knowledge is applied.
enhance security and resourcefulness in using electrical The setup of activities is divided into two sets: one consisting of
equipment. Several interactive scenes were developed to illustrate six general activities and the other one containing five simple
the idea using a measurements and instrumentation laboratory circuits. Most of the activities consist of interactive simulations to
as virtual environment. build DC circuits (nine examples) and AC circuits (four examples).
See Fig. 1.
Keywords—e-learning, interactive application, software
packages, virtual reality, 3D lab internet
This approach aims at promoting learning and encouraging
students to reflect not only on the subject, but also become
autonomous learners.
The intention is to attract a large number of students and improve
the quality of teaching and learning using new resources. With the
advances of technology, and in particular the development of 3D
virtual environments, new opportunities are presented, which may
also solve some problems of lack of resources in some Institutions.
The need of a more autonomous and flexible learning
environment led to the use of Virtual Learning Environments
(VLEs), systems that provide access to online interactions of various
kinds [7-8], [11-12].
III. VIRTUAL LAB - VEMA
One of the goals of VEMA was to create an attractive and
Fig. 1. First page of VEMA motivating environment both for teachers and students. The
prototype contains interactive simulations, virtual labs, testing as well
as internet links which are called “learning objects”. With a learning
II. SIMULATIONS - EDUCATIONAL STRATEGIES
object of three, four or five minutes the teacher is able to
The educational strategies of learning by doing and learning present/explain a certain subject which could normally take him one
through practice are essential in this subject. The teaching and or two 50 minutes sessions. The ability to create and explore 3D
learning perspective is close to the constructivist theory of cognition. online environments presents several stimulating opportunities [10].
Students must learn a variety of techniques and skills necessary to This kind of application can be integrated into the teaching and
carry out their projects. Learning is best achieved when they focus learning in a range of educational frameworks. It includes images,
their work on solving problems defined in the short-term. Although basic training guides and projects which students can use to practice.
the theory of constructivism is not new, technology can contribute to VEMA may also be used in different levels of studies, ranging
teaching and learning methods as theory can be applied more from basic learning, intermediate studies, and professional courses to
meaningfully [8]. With technology students can create their own young adults and adult education. Regarding virtual environments for
understanding of the world and build their personal representation of teaching and learning, it seems to be quite positive.
knowledge. Learning occurs when they actively explore the VEMA (Virtual Eletrical MAnual), as an interactive application
knowledge leading to the discovery and there is interaction between platform, aims at allowing students to explore and experiment several
students and their peers. electrical experiments, without the need for being actually working in
The concept of learning by doing is associated with the in the lab. The purpose is to provide another resource and support for
educational theory of experiential learning, in which the student is higher education students to teach basic concepts in Circuit Theory.
directly in touch with the realities being studied. In the learning It enables any number of students, from any location, to use this
process students absorb more when they take on a project or task and simulated environment [13-14].
are allowed to make discoveries by themselves [9]. This involves The prototype uses 3D visualization in which it is possible to
questioning, analysis, experimentation, responsibility and the manipulate contents, that is, change the position of an object, rotate
construction of meaning. This strategy allows learning to arise from it, pull it away, bring it forward, etc. The physical environment of a
natural significances, mistakes and successes, achieved by the real lab is replicated, simulating workbenches or stored equipment.
students. By engaging in the action and reflecting on that same Some of the functions resemble a “game”, allowing the student to
action, students achieve a deeper understanding of the theory and the choose one experiment within the range already prepared or create a
practice involved. They are encouraged to develop the capacity for whole new one.
independent learning, solve problems in a creative way, identify and All simulations are easy to handle and use in the classroom. They
redefine problems. The purpose is to promote self-discovery, which were built in 3ds Max, Vizup, Wirefusion or Java and may be run
can lead to a deeper approach to learning [10]. using any web server, with no need of any plugin installation.
An approach based on research combines discoveries from The VR tool of this project uses a Wirefusion authoring tool,
previous findings and the testing prepares students to build up which allows a low cost and fast implementation when an
connections between real life phenomena and basic science, thus educational license is used. This was a key factor in the choice of this
strengthening their understanding of the world they live in. specific application to implement VEMA. Moreover, Wirefusion
In order to further encourage quantitative exploration, simulations does not generate 3D images or models; in turn, the developer creates
offer measurement instruments, including multimeters, power a range of 3D objects, images, animations, 3D mesh and sounds in a
sources, oscilloscopes, voltmeters and function generators. As the separate program and then imports them to Wirefusion. The basic
user handles the interactive tools, the answers are immediately construction units in Wirefusion are called “objects”. In short, an
animated, showing cause-effect relationships as well as other “object” is a reusable component containing a logical part of the
representations (movement of objects, reading of data, etc.). application. This component can interact with the Wirefusion
This way, students can use prior knowledge and skills to create interface mechanism as well as other objects, and logical connections
new knowledge, and play a central role in controlling learning. With may be established among the different components in Wirefusion
a lab simulation several perspectives of concepts can be presented (Fig 2).
with the focus on knowledge construction. At this point teachers are Wirefusion enables 3D models to be viewed online using any
seen as guides and facilitators. All activities, tools and environments browser. VizUp reduces the size of 3D objects (too big to be easily
should help students to infer new knowledge/concepts, encouraging functional). Java is used to control behaviors between the 3D
them to a deeper understanding and learning [10]. elements and the interactions that the user performs.
Fig. 2. Overall view of the Wirefusion user interface Fig. 3. VEMA Equipment menu
The environment is based on 3D models and can be experienced
B. Capacitor
in real-time. The student’s view of the environment is rendered
dynamically showing the actual position of objects in the virtual This menu allows to explore how a capacitor works and the
space. This system allows the student to move freely through the measurement of voltage and of the electric field. The objectives will
environment and the view is updated as he/she moves around. be: to determine the relationship between load and voltage for a
All simulations were previously tested and assessed to ensure capacitor as well as the energy stored in a capacitor or bank of
their efficiency and feasibility in an educational context. These tests capacitors in a circuit; also to explore the effect of added space and
included not only the simulations in a range of configurations, but dielectric materials between the conductors of a capacitor in a circuit,
also the actual lab tests. and determine the equivalent capacity of a set of capacitors in series
Circuits with resistors and batteries can be built and data can be and in parallel in a circuit (Fig. 4).
calculated using ammeters and voltmeters as if they were real.
Some of the learning objectives involve discussing basic
electrical relationships; building circuits using schematics; using an
ammeter and a voltmeter to take readings in circuits; providing
arguments to explain the measurements and relationships in circuits;
discussing basic electrical connections in series and parallel circuits;
providing methods to explain the measurements in circuits.
The lab session should take no more than 30 minutes, including
calculations and questions. Any activity in the lab is easy for the
students to perform and easy to grade. It can be prepared at home
with little instructor input if the student cannot attend the class.
Students will go from station to station working with a different
simulation to better visualize current, voltage and resistance. This
provides a structure for a more detailed research work that facilitates
acquisition and the interactive engagement.
Fig. 4. Layout of the equipment
Circuit Theory is stimulating when students are presented with
familiar and relevant challenges. Electric circuits containing series,
C. Construction of DC circuits
parallel and combination circuits are familiar to most students. The
This menu presents a few simple DC circuits that will give an
activity provides a real-life context to explore different kinds of
idea of how things work in the first place. Students will learn how to
circuits and their applications.
use a DC power supply and an electrician’s best friend — a digital
multimeter. They will understand the basic properties of circuits and
A. Equipment
what is required to complete a circuit. They will be able to build
There are eight different kinds of equipment for those who zap
series and parallel circuits and understand the difference between the
through the activity while others are still working (Fig. 3).
different circuits, and also learn about conductors and insulators.
There is a set of simulations for the stage when students are
This activity was used as an introduction to circuits (Fig. 5).
introduced to current, voltage and resistance. The objective is to
Students will use the circuit construction simulation to create
explain what voltage, resistance and current are and identify their
circuits and verify Ohm's Law. Once they have been introduced to
roles in a circuit. The activity ends with the construction of circuits in
Ohm's law, they can use this simulation to help them visualize the
series and in parallel both in the circuit simulation and in real life,
concept of resistance and its relationship with voltage and current.
using a real circuit board. The purpose is also to interpret and analyze
They will go from simulation to simulation working with different
how a circuit works and the different variables that affect the flow of
ones to better visualize current, voltage and resistance.
energy.
circuits and the simulated ones; build circuits from schematic
drawings; use a multimeter to take readings in circuits; provide
reasoning to explain the measurements in circuits.
They will be able to use the simulation to learn the goals through
discovery. This lab uses both simulation and lab equipment.
VEMA proposes to show the basic differences between series and
parallel circuits. It walks students through the construction of series
and parallel circuits using the simulators and asks them to record any
observations. They will be able to build circuits to match the diagram
to determine the relationship between voltage, current, and resistance
in a series circuit, to understand series circuits electrical
relationships.
They can explore the difference between circuits with batteries
connected in series or parallel, learn how to relate the battery current
to the current through resistors connected in parallel, and explore
voltage in series circuits. Furthermore, they need to decide what they
Fig. 5. VEMA – Direct Current , Introduction
may want to place in series or in parallel. To discover the attributes
of both they will use the computer simulation.
This activity uses simulated circuits to allow students to
The objectives are: to place voltmeters and ammeters correctly in
investigate current, voltage and power relationships amongst the
a series circuit; to find out the voltage and amperage in series
circuit elements for simple resistive circuits. It is intended for
circuits; and determine which is constant in a series circuit, voltage or
students to discover Kirchhoff’s Loop Rule and Junction Rule by
amperage.
examining measurements made of nine different circuits, and to
With resistance in parallel circuits the goals are to place
establish connections between energy and charge conservation with
voltmeters and ammeters correctly in a parallel circuit. Also; find the
these rules. Power dissipated by each element is also examined and
voltage and amperage in parallel circuits and determine which is
related with energy conservation.
constant in a parallel circuit, voltage or amperage. At the end,
Students collect and make a graph of data for changing voltage
students are requested to build a virtual series or parallel circuit;
and resistance. This allows them to see different shapes of graph lines
measure voltage in parallel and series circuits; measure amperage in
for direct and inverse relationships. Ohm's Law is explored. Current
series and parallel circuits and compare the amperage and voltage in
and Voltage are demonstrated to be directly proportional for a fixed
series versus parallel circuit.
resistance, and current and resistance are inversely proportional for a
These sessions are carried out after the preliminary concepts of
fixed voltage.
series and parallel circuits are taught.
It is also necessary to show how to configure series and parallel
Combining series and parallel concepts into one circuit is the next
circuits so they get a sense of what is happening inside a circuit as
step. Ideally, the students should attempt to solve the circuits first,
some of the various characteristics are altered.
before constructing them virtually. However, the simulator will
In the first activity students explore the properties of circuits in
provide a visual aid to help them understand how and why the current
series and in parallel made with identical resistors by using the DC
ends up splitting at each junction.
circuit simulation. The second activity is hands-on and leads the
Most students found the use of simulation can become more
students to set up circuits in parallel and in series with resistors of
useful and more enjoyable than the actual equipment. This simulation
two different values. Voltages and currents are measured in several
invites students to investigate the models shown to make sense,
parts of the circuit to develop a general model for parallel and series
explain their ideas about the model, and describe their reasoning.
circuits (Fig. 6).
D. AC Circuits
A virtual lab experiment is used as a pre-lab activity or a
replacement of a regular lab experiment. The student will be able to
explain how a resistor, an inductor, or a capacitor affects the
operation of an AC circuit (Fig. 7).
Fig. 6. VEMA – Direct Current, Series -Parallel Association
Students will be able to discuss basic electricity relationships in Fig. 7. VEMA - Alternating Current, Introduction and Series-Parallel
series and parallel circuits; analyze the differences between real Association
This version of the simulation includes capacitors, inductors and VEMA environment provides a new and effective learning delivery
AC voltage sources. The user can represent the current and the platform that can be used in a safe way. Learning through discovery
tension in a chart according to the time span. by clicking on objects with associated information, simulating
The idea is to discuss the basic electrical relationships, build learning by modelling a process or interaction that closely resembles
circuits from schematics, and use the ammeter and voltmeter to take the real lab work in terms of fidelity and outcomes. It reinforces
readings in circuits. It will also be necessary to explain the measures learning by offering aid menus, tools, etc., again associated with 3D
and relationships in the circuits; discuss the basic relationships in objects. While learning with VEMA may not fully replicate the
series and parallel circuits or how a capacitor is loaded and effectiveness of a face-to-face experiment, it is believed that it is
discharged and discuss the behavior of an inductor in a circuit. worth the savings, risks and work efficiency gained through learning
in 3D. There is real value in designing effective learning for this 3D
E. Resonance environment.
This simulation will teach them how a radio tuning circuit works
by investigating a circuit consisting of an inductor and a capacitor –
an LC circuit. When the activity is over, they should be able to [1] P. Ernest, M. G. Catasús, R. Hampel, S. Heiser, J. Hopkins, L.Murphy,
describe the properties of a LC circuit; describe resonance in an LC U. Stickler, “Online teacher development: collaborating in a virtual
circuit and why an LC circuit can be used as a radio tuner. learning environment”, Computer Assisted Language Learning, vol. 26,
It is important to define the required conditions for a resonance; Issue 4, 2013.
identify/explain the variables affecting the natural frequency of a [2] A. Ewais and O. De Troyer, "Authoring Adaptive 3D Virtual Learning
system; identify which variables affect the duration of the transient Environments", International Journal of Virtual and Personal Learning
Environments (IJVPLE) 5 (2014): 1, accessed July 10, 2014.
behavior; explain that electrical resonance occurs in an electric
circuit at a particular resonance frequency when the imaginary parts
[3] R. M. Combs, and J. Mazur, "3D Modeling in a High School Computer
Visualization Class: Enacting a Productive, Distributed Social Learning
of impedances or admittances of circuit elements cancel each other;
Environment." K-12 Education: Concepts, Methodologies, Tools, and
give examples of the application of real-world systems for which the
Applications.IGI Global, 2014
understanding of resonance should be applied and explain why.
[4] A. Nawaz, “Using e-learning as a tool for ‘education for all’ in
developing states”, International Journal of Science and Technology
IV. CONCLUSION Educational Reseacrh, vol. 4(3), pp. 38-46, 2013. ISSN 2141-6559.
[5] K. Kreijns, F. Van Acker, M. Vermeulen, H. van Buuren, “What
VEMA focused on a 3D learning environment with some
stimulates teachers to integrate ICT in their pedagogical practices? The
embedded links. With VEMA students may compete with each other use of digital learning materials in education”, Computers in Human
to design increasing complex circuits. Behavior, vol. 29, Issue 1, January 2013, Elsevier, pp. 217-225, ISSN
It provides the balance between the goals proposed by the 0747-5632.
simulation activity and the actual engagement of the simulation. This [6] P. Lacasa, “Learning in Real and Virtual Worlds: Commercial Video
is the type of lab that invites students to get involved in simulations Games as Educational Tools”, Palgrave Macmillan. ISBN: 978–1–137–
using models, allowing them to be able to reason and explain their 31204–4, September 2013. Accessed: 10 June 2014.
ideas about the model based on the acquired virtual experience. [7] P. Banyard, J. Underwood, L.Kerlin, J. Stiller, “Book Virtual learning
Virtual labs like VEMA offer very effective and engaging environments: personalizing learning or managing learners?”, Palgrave
Macmillan, chapter in Michael Thomas' (2011) book: ''Digital
platforms, creating high-value learning exchanges, with the same
Education: Opportunities for Social Collaboration''.
sense of “presence” as in a real lab. The platform allows the creation
ISBN:9780230118003, 2011.
of interactions that are both unique and meaningful for the student,
[8] B. Dalgarno and M. J. W. Lee, “What are the learning affordances of 3-
including “hands on” and immersive experiences, unique to this
D virtual environments?”, British Journal of Educational Technology,
environment. Published by Blackwell Publishing Limited, 9600 Garsington Road,
VEMA provides an environment that helps students increase their Oxford OX4 2DQ, UK , vol 41, No 1, pp. 10-32, 2010.
security in circuit theory, providing asynchronous challenges such as [9] D.A. Kolb, (1984), Experiential learning: experience as the source of
picking up objects, or moving through the world to observe and learning and development, Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey, Prentice Hall.
participate in experiments. With VEMA, the 3D experiments allow [10] C. Stabile, and W. F. Ritchie, “Clarifying the Differences between
various levels of learning, from cognitive to skills or competency Training, Development, and Enrichment: The Role of Institutional
based learning. It allows both passive and active learning, as well as Belief Constructs in Creating the Purpose of Faculty Learning
synchronous and asynchronous learning. The costs associated to this Initiatives”, New Directions for Teaching and Learning, 2013.
platform are quite low when compared to other distance learning [11] N. Nussli and K. Oh, “The Components of Effective Teacher Training in
environments, and its power stands in the design and delivery. It also the Use of Three-Dimensional Immersive Virtual Worlds for Learning
and Instruction Purposes: A Literature Review”, Journal of Technology
creates an environment where students can explore and discuss
and Teacher Education, vol. 22(2), pp. 213-241, 2014.
contents. VEMA can provide a blended approach, allowing students
[12] J. Oerter, W. Suddarth, M. Morhardt, J. Gehringer, M. L. McGinnis,
to learn on their own as well as interact in groups. VEMA provides
J. Shockley and A. Baysa, “A system architecture and simulation
real-time feedback of performance. It was also found that as students
environment for building information modeling in virtual worlds”, The
progressed through a learning program, their skill and confidence Journal of Defense Modeling and Simulation: Applications,
increased with each module, providing a consistent experience for Methodology, Technology, July 2014.
various learning strategies. It was established that, by using [13] L. F. Gül, Ning Gu, A.Williams, “Virtual worlds as a constructivist
sequencing modules over a period of time, students had the learning platform: evaluations of 3D virtual worlds on design teaching
opportunity to practice concepts and skills, and were better prepared and learning, ITcon vol. 13, Special Issue Virtual and Augmented
to discuss concepts in future sessions. Reality in Design and Construction , pp. 578-593, 2008.
The VEMA environment can become a solution to Electrical [14] M. Travassos Valdez, C. Machado Ferreira and F. P. Maciel Barbosa,
“Virtual Reality Prototype as a Tool in a Lab Environment”. PRAXIS
Engineering Education as the virtual platform can bring training to
2012, PRAXIS'12, The Open Discussion Forum. Wroclaw University of
students. It provides the experience of a face-to-face event without
Technology. Poland. 6-7 September, 2012.
any inconvenience for the students who cannot attend classes. The