Visualising Emotional Landmarks in Cities
Salvatore Iaconesi, Oriana Persico
ISIA Design Florence
{salvatore.iaconesi@artisopensource.net, oriana.persico@gmail.com}
Different people and cultures associate different
emotional states to different parts and spaces of cities.
These vary according to individuals, their cultures
and also to the time of day, day of week, season, special
occasions and more.
Recurring patterns may occur in correspondence of
the places in which people work, study, entertain
themselves, consume, relate, wait or just take a break.
What can we learn from these patterns?
Trying to find possible answers to this question
passes through the possibility to visualize and represent
the configurations of emotional expressions in urban
spaces, across time, geography, theme, cultures and
other dimensions.
We have developed ways in which it is possible to
harvest people's geo-located (or geo-locatable)
emotional expressions from major social networks and to
visualize them according to a variety of different
modalities.
In this paper we will present a series of these types
of visualizations, and the ways in which they can be used
to gain better understandings of these emotional patterns
as they arise, from points of view which derive from
anthropology, urbanism, sociology, politics and also arts
and poetics.
The paper will focus on the ways in which the data
is harvested from different social networks, then
categorized and annotated with meta-data describing the
emotional states, the languages in which people express
themselves, the geographic locations, the themes
Figure 1: C. Oldenburg, Dropped Cone,
expressed.
Neumarkt Galerie, Cologne, Germany.
A methodology for representing this information
across a variety of domains (time, space, emotion,
theme) will then be presented in detail.
1. Introduction
A reflection on possible usage cases for
anthropology, urbanism, policy-making, arts and design
Neumarkt Square, Cologne, Germany. A giant ice
will end the contribution, as well as the description of
cream come seems to have been dropped atop a steel and
series of open issues and the indication of possible next-
glass building at the corner of the plaza (Figure 1).
steps for research.
In a clear, sunny day, while many bicycles crowds
swarm about, multiple people are taking pictures of it
Keywords--- emotional analysis, social networks,
and of themselves. Many have evidently expecting
natural language processing, public space,
someone. We can almost imagine their text messages
anthropology, urban planning, architecture.
from a short while ago: "Meet me at the giant ice cream
cone." For the people of the city, it has become an usual, 1.2. The Ubiquitous Sculptor of the City
pleasant view: they notice it with the corner of their eye,
and while it has become a common view, it never fails to With mobile devices, such as smartphones and
bring out a smile, or the curiosity of how they brought it tablets, we have become able to produce a continuously
up there, or visions of the gigantic child with a sad face evolving infoscape – the layer of information which
that has spilled his cone onto the tiny building that was forms our experience of the world, together with the
standing at teh height of his ankles. For the people who physical landscape. Through social networks and other
arrive for the first time, it is the perfect moment to shoot services and tools, we have become able to express our
out a sincere laugh. "Look!" "Did you see it?" and even emotions, points of view, desires, expectations and
"That's so stupid!" are some of the most common wishes in ways that are able to influence others' actions,
comments pronounced out loud which you can hear if decisions and emotions.
you are an eavesdropping urban ethnographer. Through this production we have become a peculiar
This artwork by Claes Oldenburg is one of many type of sculptors, transforming our ephemeral, transient,
extraordinary examples of what can be described as temporary perceptions and expressions into tangible
emotional landmarks: places in which specific emotional artifacts, which are disseminated in the environment.
expressions are systematically produced by multiple city Images and texts are constantly published onto public
dwellers of different backgrounds and cultures. spaces, shopping centers, offices, schools and streets,
Emotions are a very important part of our experience forming a new layer of reality [2, 3 and 4]. These
of the world, and express the ways in which people artifacts contribute to the formation of our everyday
perceive a sense of well-being (or the absence of it) in experience of cities.
their environment.
How can we observe and visualize human emotions 2. Emotions, previous work
in cities to gather better understandings about their joys,
fears, excitements, doubts, wishes and, more in general,
expectations and desires?
1.1. The Sculptor and the Architect
Cities are both concrete and imaginary.
One side the city is "characterized by rigidity,
paralysis — the halting of motion in which the city
expresses its architectural and urban riches" [1]. On the
other side it is "marked by the threat of imminent
explosion due to a precarious creativity that seeks spaces
and territories for its expression, thereby producing
images and edifices, routes and figurations that reveal the
impassioned results of a life lived in art and architecture"
[1].
The ephemeral city betrays a latent desire for a
dream with an urgent drive to reveal and disseminate
itself through reality. What is called "public art" is a
residue of the creative exuberance that imbued both the
theory and planning of the "ideal city". It is the
Figure 2: P. Desmet, Basic model for emotions.
government's compensation for Utopia that, unable to
penetrate reality, was abandoned in the squares and silent Desmet [5] has described a basic model of emotions
territories of the city, to maintain the presence/absence of (Figure 2) on top of the work of Rosemann [6], Ortony
an alternative dream and desire. [1] [7] and Lazarus [8].
During the 1960s, Claes Oldenburg took up the In this model, the concept of Appraisal is defined as
challenge to restore an ideal urban impact that could a non-intellectual, automatic evaluation of the
compete with the existing cityscape, transforming significance of a stimulus for one's personal well-being.
sculpture in geographic invention, transferring urbanism The act of emotional appraisal leverages the presence of
from one language, architecture, to another, art. two different inputs: Stimulus and Concerns. According
Oldenburg multiplies the element of surprise which to Frijda [9] a Stimulus is any perceived change which
distorts the laws of construction by imposing a has the potential to elicit an emotion. Every emotion
phantasmagorical scene that explores a language of hides a concern, that is, a more or less stable preference
figural excess. for certain states of the world. Thus [9] concerns can be
regarded as points of reference in the appraisal process.
It is interesting to note Concerns' relation to Maslow's
[10] hierarchy of needs: Concerns can be placed at the
different levels of the hierarchy to express their referring the were feeling. The resulting data would be used to
domains, their importance and priority. create information visualizations.
Multiple methodologies for emotional appraisal of The Aleph of Emotions [24], an experimental art
architectural environments exist. project by Mithru Vigneshwara, used a camera-like
Some [11, 12] focus on complexity as a parameter interface allowing users to point along a particular
for evaluation, referring to the number and the varieties direction, focus to a place along that direction, and click
of different units present in a setting/picture. Kaplan [13] to view a representation of emotions in that place.
proposed a model on environmental preference in which Emotions were collected by searching for keywords on
predictors like complexity play an important role. social networks.
According to Berlyne [12] different levels of complexity
can be associated to different levels of preference. 3. Design
Familiarity and prototipicality can influence the
emotional reaction to architectural spaces [14]. From the case studies we were able to form an idea
According to the circumplex aesthetic model of what the previous work in the domain had been able to
proposed by Russell [15] the affective appraisal of the achieve and the major critiques relative to the type of
environment can be summarized by two dimensions: result we set forth to obtain.
pleasantness and arousal. In view of another aesthetic Among the issues we have identified are the idea of
model called Discrepancy Model [16], the level of emergence and of the unconscious.
likeableness attributed to an external stimulus depends Apart from the feel-o-meter, which focuses on facial
on how far is the appraised environment from the recognition from people in the streets of the city, all of
prototypical exemplar that an individual has in mind. If the other works try to establish a relationship with
the incoming stimulus is too similar or too different from people, to be able to explicitly ask for their emotional
the prototype, it is very possible that the evaluation will state and geographical position. While this is an
be negative; on the contrary at a moderate level of interesting approach, it evades our most pressing need:
discrepancy there are good chances that the stimulus will fining ways in which to measure emotions in the city
be appreciated. (and, thus, the mental maps according to which people
Some methodologies are focused on the possibility perceive urban space) in emergent form. What we were
to understand how emotions are expressed in the daily trying to do was to be able to sense the unconscious
lives of citizens. elements of people's perception, to infer how people feel
Christian Nold's fundamental work on Biomapping in the city by gaining better understandings of their daily
[18] and Emotional Cartography [19] saw multiple activities and expressions, not through the synthesis of a
people in 25 cities of the world wear Galvanic Skin survey, however advanced or technological it might be.
Response devices to record their emotional arousal in A project which went in this direction was the Aleph
conjunction with their geographical location. In this way, of Emotions. One drawback in its approach was its
a map is created which visualizes points of high and low extreme simplicity: keyword based emotional evaluation
arousal. is not reliable and leaves out most of the irony, creativity
Another example, the Fuehlometer ('feel-o-meter') and other modalities in which emotions can be
[19], was produced by german artists Wilhelmer, Von expressed. To express “fear” one doesn't always mention
Bismarck, and Maus in the form of a public face, an the word “fear”.
interactive art installation that reflects the mood of the For this we set up a more complex system for
city via a large smiley face sculpture. It was installed information harvesting and processing. We combined the
atop a lighthouse in Lindau, Germany. A digital camera system used for harvesting content from geographical
along the lake captured the faces of passersby, which areas described in [25] with the Natural Language
were then analyzed by a computer program and Analysis technique described in [26, 27 and 28].
classified as either happy, sad, or indifferent. The We approached the possibility to recognize emotions
cumulative results determine the expression of the by identifying in text the co-occurence of words or
sculpture, whose mouth and eyes shift accordingly via a symbols (for example smileys) that have explicit
system of automated motors. affective meaning. As suggested in by Ortony et al. [26]
Using a different approach, the City of Vilnius [20] we must separate the ways in which we handle words
used a social tool to gauge the average residents’ level of that directly refer to emotional states (e.g.: fear, joy)
happiness, using an online form and barcodes in the city. from the ones which only indirectly reference them,
Another example comes from Consciousness of based on the context (e.g.: "killer" can refer to an
Streams [21], in which art installations in multiple cities assassin or to a "killer application"): each has different
were used to contribute users' emotional state and ways and metrics for evaluation.
geographical location, creating a "real-time For this, we have used the classification found in
interconnected emotional map of the planet" [22]. WordNet Affect[29], which is an extension of the
The Mappiness project [23], part of a research WordNet database.[30]
project at the London School of Economics, created a The approach we used was based on the
mobile app which contacted users once a day to ask how implementation of a variation of the Latent Semantic
Analysis (LSA). LSA yields a vector space model that
allows for a homogeneous representation (and hence stimuli for people's emotional appraisal. They can (and
comparison) of words, word sets, sentences and texts. usually are) temporary (but, eventually, recurrent), and
According to Berry [27], each document can be depend on the time of the day (they might be different in
represented in the LSA space by summing up the office hours or on week-ends, for example) and of the
normalized LSA vectors of all the terms contained in it. cultural background (i.e.: in the city of Florence different
Thus a synset in WordNet (and even all the words locations are the sites for very different emotional
labeled with a particular emotion) can also be expression from the tourists coming from may different
represented in this way. parts of the world). They might be positive or negative
In this space an emotion can be represented at least (for example in the Schuster Park in Rome, which is used
in three ways: (i) the vector of the specific word denoting by many people as a shortcut from the bus station to the
the emotion (e.g. “anger), (ii) the vector representing the houses which are on the other side of it, which at night is
synset of the emotion (e.g. {anger, choler, ire}), and (iii) a place of anxiety or even fear for multiple people,
the vector of all the words in the synsets labeled with the because of its darkness, right in downtown Rome).
emotion. This visualization brought up the idea of being able
This procedure is well-documented and used, for to “ask questions to the city”: a modality for
example in the way shown in [28], which we adopted for interrogating the city not about the typical questions
the details of the technique. which are often asked (“where is the bus stop?”, “where
We proceeded to harvest the data, and to use an is the museum?”, and more), but entirely new types of
annotation system to mark it with the emotional questions, whose answers can only come from the
expressions which we progressively found using this expressions of high number of people (“where are people
methodology. afraid?”, “where do people feel joy on monday
morning?”, “where are people anxious, or bored on
3.1. Visualizations Friday evening?”, and more along similar schemes).
For this reason we set forth in designing the
relational visualization and, then, the emotional compass.
Figure 4: S. Iaconesi, O. Persico. Relational
Figure 3: S. Iaconesi, O. Persico. 3D
view of the city.
emotional map in Rome.
The relational visualization (Figure 4) was created to
After several preliminary studies in which we used
gain better understandings of how people's emotions
3D histograms and surfaces to understand the quality,
were connected according to time, place and theme.
and distribution of the data, we proposed three types of
Conversation threads were aggregated for this,
visualizations: a 3D map, a relational visualization and
describing discussion communities (non-linear graphs
an emotional compass.
message-reply chains). These were then displayed in 3D
The 3D map (Figure 3) highlighted using different
so that the people's roles in conversations could be
colors the different emotions which appeared on social
highlighted. This was specifically useful to identify the
networks. Filters were used to turn on and off the various
origins of specific emotions, in their being discussed
emotions and languages (we harvested content in 29
along the evolving conversations. Many people, for
languages using the available Wordnet translations). A
example, showed up as not actually feeling the emotion
timeline was used to navigate through time, to observe
manifested in a certain space, but simply commenting it
how emotional expressions moved and
from another location, or acknowledging it because of
appeared/disappeared in the city.
their relationship with another social network user (for
This was a highly legible visualization, as it allowed
example through a “like” on Facebook, or a re-tweet on
us to clearly identify the emergence of Emotional
Twitter).
Landmarks: geographical locations in which multiple
people from different cultures and backgrounds
consistently express specific emotions (eventually more
than one) at specific times of day/week/season/year.
These are places that constitute particularly strong
interface for an innovative form of urban navigation
(Figure 5). The interface could be used as a standard
compass, with the exception that it did not show the
direction of cardinal signs, but, rather, the directions in
which emotions were expressed on social networks. If
the user selected, for example, the emotion of “joy”, a
color coded shape would appear in radial form, which
was thicker in the directions in which more expressions
of “joy” were published on social networks, allowing the
user to go in that direction to find these areas of the city.
Threshold levels were defined to allow users to identify
the presence of an emotional landmark. If a certain
highlighted emotion was manifested in the current
location beyond the threshold level the color of the
screen would change to reflect that an Emotional
Landmark had been reached. Filters and timeframes
Figure 5: S. Iaconesi, O. Persico. The
could be specified on the interfaces, to allow users to ask
Emotional Compass.
more complex questions, in the modalities explored in
Finally, the Emotional Compass visualization was the previous sections.
designed, under the form of an interactive mobile
Conclusions [4] M.A. Zook, M. Graham. Mapping DigiPlace: geocoded
Internet data and the representation of place. In
Environment and Planning B: Planning and Design 34(3)
This research has proven to be truly insightful both
(2007) 466–482.
for providing a methodology using which it is possible to
[5] P. Desmet. Designing emotions. Ph.D Thesis. Delft
observe human emotions as they unfold in urban spaces,
University, Netherlands (2002).
and for some of the results and outcomes which have
[6] I.J. Rosemann. A model for appraisal in the emotion
been collected.
system: integrating theory, research and applications. In
The idea of being able to define Emotional
Appraisal Processes in Emotion : Theory, Methods,
Landmark has turned out to be interesting and deserving Research. Oxford: Oxford University Press (2001).
further investigation. Their variability across times, [7] A. Ortony, G.l. Clore, A. Collins. Cognitive Structures of
cultures and contexts brings up interesting possibilities to Emotions. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press
understand more about our urban environments, and (1988).
about the ways in which multiple cultures traverse them [8] R.S. Lazarus. Emotions and Adaptation. Oxford: Oxford
for work, entertainment, relations and consumption. University Press (1991).
Emotional Landmarks exist and are identifiable, giving [9] N.H. Frijda. The emotions. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press (1986).
rise to entirely new opportunities for anthropology,
[10] A.H. Maslow. Motivation and Personality. New York:
ethnography, sociology as well as for the development of
Harper and Row (1970).
novel services, businesses and possibilities of great
[11] R.S. Ulrich. Aesthetic and affective response to natural
utility for administrations and organizations.
environment. In Human Behavior and Environment,
Possibly most important of all, the possibility to
Eds. I Altman, & J. F. Wohlwill, Volume 6, pp. 85 – 125.
“ask questions to the city” has presented itself with great New York: Plenum Press (1983).
emphasis. The opportunity to pose questions to which [12] D.E. Berlyne. Aesthetics and psychobiology. New York:
large numbers of people are able to contribute their Appleton-Century-Crofts (1971).
answers from emergent, subjective points of view [13] S. Kaplan. Aesthetic, affect and cognition:
through the practice of their daily lives and activities, Environmental preference from an evolutionary
and to analyze them with the help of expressive, readable perspective. In Environment and Behaviour, 19(1) 3-32.
information visualizations is a fertile ground to gain (1987)
precious insights about our well-being in cities. [14] R.B. Zajonc. Feeling and thinking. Preferences need no
inferences. In American Psychologist, 35, 151-175.
(1980).
[15] J.A. Russell. A circumplex model of affect. In Journal of