Wavelets and wavelet-like transforms on the sphere
and their application to geophysical data inversion
Frederik J. Simonsa, Ignace Lorisb, Eugene Brevdoc, Ingrid C. Daubechiesd,
a Department of Geosciences, Princeton University, Guyot Hall, Princeton, NJ, USA
b Department of Mathematics, Universit´e Libre de Bruxelles, Belgium
c Department of Electrical Engineering, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, USA
d Department of Mathematics, Duke University, Durham, NC, USA
Many flexible parameterizations exist to represent data on the sphere. In addition to the venerable spherical
harmonics, we have the Slepian basis, harmonic splines, wavelets and wavelet-like Slepian frames. In this paper
we focus on the latter two: spherical wavelets developed for geophysical applications on the cubed sphere,
and the Slepian “tree”, a new construction that combines a quadratic concentration measure with wavelet-like
multiresolution. We discuss the basic features of these mathematical tools, and illustrate their applicability in
parameterizing large-scale global geophysical (inverse) problems.
Keywords: frames, geophysics, inverse theory, localization, sparsity, spherical harmonics, wavelets
1. INTRODUCTION
Thispaperisaboutparameterization,anditsroleingeophysicalinverseproblems: theanalysisandrepresentation
of volumetric properties, with a particular emphasis on the three-dimensional ball and its surface, the two-
dimensional sphere. This is not the sole purview of geophysics (e.g. geodesy, geodynamics, seismology): there
is a large literature on the subject in virtually every area of scientific inquiry (e.g. medical imaging, astronomy,
cosmology, computer graphics, image processing, ...). For this reason we limit ourselves here to a few technical
aspects, some of which have been published before (refs 1, 2) but are illustrated with different examples.
We begin with a new class of spherical wavelet basis on the ball designed for the analysis of geophysical
models and for the tomographic inversion of global seismic data.1,3,4 Its multiresolution character allows for
modelingwithaneffectivespatialresolutionthatvarieswithpositionwithintheEarth. Weintroducetwotypesof
discretewavelettransformsintheangulardimensionofthe“cubedsphere”, awell-knownCartesian-to-spherical
mapping.5,6 Theseareappliedtoanalyzetheinformationofterrestrialtopographydataandinseismicwavespeed
models of the Earth’s mantle across scale space. The localization and sparsity properties of the wavelet bases
allow finding a sparse solution to inverse problems by iterative minimization of a combination of the (cid:96) norm
of the data residuals and the (cid:96) norm of the model wavelet coefficients. These have now been validated in
realistic synthetic experiments to likely yield important gains in the inversion of seismic data for global seismic
tomography,theprocedurebywhichseismicwaveformsarebeingusedtoimagethethree-dimensionaldistribution
of elastic (compressional or P and shear or S) wave speeds (V and V ) inside the Earth.
A second class of transforms is inspired by the type known as Slepian functions. These we understand to
be families of orthogonal functions that are all defined on a common, e.g. geographical, domain, where they
are either optimally quadratically concentrated or within which they are exactly limited, and which at the same
time are exactly confined within a certain bandwidth, or maximally concentrated therein. Originally developed
for the study of time series by Slepian, Landau and Pollak7,8 in the 1960s, they have now been fully extended
to the multidimensional Cartesian plane9,10 and the surface of the sphere,11–13 where most of the geophysical
applications lie. We have reported on some aspects of spherical Slepian functions and their role in the analysis
and representation of geophysical data in previous papers in this series.14,15 In this contribution we announce
a hybrid construction that blends desirable aspects and properties of Slepian functions with ideas from wavelet
and frame theory. We summarize the main ideas contained in Chapter 7, Multiscale Dictionaries of Slepian
Functions on the Sphere, of the Ph. D. thesis by Eugene Brevdo,2 deferring a full publication to a later date.
]na-atad.scisyhp[
1v8171.9011:viXra
2. WAVELETS ON THE CUBED SPHERE
Theuseofwaveletsisstillnomatterofroutineinglobalgeophysics,beyondapplicationsinoneandtwoCartesian
dimensions. This despite there being a wealth of available constructions on the sphere.16–28 However, the cited
studies are mostly concerned with surfaces, not volumes, and many of them require custom design and special
algorithms. Fortheapplicationtoglobalseismictomographythatweenvisage,wetakeadvantageoftheeaseand
flexibility of existing Cartesian constructions by implementing standard algorithms on a spherical-to-Cartesian
mapproposedbyRonchietal.(1996),agridthathaslongsinceprovenitsutilityinthegeosciencesandbeyond.
As in ref. 5, we define a coordinate 4-tuple (ξ,η,r,κ) for each of the κ = 1 6 “chunks” comprising this
“cubedsphere”atradiusr. Inref.1welistexplicitformulasfortheforwardandinversemappingofcubed-sphere
to Cartesian coordinates. Here we suffice to say that a “master” surface chunk defined by the 2 2N linearly
spaced coordinate pairs π/4 (ξ,η) π/4 maps, in a general sense, to the Cartesian coordinate vector
which is rotated to occupy a total of six non-overlapping patches tiling the sphere, after which the entire con-
struction is rotated over a standard set of Euler angles α=0.0339, β =1.1705, and γ =1.1909. This results in
the configuration shown in Figure 1 (left).
Alternatively, for reasons that will be made clear, we start from the coordinates 3π/8 (ξ,η) 3π/8 and
apply the same rotations, thereby producing six overlapping “superchunks”, as in Figure 1 (right). Throughout
this paper we will quote N as the angular resolution level of our cubed sphere, which implies that it has 6 22N
such elements, with typical seismic tomography grids having N =7. The Euler angles used in our construction
were chosen for geographical convenience, as can be seen from the continental outlines in Figure 2.
On these two grids we apply standard Cartesian transforms, e.g. orthogonal29 and bi-orthogonal30 ones,
whereby for the case of the non-overlapping “chunks” construction we accommodate the presence of the “seams’
by switching to special boundary filters at each of the edges, and applying preconditioners to the data prior
to transformation in order to guarantee the usual polynomial cancellation throughout the closed rectangular
interval, as is well established.31 With this choice of bases, sparsity in the representation of many data types is
to be generally expected.32
In Figure 3 we explore coefficient statistics and the effects of thresholding on the reconstruction errors for
a model of terrestrial topography. We focus on the fifth, or “North-American” chunk of our cubed sphere, and
use the orthogonal D2 (Haar), D4 and D6 wavelet bases29 on the interval, with preconditioning.31 The top row
uses the common conventions in plotting the wavelet and scaling coefficients in each of the bases after (hard)
thresholding32 such that only the coefficients larger than their value at the 85th percentile level survive. The
coefficients that have now effectively been zeroed out are left white in these top three panels. The middle series
ofpanelsofFigure3plotsthespatialreconstructionafterthresholdingatthislevel;therootmeansquared(rms)
errors of these reconstructions are quoted as a percentage of the original root mean squared signal strengths.
The thresholded wavelet transforms allow us to discard, as in these examples, 85% of the numbers required to
make a map of North American topography in the cubed-sphere pixel basis: the percentage error committed is
only 6.3%, 5.2% and 9.2% according to this energy criterion in the D2, D4 and D6 bases, respectively. From
the map views it is clear that despite the relatively small error, the D2 basis leads to unsightly block artifacts in
the reconstruction, which are largely avoided in the smoother and more oscillatory D4 and D6 bases. A view of
the coefficient statistics is presented in the lowermost three panels of Figure 3. The coefficients are roughly log-
normally distributed, which helps explain the success of the thresholded reconstruction approach. We conclude
that the D4 basis is a good candidate for geophysical data representation.
For applications in seismology we now illustrate the performance of the cubed-sphere wavelet basis in com-
pressing seismological Earth models such as the one by Montelli et al. (2006) of compressional (P) wavespeed
heterogeneity and another by Ritsema et al. (2010) of shear (S) wavespeed perturbations. At a depth of about
670km,Figs4aand4eshowthewavespeedanomaliesfromtheaverageatthatdepth. Thewavelettransformin
the D4 basis (with special boundary filters and after preconditioning, and up until scale J =3) was thresholded
and the results re-expanded to the spatial grid, identically as we did for the topography in Figure 3. The results
for specific values of the thresholding (quoted as the percentile of the original wavelet coefficients) are shown
in Figs 4b and 4f for the 85th, and Figs 4c and 4g for the 95th, respectively. At each level of thresholding the
number of nonzero wavelet/scaling expansion coefficients is quoted: at 0% thresholding this number is identical
to the number of pixels in the surficial cubed sphere being plotted.
The reconstruction error can be visually assessed from the pictures; it is also quoted next to each panel as
the percentage of the root mean squared error between the original and the reconstruction, normalized by the
root mean squared value of the original in the original pixel representation, in percent. Specifically, we calculate
and quote the ratio of (cid:96) norms in the pixel-basis model vector m,
100 m S [A(m)] / m , (2)
× (cid:107) − {T }(cid:107)2 (cid:107) (cid:107)2
which, in the lower-right annotations is called the “% error norm”. We write A for any of the wavelet (analysis)
transforms that can be used and S (synthesis) for their inverses, and for the hard thresholding of the wavelet
and scaling coefficients. In Figs 4e and 4j, the misfit quantity (2) is represented as a black line relevant to the
left ordinate labeled “(cid:96) error norm”, which shows its behavior at 1% intervals of thresholding; the filled black
circles correspond to the special cases shown in the map view. Only after about 80% of the coefficients have
been thresholded does the error rise above single-digit percentage levels, but after that, the degradation is swift
and inexorable. The blue curves in Figs 4e and 4j show another measure relevant in this context, namely the
ratio of the (cid:96) norms of the thresholded wavelet coefficients compared to the original ones, in percent, or
× (cid:107)T (cid:107)1 (cid:107) (cid:107)1
The (cid:96) ratios (2) in the black curves (and the left ordinate) evolve roughly symmetrically to the (cid:96) ratios (3)
in the blue curves (and the right ordinate), though evidently their range is different. The third measure that is
being plotted as the red curve is the “total variation” norm ratio, in percent, namely
× (cid:107) {T }(cid:107)1 (cid:107) (cid:107)1
whereby ∇m is the sum over all voxels of the length of the local gradient of m. By this measure, which
(cid:107) (cid:107)1
is popular in image restoration applications,33–35 the quality of the reconstruction stays very high even at very
elevated levels of thresholding; we note that its behavior is not monotonic and may exceed 100%.
Finally, the new wavelet construction can be used to study the joint properties of the wavelet coefficients
of seismic wavespeed models, as we illustrate in Figure 5. There, we report the correlation between wavelet
coefficients in the Montelli and Ritsema models as a function of scale and approximate geographical position
(see again Figure 2 for the numbering scheme of the cubed-sphere chunk). A rendering of the two-dimensional
density of the data is accompanied by the value of their correlation coefficient (lower left labels) where this is
deemed significant at the 95% level, and the slope of the total-least-squares based fit in this space (upper right
labels), which is only quoted when the correlation coefficients exceeded 0.35. This should provide an estimate
of the logarithmic ratio of shear-wave to compressional-wave speed perturbations, δlnV /δlnV , an important
discriminantintheinterpretationofthe(thermalorchemical)causeofseismicvelocityanomalies.36 Thevariation
of this ratio as a function of scale and chunk position yields information that will be of use for geochemical and
geodynamical studies, and the orthogonality of the wavelet basis in scale and physical space removes some
of the arbitrariness in the calculation. Ritsema’s model does not have much structure at the smallest scales.
From scale 3 onward a positively correlated pattern begins to emerge, though even at this particular scale, the
correlation coefficients remain below the relatively stringent 0.35 level. Wavelets and scaling coefficients are well
correlated at the largest scale 4 considered, with several of the correlation coefficients exceeding our threshold.
This information is useful to geophysicists,36–39 especially given our new-found ability to study the regional
variation of such ratios, taking into account their dependence on scale length.
Simons et al. (2011) detail the reasoning behind the construction of the “superchunk” cubed sphere shown
in Figure 1 (right). In a nutshell, the cubed-sphere bases are to be used not simply for the representation and
analysis of seismic models, but also to parameterize the inversion of primary data for such models. Since the
edge-cognizanttransformsarenotnorm-preserving, thethresholdingstepsinvolvedinusingcommonalgorithms
such as (F)ISTA,3,4,40 if unmodified, lead to artifacts in the solution which are largely avoided by building the
wavelet transforms in the superchunk domain and ignoring the edges altogether.1
3. THE SPHERICAL SLEPIAN TREE TRANSFORM
Geophysical and cosmological signals are constrained by the physical processes that generate them and con-
ditioned by the sensors that observe them. On the real line and in the plane, both physical and sampling
constraints lead to assumptions of a bandlimit: that a signal contains no energy outside some supporting region
in the frequency domain. Bandlimited signals on the sphere are zero save for the low-frequency spherical-
harmonic components. Spherical harmonics are not orthogonal on arbitrary portions of the sphere, yet for the
studyofgeophysicalprocesseswemaynothaveaccesstonorinterestinsignaloriginatingfromoutsideaspecific
geographic region of interest. By construction, Slepian functions satisfy the dual constraints of bandlimitation
and spatial concentration by optimization of an energy criterion that concentrates as much energy as possible
into the region of interest for a given bandlimit.13 With Slepian function bases, however, it is “all or nothing”:
givenacertainbandwidthandaspatialregionofinterest,thefunctions(variably)filltheentirebandwidthrange
andultimatelytheentirespatialtarget. ThewaveletconstructionsthatweintroducedinSection2, ontheother
hand, were compactly supported and had multiresolution properties which the Slepian basis does not possess.
Here we develop an algorithm for the construction of Slepianesque dictionary elements that are bandlimited,
localized, and multiscale. It is based on a subdivision scheme that constructs a binary tree from subdivisions of
theregionofinterest. Suchadictionaryhasmanyniceproperties: itcloselyoverlapswiththemostconcentrated
Slepian functions on the region of interest, and most element pairs have low coherence. Therefore, they, too,
should be eminently suitable to solve ill-posed inverse problems in geophysics and cosmology. Though the new
dictionary is no longer composed of purely orthogonal elements like the Slepian basis, it can also be combined
withmoderninversiontechniquesthatpromotesparsityinthesolution. Therebytheyprovidesignificantlylower
residual error after reconstruction when compared to “classically optimal” Slepian inversion techniques.41
3.1. A Multiscale Dictionary of Slepian Functions
We now turn our focus to numerically constructing a dictionary of functions that can be used to approximate
bandlimited signals on the sphere and allows for the reconstruction of signals from their point samples. Let
S2 be a simply connected subset of the sphere. With L the bandwidth, the dictionary will be composed
of functions bandlimited to spherical harmonic degrees 0 l L. The construction is based on a binary tree.
The node capacity, n, is a positive integer. Each node of the tree corresponds to the first n Slepian functions
with bandlimit L and concentrated on a subset . The top tree node is for the entire region , and each
node’s children correspond to a division of into two roughly equally sized subregions. As the child nodes
will be concentrated in disjoint subsets of , all of their corresponding functions and children are effectively
incoherent. We now fix a height H of the tree: the number of times to subdivide . The height is determined
as the maximum number of binary subdivisions of that can have n well concentrated functions. That is, we
find the minimum integer H such that n N , with N the Shannon number,13 which has the solution
(cid:24) (cid:18) (L+1)2(cid:19)(cid:25)
H = log |R| .
A complete binary tree with height H has 2H+1 1 nodes, so from now on we will denote the dictionary
,L,n = (cid:8) d(1,1),d(1,2), ,d(1,n), ,d (2H+1 − 1,1) , ,d (2H+1 − 1,n)(cid:9)
asthesetof =n(2H+1 1)functionsthusconstructedonregion withbandlimitLandnodecapacity
n. Figure6s | h D oRwsth | etreediagra − mofthesubdivisionscheme. Weusethes R tandardenumerationofnodeswherein
node (j, ) is subdivided into child nodes (2j, ) and (2j+1, ), and at a level 0 h H, the nodes are indexed
from2h j 2h+1 1. Morespecifically, forj =1,2,..., wehave (j) = (2j) (2j+1). Furthermore, letting
g (cid:48) be t ≤ he α ≤ th Slep − ian function on (the solution to the classic R al Slepi R an co ∪ nc R entration criterion eq. 4.1 in
ref. 13, with concentration region ), we have that
Figure 7 shows an example of the construction when is the African continent. Note how, for example, d(4,1)
and d(5,1) are the first Slepian functions associated with the subdivided domains of (2).
To complete the top-down construction, it remains to decide how to subdivide a region into equally sized
subregions. For roughly circular connected domains, the first Slepian function has no sign changes, and the
second Slepian function has a single zero-level curve that subdivides the region into approximately equal areas;
when isasphericalcap,thesubdivisionisexact.13 Wethussubdividearegion intothetwonodaldomains
(cid:48) (cid:48)
associated with the second Slepian function on that domain; see Figure 8 for a visualization of the subdivision
scheme as applied to the African continent.
3.2. Concentration, Range, and Incoherence
The utility of the tree construction presented above depends on its ability to represent bandlimited functions
in a region , and its efficacy at reconstructing functions from point samples in . These properties, in turn,
reduce to questions of concentration, range, and incoherence. First, dictionary is concentrated in if its
functions are concentrated in . Second, the range of dictionary is the subspace spanned by its elements.
Ideally, the basis formed by the first few Slepian functions on is a subspace of the range of . Third, when
is incoherent, pairwise inner products of its elements have low amplitude: pairs of functions are approximately
orthogonal. This, in turn, is a useful property when using to estimate signals from point samples.
UnliketheconcentrationeigenvaluescorrespondingtotheSlepianfunctionson ,notalloftheeigenvaluesof
the elements of reflect their concentration within this top-level (parent) region. We thus define the modified
concentration va D luRe
(cid:90) (cid:104) (cid:105)2
Recalling that (cid:13) (cid:13)d(j,α) (cid:13) (cid:13) = 1, the value ν is simply the percentage of energy of the (j,α) th element that is
concentrated in . This value is always larger than the element’s eigenvalue, which relates its fractional energy
within the smaller subset (j).
The size of dictionary is generally larger than the Shannon number N = (L+1)2/ /4/π for
any node capacity n, and a D sRa result it cannot form a proper basis: it has too man|Ry|functions. Ideal | l R y, | then, we
require that elements of the dictionary span the space of the first N Slepian functions. One possible answer
to the question of the range of is given by studying the angle be|tRw|een the subspaces42 spanned by elements
of and the first α functions of the Slepian basis, for α=1,2,.... The angle between two subspaces A and B,
possibly with different dimensions, is given by the formula
(cid:18) (cid:19)
(cid:54) (A,B)=min x su ∈ A p (cid:54) (x,B), y s ∈ u B p (cid:54) (y,A) , where (cid:54) (x,B)= y i ∈ n B f (cid:54) (x,y)=cos − 1 (cid:107) (cid:107) B x (cid:107) (cid:107). (6)
Here, P is the orthogonal projection onto space B and all of the norms are with respect to the given subspace.
The angle (A,B) is symmetric, non-negative, and zero iff A B or B A; furthermore it is invariant under
unitary transforms applied to both on A and B, and admits a triangle inequality. It is thus a good indicator of
distance between two subspaces; furthermore, it can be calculated accurately given two matrices whose columns
span A and B. We can therefore identify the matrices A and B with the subspaces spanned by their columns.
(cid:0) (cid:1)
Let G(cid:98)
denote the matrix containing the first α column vectors which are the spherical harmonic
expansioncoefficientsofthetraditionalSlepianfunctionsforagivenregion andabandwidthL. LetD(cid:98) denote
the (L+1)2 matrix containing the spherical harmonic representations of the elements of the dictio-
n It ar i y s c D leRa , r L, t n h . a F t i w gu h r i e le 9 th sh e o d w ic s t (cid:54) io ( n G(cid:98) a 1 r : i α es ,D(cid:98)) for R =A a f n ri d ca with L=36 d . o T n h o e t S st h r a ic n t n ly on sp n a u n mb th e e r i s s pa N c A e f o ri f ca f , u 3 n 6 c ≈ tio 7 n 9 s .
Africa,36,1
Africa,36,2
bandlimited to L = 36 and optimally concentrated in Africa, they are a close approximation: the column span
(cid:0) (cid:1)
of G(cid:98)Africa,36
is nearly linearly dependent with the spans of D(cid:98)Africa,36,1 and D(cid:98)Africa,36,2 , for α significantly
larger than N .
Therequirementthatthedictionaryelementsformanorthogonalbasisislessimportantthanthepropertyof
mutualincoherence. Thisweidentifywhentheinnerproductbetweenpairsofelementsisalmostalwaysverylow.
Figure 10 shows that the two tree constructions on continental Africa have good incoherency properties: most
dictionaryelementpairsarenearlyorthogonal. AscanbeseenfromFigure10a,mostpairwiseinnerproductsare
nearlyzero. Morespecifically,asexpected,dictionaryelements(j,1),(2j,1),(2j+1,1),(2(2j),1),(2(2j)+1,1),
(2(2j+1),1),(2(2j+1)+1,1),...,tendtohavelargeinnerproducts,whilethosewithnon-overlappingborders
do not. This exact property is also visible in the two diagonal submatrices of Figure 10b. In the off-diagonals,
due to the orthonormality of the construction, elements of the form (j,1) and (j,2) are orthogonal. In contrast,
duetothenatureofthetreesubdivisionscheme, elementsoftheform(2j,1)or(2j+1,1)and(j,2)havealarge
inner product. However, the number of connections between nodes and their ancestors is (n[2HH]), while the
total number of pairwise inner products is ([n2H]2); and for reasonably sized values of L the ratio of ancestral
connections to pairwise inner products gets to be small, see Figure 11.
4. CONCLUSIONS
We have introduced two classes of spherical parameterizations and discussed their properties in the context of
geophysical model analysis and representation. The first involved the porting of traditional Cartesian wavelet
transformstothesphereviaacubed-spheremapping, withandwithoutspecialconsiderationfortheboundaries
between the six chunks constituting the entire spherical surface. The second was a novel elaboration of the
classical ideas of signal concentration on the sphere. Starting from optimally spatially concentrated bandlimited
spherical“Slepian”functions,weconstructadictionaryoffunctionsoccupyingabinarytree,wheretheelements
of the tree are successive levels of Slepian functions calculated for an increasingly subdivided spatial domain.
Both the wavelet bases and the Slepian tree frames that we discuss in this paper are flexible and efficient
waysofstudyingtheinformationcontentandspatiospectralstructureofgeophysicalandcosmologicaldata. But
in both cases their utility will also be derived from using them in the parameterization of geophysical inverse
problems. In ref. 1 we discuss an iterative algorithm that solves an inverse problem in seismic tomography while
promoting sparsity in the cubed-sphere wavelet basis in which the unknown model is expressed. Ref. 2 explores
theinverseproblemofapproximatingbandlimited,heterogeneouslyconcentrated,essentiallymultiscalefunctions
on the sphere from their samples.
Inthispaperandelsewhere,wehaveshownbyexamplethatmanygeophysicalsignalsaresparseinthewavelet
and Slepian (tree) “bases”. To tackle large-scale and potentially ill-conditioned inverse problems, the sparsity
of the solution should actively be encouraged. In either case the inverse problem comes down to minimizing a
mixed (cid:96) -(cid:96) functional of the form
(w)= K S w d 2+2λ w , (7)
F (cid:107) · · − (cid:107)2 (cid:107) (cid:107) 1
whereby d is a data set, K a linear operator, and S a certain synthesis map that transforms the set of unknown
coefficients w into the domain of K. Thus, S could relate to the wavelet bases introduced in Section 2 or to the
Slepian-tree dictionary introduced in Section 3. Numerical experiments conducted for a variety of experimental
setups under geophysically realistic conditions have already indicated that both types of constructions will be
amenable to solving inverse problems in geophysics and beyond. Further research will be reported elsewhere.
5. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
WethankJeanCharl´ety,HuubDouma,MassimoFornasier,GuustNolet,PhilVetter,C´edricVoneschandSergey
Voronin for valuable discussions throughout the past several years. FJS was supported by Princeton University
account 195-2142 and by NSF grant EAR-1014606 to FJS. Portions of this research were supported by VUB-
GOA grant 062 to ICD and IL, the FWO-Vlaanderen grant G.0564.09N to ICD and IL, and by NSF grant
CMG-0530865 to ICD and others. IL. is Research Associate of the F. R. S.-FNRS (Belgium).