Wavelets for Single Carrier Communications
Ömer Bulakci
PhD candidate at Aalto University School of Electrical Engineering, omer.bulakci@ieee.org
Abstract: This paper aims to provide a report regarding the seminar presentation
given on 23.02.2011 as a part of the postgraduate seminar course S-88.4223
Wavelets in Communications1 lectured by Dr. Sumesh Parameswaran at Aalto
University School of Electrical Engineering. In particular, the topic on “wavelets
for single carrier communications” has been considered in this paper.
I. Introduction
Wavelets are small oscillatory waveforms that are non-zero for a limited period of time,
satisfying certain mathematical conditions. The primary advantages of wavelet transform are
considered to be wavelet diversity and high localization in time and frequency domains. Fast
wavelet transform is implemented via filter banks. One important feature of the wavelets is that
wavelet symbols are overlapping both in time and frequency. This feature enables a high spectral
efficiency. Another important feature of the wavelets is the so-called wavelet diversity. Wavelet
diversity implies that there exist various wavelet families and new wavelets can be designed
depending on the application of interest. This paper provides an overview of the wavelet
applications in the field of single carrier communications.
II. Wavelet Modulation
It is promising to use bandwidth efficient overlapped wavelet packet functions for
modulation. It has been shown that the orthogonality of the wavelets can be exploited to increase
the bandwidth efficiency [1]. Since wavelet packet functions are overlapped a guard band
consisting of cyclic prefix is not available for the wavelets with a multi-channel scheme. The
advantage of this is the increased bandwidth efficiency at the cost of decreased flexibility against
multipath fading tolerance due to the lack of a cyclic prefix.
In [2], two wavelet systems are proposed. In the first system, wavelets are used for pulse
shaping. It has been shown that wavelet based pulse shaping (with Daubechies 10) the spectral
efficiency of the system can be made higher than the system using raised cosine. It is further
shown that the spectral efficiency can be increased by means of using mother wavelet together
with the dyadic expansions. Note that in [3], the author shows that the upper limit of the spectral
efficiency is two, if infinite dyadics are used. For the first system it is also demonstrated that
different wavelet families can have different spectral efficiencies (see Table 2). The spectral
efficiencies are tabulated in Table 1 and Table 2 [2]. In Table 1, wavelet 1, wavelet 1.5, and
wavelet 1.75 correspond to mother wavelet, mother wavelet plus first dyadic expansion and
mother wavelet plus first and second dyadic expansions, respectively. In the second proposed
system, the classical oscillator is replaced by a waveform generator that produces a basic mother
wavelet [2]. This model is referred to as Wavelet Shift Keying (WSK). The authors show that the
spectral efficiency of this system becomes comparable (even better) with the BPSK system using
raised cosine filtering when other user’s information is as well transmitted on the same band.
Besides, the authors mention that the binary WSK performs similar to BPSK in the presence of
AWGN.
III. Bandwidth Efficiency (Demonstration)
In the presentation, one of the strong aspects of the wavelets has been presented. Namely, the
wavelet diversity can be exploited to find a wavelet function with desired bandwidth
characteristics. By means of the spectra of different QMFs (as used in the filter banks)
corresponding to different wavelet families, it is shown that the spectra of these wavelet families
can differ significantly. Furthermore, the impact of the receiver bandwidth on the correct
detection of the receiver symbols has been demonstrated. In this demonstration, the error vector
magnitude (EVM) between the received symbol and ideal symbol is determined with respect to
the normalized bandwidth of the receiver filter. In this scheme, Fourier transform based
Orthogonal Frequency Division Multiplexing (OFDM) and wavelet transform based OFDM are
as well compared using 512 subcarriers and an oversampling factor of two. For the wavelet
transform based OFDM Daubechies 10 (db10) wavelet is used. It is observed that wavelet
transform based OFDM is more tolerant to the inband distortion, which is supported by the fast
decay of the side-lobes. It is worth noting that through different wavelet families such
performance can be further enhanced. The trade-off is in general between the complexity of the
wavelet implementation and the performance.
IV. The modified Gaussian: A Novel Wavelet
One of the key points of the wavelet based communications is the inherent flexibility of
choosing the basis functions. Moreover, different wavelets can be as well designed. In [4] a
novel wavelet called the modified Gaussian is introduced. It is presented that the new wavelet
has very low side lobes and its bandwidth efficiency is compared to that of the square-root raised
cosine. This novel wavelet is obtained by applying the so-called orthogonalization trick. A
further advantage of this design is that the spectral efficiency can be controlled by a parameter.
The Fourier transform of the scaling function is formulated in (1).
V. Wavelets in Single Carrier (SC)-FDMA Sytems
OFDM is a modulation technique well known from wireless and wired communications and
part of standards as LTE, WiMAX, WLAN, DVB and DAB [5][6]. However, a major drawback
of OFDM is high peak-to-average power ratio (PAPR). Therefore, a high dynamic range of
power amplifiers and DA/AD-converters is required for distortionless transmission. The effect of
high PAPR becomes deleterious for higher number of subcarriers (SCs), since PAPR of an
OFDM symbol can be up to 10∙log (N) in the worst case, given N as the number of subcarriers.
Being a multicarrier modulation scheme wavelet transform based OFDM (WT-OFDM) can also
suffer from the high PAPR depending on the used wavelet family. In [7], the PAPR performance
of the WT-OFDM is compared with that of the Fourier transform based counterpart. It has been
shown that WT-OFDM has better PAPR performance and its performance increases as the
wavelet order increases. Note that therein the Daubechies wavelet family has been analyzed. For
the OFDM signal generation 128 SCs were used with QAM modulated input symbols.
In LTE, a DFT precoding is used before generating the FT-OFDM symbol. It is worth noting
that precoding is a PAPR reduction method where the side lobes of the auto-correlation function
of the input symbols are tried to be reduced. The upper limit of the PAPR is related to these side
lobes. The cumulative effect of using DFT precoding and FT-OFDM is the single carrier-like
modulation which is referred to as SC-FDMA [8].The SC-FDMA has superior PAPR
performance relative to OFDMA and hence is preferred for the uplink (UL) transmission. Low
PAPR implies high power efficiency which is critical for the mobile phones especially when we
consider today’s smartphones. It has been shown that similar to FT-OFDM based SC-FDMA,
WT-OFDM based SC-FDMA can be designed [9]. The idea is applying DWT in advance to WT-
OFDM symbol generation. The PAPR performances of FT-OFDM and WT-OFDM based SC-
FDMA are compared using Haar wavelet with 9-levels (or 512 SCs for FT-OFDM) with QPSK
modulated symbols. It is shown that the PAPR performances of conventional FT-OFDM and
WT-OFDM are similar. On the other hand, the PAPR performances can be significantly
enhanced when SC-FDMA is used. Moreover, the PAPR performance of the WT-OFDM based
SC-FDMA is better than that of the FT-OFDM based SC-FDMA. In addition, the BER
performance of WT-OFDM based SC-FDMA is observed to be better for a 10-path fading
environment. Therefore, wavelets are also promising for SC-FDMA systems.