]CN.oib-q[
1v9324.5041:viXra
Published in: “Mathematica Applicanda” 40: 27-37 (2012)
What can a mathematician do in neuroscience?
Karbowskia,b,∗
a Institute of Biocybernetics and Biomedical Engineering,
Polish Academy of Sciences, 02-109 Warsaw, Poland
b Institute of Applied Mathematics and Mechanics,
University of Warsaw, 02-097 Warsaw, Poland
Mammalian brainis one of the mostcomplex objects in theknown
universe,asitgovernseveryaspectofanimal’sandhumanbehavior. It
is fair to say that we have a very limited knowledge of how the brain
operates and functions. Computational Neuroscience is a scientific
disciplinethatattempts tounderstandanddescribethebraininterms
ofmathematicalmodeling. Thisuser-friendlyreviewtriestointroduce
this relatively new field to mathematicians and physicists by showing
examples of recent trends. It also discusses briefly future prospects
for constructing an integrated theory of brain function.
Keywords: Computational Neuroscience; Brain, Modeling, Neurons.
Corresponding author at: jkarbowski@mimuw.edu.pl; jkarbowski@ibib.waw.pl.
1 Introduction
The purpose of this review article is to present a relatively new field of Computational
Neuroscience (or Theoretical Neurobiology) tomathematicians orphysicists, who would
like to do a non-traditional research in theoretical biology but do not know how and
where to start. The primary audience for this review are graduate students who have
their MSc in mathematics, theoretical physics, or computer science, and are ambitious
enough to think about their PhD (doctorate) in Computational Neuroscience.
I still remember myself in the mid 1990s when I was finishing my PhD in theoretical
physics (condensed matter) and thinking that I would not spend the rest of my life
doing this type of research. At that time it became clear to me that physics was an
“oldscience” andallexciting theoretical problemsthatcouldbesolved andlaterverified
experimentally had been already solved. (Of course there was string theory but that
appeared to me as an extremely abstract fantasy with its 11 or so dimensions and
with no chance for any sort of verification in my lifetime). In my search, I turned to
biology, which at about that time was depicted in a popular press as the science that
would dominate the 21 century. Judging by the percent of biological papers published
in every issue of highly prestigious Nature and Science magazines, this prediction has
turned out to be correct. In particular, neurobiology seemed very interesting to me,
because it dealt with the brain, which is the organ generating all of our behavior, as
well as higher cognitive states (e.g. the ability to solve math equations). I made my
transition from theoretical physics to theoretical neurobiology when I was a postdoc at
Boston University. That transition was relatively quick and painless, and I have never
regretted my decision. My example shows that it is possible to switch successfully
scientific fields, if somebody is highly motivated and hard working. Thus, if a young
reader of this article possesses these two traits, such a transition can be possible as well.
2 General overview of Computational Neuroscience
2.1 Grand challenges of Computational Neuroscience
One of the major goals of contemporary Neuroscience is to understand human be-
havior and action through understanding certain physical processes in the brain [1].
The challenge here is to provide quantitative description or “theory” that would make
far-reaching testable predictions, much the same way as it has happened in physical
sciences with the understanding of non-living matter. There is no need to elaborate
that such putative understanding would be beneficial for society at large, and might
have technological implications (e.g. for constructing “intelligent” computational de-
vices). However, because of the brain structural complexity (about 1010 neurons and
1015 synapses in the human brain), this task is extremely difficult. One might note
that this fact in itself should not be a big obstacle because even 1 mole of non-living
matter contains about 1023 atoms, and somehow statistical physics deals efficiently with
that. However, there are several fundamental differences between non-living and living
matter, in particular the brain.
First, the brain, which can be viewed as an electro-chemical system of ionic mixture,
is far from thermodynamic equilibrium with the environment and also within different
brain components. This inequilibrium is maintained by the brain itself through vari-
ous self-regulatory biochemical and sensory feedback loops, which use energy from the
environment (animals have to eat). Nothing like that appears in non-living matter
composed of a huge number of atoms, and mostly successfully described by equilibrium
statistical physics (there are also exceptions, e.g. whether phenomena that are often
described by non-equilibrium thermodynamics).
Second, neurons interact in a non-linear manner and the degree of this interaction
changes over time (neuromodulation). Moreover, neurons and synapses undergo struc-
tural changes over vastly different time scales (from minutes to years). This process
is known as brain plasticity and it is to a large extent environmentally (externally)
driven, and therefore it has a strong non-deterministic component. This environmen-
tal stochasticity introduces non-stationarity into brain dynamics, which is difficult to
capture theoretically. In contrast, non-living physical systems described by equilib-
rium statistical physics are composed of elements that interact in a predictable and on
average static ways, which are relatively easy to formulate mathematically.
Third, neurons process information, i.e. they store information and recall it when
necessary. A similar function can be also performed by some non-living man-made
devices, e.g. computers, but only rather passively. The point is that brains do it
naturally and adaptively, with a high degree of effectiveness, which is a result of a long
process of evolution and self-organization (see e.g. [2] for the latter topics). A related
issue is that brains (at least human brain) use information in a specific way to create
abstract representations of the outside world. This is implemented by the so-called
“higher cognitive states” or consciousness, which form the basis of our daily existence
and experience. Unfortunately, these cognitive states are rather elusive and therefore
they have been much more investigated using the methods of psychology rather than
those of exact sciences.
Givenallthat, onecouldspeculatethatthefutureintegrated“grandtheory”ofbrain
function (provided such a theory is possible at all) should contain elements of stochastic
dynamical systems [3, 4] combined in some innovative way with non-equilibrium statis-
tical physics [5], and information theory [6] possibly with some elements of game theory
(psychologically motivated). All these three or four disciplines already exist and have
solid theoretical foundations. Nevertheless, they are still actively developed and have
many open questions, especially in the context of neuroscience. Thus, I believe that
we have enough theoretical tools at hand for describing brain functional mysteries, and
there isno need to invent “newkinds” of mathematics or physics for thatparticular goal
(see however [7] and [8] for the opposite points of view on the brain and general complex
biological systems, respectively). It seems that the main challenge in constructing the
grand theory of the brain is in appropriately adopting and integrating already existing
separate concepts from these disciplines into a coherent theoretical picture that would
be useful for brain description, rather than to invent completely new and unchecked
concepts.
2.2 Historical remarks
Up to recent years Neuroscience has been predominantly an experimental science, in
which scientists have been accumulating painstakingly, mostly separate, experimental
facts. In this field there was no room for any sort of theory or mathematical model,
partly because of incomplete or evolving knowledge and partly because of neuroscien-
tists’ reluctance to mathematics. Consequently, the majority of neurobiological models
had qualitative, verbal character. The first example that theory can be useful in neu-
roscience came with the formulation of the so-called Hodgkin-Huxley model [9], which
“mechanistically”, i.e. physically, explains the generation and propagation of action
potential in squid axon in terms of Na+ and K+ ions flow through neuron’s membrane.
That mathematical model agreed perfectly with the data and subsequently has become
a classic. Hodgkin and Huxley were later awarded the Nobel Prize in Medicine or Phys-
iology (1963) for their combined experimental, computational and explanatory efforts
of neural spiking biophysics. However, despite this early success, the mathematical
modeling in general and the Hodgkin-Huxley model in particular, were for a long time
an exception rather than a rule in the neuroscience research. The exceptions in the
1960s and 1970s were in part due to people like Stephen Grossberg, Walter Freeman,
and slightly later Terry Sejnowski (to name just a few), who made some lasting contri-
butions to computational neuroscience, but nevertheless, did not inspire big crowds of
computational scientists. Such an inspiration wave among physicists came later with
the so-called Hopfield models in the early 1980s [10]. That huge initial wave subsided
significantly later because the Hopfield’s models and their extensions were not too re-
alistic. It seems that the main value of these simple models is in the fact that they
helped to realize that mathematics, physics, and computer science with their quantita-
tive and rigorous methodologies, can offer a lot in understanding the brain. As a result
of this thinking a new field called Computational Neuroscience has emerged, which is
still in progress and which provides a link between theoretical and experimental work
in neuroscience from a physical perspective [11, 12]. It seems that at present Neuro-
science has matured enough so that it is possible, and even necessary, to try to find
mechanistic explanation of brain dynamics and function. The current models used in
Computational Neuroscience are far more complex and realistic than they were in the
1980s and 1990s. It should be also mentioned that this new interdisciplinary field is
practiced only to a limited extent in Poland by a handful of people. Nevertheless, I do
hope that a popularity of this exciting field will grow over time in Poland as well.
3 Examples of research topics in Computational Neu-
In this section I present a short description of selected topics in Computational Neuro-
science that might be of a particular interest to the mathematical and physical commu-
nities. The choice of these topics reflects author’s interest, and for that reason it should
not be viewed as the whole field of Computational Neuroscience.
3.1 Dynamics of a single neuron and networks of neurons
The most popular area of research in Computational Neuroscience is neural dynamics.
Neurophysiological studies show that the brain exhibits different activity patterns, from
regular oscillations, often with synchronous activities across different brain regions, to
highly irregular or chaotic behavior. In this area the typical questions of interest are:
(i) What are the mechanisms of oscillations in neural systems? (ii) What conditions
must be satisfied to obtain synchronization in neural activities? (iii) Is chaotic neural
activity relevant functionally? (iv) What is the mechanism of generating the so-called
bursts of action potentials? These and similar questions are investigated both on a
single neuron level and on a network level. In general, the single neuron study involves
modeling realistic neurons with complicated voltage dynamics due to primarily sodium
and potassium channels located on neuron’s membrane. The basic equations of this
approach, called Hodgkin-Huxley (HH) equations are of the form:
L L Na Na K K syn
where C is the membrane electric capacity, V is the membrane voltage, I is the
synaptic input current, g , g , and g are sodium, potassium and the so-called leak
conductances through the membrane. These ions have their specific equilibrium volt-
ages (Nerst potentials) for balance of their concentration gradients with electrostatic
forces. These voltages are denoted as V , V , and V , respectively. The Na and K
conductances are dynamical parameters in this model, and are given by g = g m3h,
and g = g n4, where g and g are maximal conductances (all positive). The vari-
ables m, h, and n are the so-called gating variables, and each of them is described by
a similar differential equation of the type:
where α and β depend on voltage V in a non-linear manner. The gating variables
describe complicated ion channels kinetics such as channel opening, closing, and inacti-
vation through voltage dependence of the parameters α and β (for details see [11, 12]).
Let us try to provide some physical picture behind Eqs. (1) and (2). When neu-
ron does not get a synaptic input (I = 0), its voltage V is at a resting potential,
which is close to V (about −65 mV). This is a consequence of the fact that for very
negative voltages, Na+ and K+ channels are practically closed and do not conduct ions.
Mathematically this means that the gating variables m and n, characterizing channels
openings, are approximately to zero (hence g and g → 0). However, when synaptic
input I > 0, then voltage V increases due to sodium channels opening and Na+ in-
flux to neuron’s interior. Mathematically speaking, V grows because g increases and
V −V < 0 (V ≈ 50 mV). If I is sufficiently strong, then V can reach a threshold
(V ≈ −44 mV) for generation of an action potential (action potentials are abrupt
changes “spikes” in V, and are the means to communicate signals between neurons).
After crossing the threshold, the voltage increases further sharply, and this is because
a positive feedback loop between g and V (both drive each other through the gating
variable m). With some delay the potassium channels start to open, i.e. the gating
variable n starts to grow. However, since V −V > 0 (V ≈ −90 mV), the potassium
current is negative (K+ ions escape from the neuron’s interior) and counteracts the pos-
itive Na+ current. Therefore, the activation of potassium channels results in slowing
down the rise of V, and ultimately its decay after reaching ∼ 20−30 mV to negative
values below V . From there the voltage slowly relaxes to its resting value V . The
whole process of the action potential lasts about 2−3 msec.
Note that the Hodgkin-Huxley HH model involves four differential equations (one
for V, and 3 equations for the gating variables). The modern single neuron research
takes this model as a base and extends it by including a whole range of new (recently
discovered) channels, such as different types of calcium channels, calcium activated
potassium channel, etc, to study neural dynamics. Such models are more realistic but
at the same time more complex (and require more computing time in simulations).
The interesting thing is that sometimes the presence of one channel type can have a
dramatic impact on single neuron dynamics [13, 14]. That is, this dynamics can vary
from highly ordered to extremely irregular.
On the other hand, studies on a network level involve simplified models of neurons.
The most popular of these is the so-called integrate-and-fire (IF) model, of the form
where τ is the membrane time constant, and the function f(V) = −(V − V ), with
V denoting the resting membrane potential (i.e. when there is no synaptic input). In
this model an action potential is generated when voltage V reaches a certain threshold,
after which V is immediately reset by hand to a value below V . Then V starts to
relax back to value V . This resetting procedure introduces a discontinuous jump in
V, which is to mimic the decay phase of V during an action potential observed in real
neurons. Additionally, the resetting jump in V leads to a non-linearity in the model,
which otherwise would be perfectly linear. The advantage in using this simple model
over the HH type model (Eqs. 1 and 2) is that a simulation time on a computer is
much shorter because less equations have to be solved. This allows simulation of a huge
number of connected IF neurons. Another benefit of using IF model is that, unlike
HH model, it can be solved analytically, which provides in some cases a huge intuitive
advantage. On the other hand, the drawback of this model is that “an interesting”
neural dynamics is generated only by an interesting synaptic input, unlike in HH base
models (which could be highly nonlinear even with constant I ).
Extensions of IF model have been proposed that involve different forms of the func-
tion f(V). For example, the so-called quadratic integrate-and-fire or its modification
known as an Izhikevich model has f(V) = aV2+bV +c, where a,b, and c are some nu-
merical coefficients [15, 16]. Another example was proposed by the author [17] that can
be called an absolute integrate-and-fire, which is piece-wise linear with f(V) = |V −V |.
These extended models have features that make them slightly more realistic than the
traditional IF model, and hence should describe the dynamics of real neural networks
a little more faithfully.
3.2 Models of learning and memory in the brain
One of the most important aspects of the brain is that it can learn and remember
different events in the real world. These dynamic processes take place in the synapses,
i.e. in the tiny volumes connecting two neurons (the term I in Eqs. 1 and 3).
Despite a huge experimental progress in the last 30 years, the detailed mechanisms
of learning and memory are still poorly known. What we do know, however, is that
synaptic structure and conductance are not static but change over time with different
time constants ranging from 0.1 sec to ∼ 50−70 years (human lifetime). That process
is known as synaptic plasticity, and it can be activated when two neurons connected by
a given synapse are simultaneously (or almost simultaneously) active. It is suspected
that memories are encoded in these structural synaptic changes.
There exist a traditional model of memory based on the Hopfield model [10]. In
this model the network learns different patterns by a training, and there is a close
correspondence of memory states to the basins of attractors known from the dynamical
systems. The problem with this and similar models is that they are quite abstract, i.e.
memories can last forever, and moreover they have rather low capacity for the number
of memory patterns they can store. In recent years, there have appeared other models
of learning and memory [18, 19, 20] that are based on an experimental finding that
synapses can exist in many discrete states, not in a continuum of states [21]. In these
models [18, 19, 20], which usually have large memory capacities, plasticity is associated
with transitions between these discrete states, and memories can naturally fade away,
as it happens in the real world. As was stated above, there is a stochastic component
to these transitions, which involves considering probabilities of synaptic states. The
dynamics of synaptic probabilities are described by differential equations of the Master
equation type known fromnon-equilibrium statistical physics [4]. Anther formulationof
synaptic plasticity through the Fokker-Planck equation is also possible. This example
shows that stochastic effects are present in the brain and can have some functional role
(in this case in learning and memory).
3.3 Models of brain metabolism and visualization of brain
Brain is an expensive organ in terms of metabolic energy it uses [22, 23]. Moreover, as
brain increases in size on an evolutionary scale its metabolic consumption grows slightly
faster than metabolic needs of the whole body [24, 25]. This suggests that metabolism
is an important part of brain function. The majority of energy used by neurons goes
to maintaining concentration gradients of Na+ and K+ ions across neural membranes.
Thesegradientsarenecessaryforkeeping thebrainintheoutofequilibrium state, which
is the pre-condition for the ability to generate action potentials, which are necessary for
efficient neural communication. One can relate the amount of metabolic energy used
to the underlying neurophysiological processes such as the firing frequency of action
potentials and activities of synapses. This involves solution of a system of differential
equations for a balance in ionic flow of Na+ and K+ [26]. This relationship can have a
practical aspect, because by measuring metabolic activity of certain brain regions one
could say something more definitive about physiological state of neurons there. This is
important, since the only way to visualize regional brain function in humans is through
techniques such asPET(positronemission tomography)andfMRI(functionalmagnetic
resonance imaging). Both of them are based primarily on brain metabolic activity, and
therefore it is good to have a model that maps brain metabolism into an underlying
electrical (neural) and chemical (synaptic) signaling. In my opinion, this branch of
neuroscience will develop fast in the coming years, as is it visible in recent conferences
and workshops agendas (e.g. Computational Neuroscience Meeting in Stockholm CNS
2011, or INCF Congress in Munich 2012).
3.4 Models of brain connectivity patterns
The mammalian brain is organized hierarchically. On the most basic level, there are
neurons that are connected by synapses. Typically, there are two major classes of neu-
rons, excitatory and inhibitory, determined by the type of synapses (neurotransmitters)
they make with other neurons. It is commonly believed that neurons are organized
into the so-called columns (about 103 − 104 neurons). Neurons belonging to a single
column behave dynamically similar in response to a specific stimulation, and differ-
ent columns are activated differentially by the same stimulus. Columns are organized
into macro-columns and these, in turn, form functional “areas”. Human brain contains
about hundred areas, each one is thought to process a different type of information. For
example, visual areas process visual input coming to the brain through the eyes. Motor
areas guide movement of hands and legs, whereas frontal areas (located in front of the
brain) are associated with higher cognitive functions.
If the brain is to perform its functions coherently, different areas have to commu-
nicate efficiently, i.e. on time, so that information is globally integrated [27, 28]. This
means that a certain level of connectivity between neurons and areas should be main-
tained. Too low connectivity would imply too large separation between areas, which
is not good for integration of information. On the other hand, too high connectivity
would unnecessarily merge distinct areas causing their functional disintegration. Stud-
ies in recent years have shown that brain has a “small world” architecture [29], which
is a name given to organization in which there are many local connections and only few
long-range connections [30].
A common theoretical tool for investigating these topics is graph theory, which
provides quantitative means for characterizing anatomical and functional separation
and integration in a network [31]. Research in this field is centered around questions
of how to relate brain functioning to parameters characterizing brain connectivity. For
example, there are studies claiming that certain brain abnormalities and disorders, like
schizophrenia and autism, may be a result of an altered connectivity between brain
regions [32].
4 Concluding remarks
It is important to stress a difference between understanding the main ideas of the field
of Computational Neuroscience and doing an ambitious research on theories of brain
function. For the former, one does not need overly complicated or sophisticated math-
ematics. In fact, it seems that the most common theoretical tool across the whole
theoretical neuroscience is the ability to solve and analyze systems of non-linear dif-
ferential equations on a computer (simulations). By mastering this relatively simple
technique (there are even open source free softwares that do it for you), one acquires
in principle a sufficient technical background to comprehend the basics of theoretical
neuroscience. For a general overview of mathematics used in neuroscience see the book
by Ermentrout and Terman [33].
On the other hand, constructing influential theories of brain functioning requires
in my opinion a mixture of different skills (as it was signalled in Section 2). It is
not enough to just know how to solve differential equations on a computer, one has
also to know how to analyze such equations analytically, at least approximately and
qualitatively, to gain an intuition about what they really describe. The more analytical
techniques one knows the better. However, even this can be insufficient without a solid
knowledge of physics and traditional neurobiology. Physics teaches how to describe
in mathematical terms the non-living matter, and borrowing certain concepts from
this discipline may be highly beneficial. In particular, the ideas of non-equilibrium
thermodynamics and electromagnetism applied in a new context to the brain may yield
new insights of how the brain works. Knowledge of neurobiology on some decent level
should also help. Neurobiology (or biology in general) teaches researchers from the so-
called “exact sciences” which processes are possible and which are not, and additionally
that biological phenomena are generally governed by many factors (or parameters),
often conflicting in outcome.
The current Computational Neuroscience is very fragmented. Virtually almost all
theoretical papers in this field focus on a specific neurobiological phenomenon or on a
narrow class of phenomena (no exception are the examples presented in Sec. 3). This
narrowness of thescope probablyreflects the degree of difficulty inconstructing theories
that would have a broader unifying impact. This difficulty is a consequence of the fact,
already mentioned in Sec. 2, that “grand theories” require a comprehensive approach
that would have a chance to integrate concepts from different disciplines into a coherent
framework with testable (quantitative) predictions. That is probably too much for the
present-day Computational Neuroscience. For example, it is currently not clear at all
how to pass from molecular (neurotransmitters, channels) and cellular (neuron) levels
of description to the description of macroscopic cognitive states. I do not think we
can even properly address this question at present. The point is that we are unsure
about which microscopic details to include and which to abandon in the theoretical
description. Similarly, on the macroscopic level, it is often unclear how to precisely
define distinct cognitive states, and which parameters should characterize them.
The research topics discussed in Sec. 3 and almost all other (see [1]) are satisfactory
described in terms of classical physics. However, since neurons and synapses are so
small (micrometers), one can wonder if quantum mechanics (describing the world of
atoms and molecules) is relevant for the brain description (I mean here functional or
dynamical description not just a mere structural description of various microscopic
parts of channels and synapses). About two decades ago a prominent mathematician
Roger Penrose published a book [34] in which he claimed that quantum effects might
underlie neural activities that lead to consciousness. The book was totally criticized by
almost every neuroscientist for the author’s lack of basic neurobiological knowledge, but
nevertheless caused thepeopletoaskquestions abouttherelationshipbetween quantum
theory and brain function [35, 36, 37]. At present, it is rather commonly believed that
quantum coherence effects are too short (10
sec) to be important for brain
dynamics (10
sec), and thus they cannot control brain function. The very short
quantum coherence times are caused by frequent ionic (Na+, K+, Cl − , Ca++) collisions
with each other and water molecules, which is additionally amplified by a relatively
high brain temperature of 300 K [35, 37].
Acknowledgments
The work was supported by the grant from the Polish Ministry of Science and
Education (NN 518 409238), and by the Marie Curie Actions EU grant FP7-PEOPLE-
2007-IRG-210538.