Page 1 of 6 Original Research
What is Children’s Theology? Children’s Theology
as theological competence: Development,
differentiation, methods
Author: Children’s Theology, theologising with children, or Child Theology has become an established
Mirjam Zimmermann1
concept in the discipline of religious education in Germany. The discipline departs from the
point of view that children have a right to their religion, which makes the process of religious
Affiliations:
1Fakultät Philosophische, education the focal point. It is, however, important to understand the theology generated by
Evangelische Theologie children and also to create interaction with their religious views. This requires dialogue in
Seminar, Universität Siegen,
which relevant questions are to be considered and discussed. The challenges for religious
educators are subsequently treated.
2Faculty of Theology,
North-West University,
Potchefstroom Campus, What is Children’s Theology? Children’s Theology as
South Africa
theological competence
Note:
Mirjam Zimmermann is an The background for the concept is secularism and religious plurality in Europe and that leads to
extraordinary professor at
the question: How can we pass on our religious tradition to our children? Over the past 20 years,
the North-West University,
Children’s Theology has become an established concept in Europe within the academic field of
Potchefstroom, South Africa.
religious education (Kraft, Roose & Büttner 2011b). Based on the point of view that children
Correspondence to: in institutions of public education have a right to their religion (Schweitzer 2000, 2011:10) and,
Mirjam Zimmermann
particularly in religion classes, have a right to religious education and to information that is new
Email: to them, pioneers of Children’s Theology such as Anton A. Bucher, Gerhard Büttner, Friedhelm
zimmermann@evantheo. Kraft, Petra Freudenberger-Lötz, Hartmut Rupp, Elisabeth Schwarz and Mirjam Zimmermann
uni-siegen.de advocate ‘a hermeneutics of active acquisition rather than transmittal’ (Bucher 2002:23). They are
convinced that children can be regarded as people:
Postal address:
Universität Siegen, [W]ho can think about theological topics in their specific way. Just as children are sensitive to philosophical
Evangelische Theologie questions, they are sensitive to theological questions. … Children are not only encouraged to say what
Seminar, Adolf Reichwein Str.,
they think, they [are] also encouraged to specify why they think, what they think and in which respect
57068 Siegen, Germany
what they think might differ from what other children (or adults) think. (Kraft et al. 2011b:5)
Dates:
Received: 27 Oct. 2014 Is seems that theologising with children is a concept that is primarily related to religious education
Accepted: 23 Mar. 2015 at school, but there are also descriptions of possibilities with children in families.
Published: 21 Aug. 2015
How to cite this article: The goal is to understand the theology generated by children, to interpret the ‘pattern
Zimmermann, M., 2015, (hypothetically) detected in this way’ (e.g. on prayer see Roose 2006:137–146) and finally to give
‘What is Children’s Theology? new theological ideas, identify the nuances and make it more flexible.
Children’s Theology as
theological competence:
Development, differentiation, Using the concept of the advancement of theological competency (Zimmermann 2012:131–
methods’, HTS Teologiese 164) allows the more open notion of ‘religious competency’, which is used extensively in the
Studies/Theological Studies competency debate, to be expanded into an area so far neglected and to be brought back into
71(3), Art. #2848, 6 pages.
the theological tradition of thought. The intention is to thoughtfully investigate a historical,
hts.v71i3.2848 contemporary or personal faith practice, while moving away from a spirituality of the child that
is practiced but not reflected. Therefore, in order to advance theological competency, a process of
Copyright: confrontation, examination and reflection must take place in classroom situations.
© 2015. The Authors.
Licensee: AOSIS
OpenJournals. This work is Additionally, theologising gains connectivity in the religious-didactic field through its integration
licensed under the Creative into the competency debate (Kraft, Freudenberger-Lötz & Schwarz 2011a:9–16). Competency
Commons Attribution in Children’s Theology is defined as the empirically measurable ability of children ‘not only to
License.
articulate but also to reflectively penetrate and refine their own thoughts and ideas on theological
Read online: questions’ (Reiß & Freudenberger-Lötz 2012:133). It is thus a cognitive ability that reveals itself
Scan this QR in the posing and processing of theological questions as well as in narrative and metaphorical
code with your
smart phone or modes of thought and which enables one to deal with paradoxes and hermeneutical questions. It
mobile device assists in the solving of theological problems, the points of origin which lie between the child and
to read online.
the theological issues. Its specificity to a field or domain is revealed through specific theological
Page 2 of 6 Original Research
subject matters (e.g. the question of God, Christology, the Holy children actively construct their own worlds and are capable
Ghost). This competency can be learned, tested, expanded of complex thinking, for example, of forming analogies, at
and improved and it can be called up as a competency for a much earlier age than formerly assumed, has grown. This
communicating and acting in appropriate situations. It can change of perspective has taken place over the past 30 years
be analysed in form and content, for example with regard through sociological, psychological and pedagogical issues
to consistency, abstraction, dependence on language, the use and has been taken up in theology and in the church especially
of fundamental categories, the generation of causal systems through developments such as Children’s Theology. In
and connectivity to interpretations and systems, and it can Religious Pedagogy, ‘Children’s Theology, Child Theology
be evaluated and promoted according to didactic goals (for or theologising with Children’ is explicitly spoken about
more detail see Zimmerman 2013:163). within the religious-pedagogical discourse since 1992 and
the discussion has become more intense since the appearance
Drawing on established definitions within the systematic- of the ’Jahrbuch für Kindertheologie’ (Yearbook of Children’s
theological tradition, Children’s Theology is defined as: Theology) in 2002.
• theology of revelation and answers
Since then, several monographs, for example on the
• lay theology
• existential and personal theology interpretation of Jesus’ death (Albrecht 2007; Zimmermann
• concrete, creative and contextual 2012), the resurrection (Butt 2009), prayer (Kammeyer 2009)
• but also temporary, critical and dialogical theology. et cetera, have been published and a bibliography up until
2010 is available (Zimmermann 2012:51–54). Since 2010, an
In every case it is closely tied to language as the medium for additional focus on youth theology has been established
reflection (for more detail see Zimmermann 2012:88–92). (Dieterich 2012; Freudenberger-Lötz 2012; Schlag &
Schweitzer 2011) and the ‘Jahrbuch für Jugendtheologie’
Many aspects concerning the goal and the road to be used (Yearbook of Youth Theology) has been published alongside
still needs further definition and research. The central the Yearbook of Children’s Theology since 2013.
concern of researchers is to remain respectful of children
and not to functionalise or romanticise their voices in Philosophy has provided a decisive motivating factor
order to come to a new vitality in theology. Certainly, for the interest in conversing with children and for the
the awareness of the position of children in theology is appreciation of children’s thoughts. Both through transfers
part of the actual hermeneutical turn in theology (Dillen and differentiation from the ‘philosophising with Children’
2007) and can also be seen as a ‘postmodern modus’ of (Camhy; Matthews; Freese; Horster 1992; Lipman 1980 etc.),
doing theology (Roebben 2011:15), in which the difference we have been able to learn essential aspects about establishing
between a child, an ordinary theologian and an academic and structuring Children’s Theology. The following can be
professional theologian is not substantial, but graded considered to be common core beliefs:
(Bucher 2002:11).
• interest in the questioning attitude of children and trust
in children’s competency, even in explicitly philosophical
The development of Children’s
questions (Lipman 1980)
Theology • the partial criticism of the cognitive stage theory based on
Piaget (Matthews 1991) for the evaluation of statements
Although the term ‘Children’s Theology’ is quite new, the
in Children’s Theology
concept behind it has a long history. Individual aspects
• the appreciation of the particularity of individual
reveal analogies to insights and postulations from various
children’s thought processes (Matthews 1984, 1993)
phases of theology and religious education, such as:
• individual interview methods (particularly the dialogue
[T]he perception of the otherness of the child in ancient times, method of Martens 2009:97–115; Socratic discourse in
the attempt to improve its social status in the New Testament, Horster 1992).
a recognition and appreciation of its own value during the
Enlightenment, the change of perspective in an education
However, in addition to these analogies, it is possible and
‘originating with the child’ in progressive education, the
necessary to make a clear distinction between the object of
exploration of the religious development of children through
Children’s Theology and that of the philosophy of children.
developmental-psychological or religious-sociological studies
In defining the object of theology more specifically, we gain
within empirical theology since the 1970’s and the insight,
a clearer separation between Children’s Theology and the
supported by new child research, into the independent
interaction of children with their environment … (Zimmermann philosophy of children (Rupp 2009:170–181). Children’s
2012:400) Theology develops clear contours through an orientation
toward the established term of theology in the systematic-
Through child research in the social sciences the deficient theological tradition. In the same way that theology must
image of the child, postulated by developmental and refer here to Christian faith, Children’s Theology must also
socialisation theories and measured against the norm of in some way be able to be referred to the history of God
adults, has been replaced by the concept of the child who with people and people with God, which is transmitted
acts, thinks and speaks independently. Thus, the insight that through biblical tradition, proclaimed by the church and is
Page 3 of 6 Original Research
experienced in the present day. Finally, theologising with of spirituality is also part of the pedagogical debate, which
children and philosophising with children differ in their understands spirituality as part of the condition humaine.
claims to truth and validity. As philosophers in this field This concept reminds of Maria Montessori’s concept, but
emphasise, philosophical thought cannot lead to normative it was developed in an interreligious, pluralistic context
security in the sense of life certitude. However, for Children’s (Freudenreich 2009:131–144). Roebben asks (2011): How do
Theology, the essential aspects are a connection back to a this term and the underlying movement relate and respond
faith which is externally authenticated – in theological terms: to the Anglo-Saxon development in children’s spirituality?
‘extra no’s’ – providing a claim to one’s own self-discovery Is it a more academic approach (therefore theology) to a
and the possibility of successfully managing one’s life as well more educational praxis (therefore spirituality) in the life of
as the hope for a goal. children? Are the German religious education specialists
building on the ‘lived theology’ that comes out of the Anglo-
In an interesting book, which presents the essays of an Saxon empirical and hermeneutical research of children’s
international discussion in Danish Loggum-Abbey, the spirituality?
participants sorted out the two interesting positions:
Internal differentiation: Children’s
KT ([Kindertheologie] means Children [sic] Theology) can be divided
in two streams: it is about philosophizing (or wondering Theology as theology by, for and
philosophically and reflecting systematically) with children on
with children
religious subjects or it is about philosophizing with children in the
form of religion. (Roebben 2011:13)
Early on in the framework of theoretical reflection on
Children’s Theology, Anton Bucher (2002:9) differentiated
Petermann, who adheres to the first position, wants to
between Theology of Children (Genetivus subjektivus) and
invite children ‘to make faith (also in the sense of its
Theology for Children (Genetivus objektivus). At the same
communications) reflective as an elementary dimension of
time, we also find the term Theologizing with Children
human experience’ (Petermann 2009:144).
(Büttner & Rupp 2002, in the book title). In his leading
article in the Jahrbuch der Kindertheologie (2003), Friedrich
Apart from the idea of philosophising with children, there
Schweitzer (2003:11) effectively differentiated among
are two more concepts which have influenced Children’s
theology by, for and with children. The following table
Theology.
(Zimmermann 2012:123) gives a brief overview, which will
Piaget and the psychology of children´s development claims be discussed below.
that children are not deficient in their way of thinking; they
are just different. These differences might be promising, This system was also adopted in Youth Theology and was
firstly for the understanding of how young children think, differentiated with regard to the various forms of youth
and secondly that their thinking provides a valuable and theology: Implicit theology, personal theology, explicit
sometimes very creative and surprising contribution to the theology, theological interpretation with the help of
theological discourse itself in bringing up new questions and theological dogmatic, the specific theological argumentation
also new answers. of youth (Schlag & Schweitzer 2011; explained by Schlag
at the conference for Children’s Theology 2011). When
The other concept that formed the idea is that of ‘Children’s considering Table 1, it is important to remember – due both
Spirituality’. Especially in the United Kingdom, the concept to epistemological considerations as well as with regard to
TABLE 1: What is Children Theology?
Variable Theology by children, the theology of children Theologising with children Theology for children
Theological concept Theology as human discourse about faith Dialogical act of the search for truth Theology of revelation (people as listeners)
Function of faith (Härle) Function of the church (Tillich) Function of revelation (Barth & Bultmann)
Role of the child Active, independent, fully-fledged subject. Relationship-oriented, dialogical- Active and independent but also capable of
Autonomy of the child communicative development and learning; deficit in knowledge and
experience
actor partner addressee
Role of the teacher Passive listener at the most providing stimulus (Dialogue)partner Orienting, leading, transmitting
Enrichment/questioning of the position of the Respectful correction and intervention; Co-responsible for the validity and security of the
teacher questioning subject matter
Basic attitude: Basic attitude: Basic attitude:
amazement, questioning searching, talking inviting, offering
Method(s) Socio-scientific empirical: descriptive From communication science Hermeneutic prescriptive
Religious-pedagogical goal To foster the creativity and independence of Symmetrical and open communication; Assistance in the development and expansion of the
children’s theological activities common search for theological truths domain-specific religious knowledge of the child;
from biblical-theological tradition
Oriented toward identity; Oriented toward dialogue; goal: Oriented toward education; goal:
goal: mature Christian community of the searchers/church acquiring and understanding of tradition
Limits/ problem Cannot be reached methodologically/ Symmetrical communication is an ideal but Perception/appreciation of children only with regard
epistemologically not a corrective cannot actually be reached to certain religious-pedagogical goals
Source: Zimmermann, M., 2012, Kindertheologie als theologische Kompetenz: Grundlagen, Methodik und Ziel kindertheologischer Forschung am Beispiel der Deutung des Todes Jesu, 2. Aufl.,
Neukirchener-Verlag, Neukirchen-Vluyn.
Page 4 of 6 Original Research
the integration of Children’s Theology in practical religious- refers to an exceptional selection of children’s statements that
pedagogical contexts – that the various dimensions of do not represent the entire spectrum of children’s theological
Children’s Theology have been differentiated with heuristic competencies. ‘Theology for children’ is also necessary
intention. Ultimately, there are three facets to Children’s because many children have too little basic knowledge and
Theology. their statements are often random, selective and problematic
(explained in Zimmermann 2012:43–47). Therefore ‘theology
Theology by children for children’ must conceptualise meaningful situations that
challenge children theologically but also support them in the
Early on, Anton Bucher called for ‘sensitivity toward
development of their abilities to question. It must convey a
children’s theological capabilities’ and valued children as
basis of knowledge that enables more complex and creative
theologians and thus as independent and active constructors
theological thought during the process of theologising and
of theological artefacts (Bucher 1992:20). At the beginning, a
must attempt to establish in the long-term the development
focus on the theology of children was necessary in order to
of these competencies in order to minimise randomness.
differentiate between classical religious education and the
movement of Children’s Theology. It also led to a change in Methods of Children’s Theology
the role of adults, who at best should stimulate children’s
thoughts or provide space for their development. This Drawing on a working paper by Hartmut Rupp, Heinz
image, however, does not appear consistently throughout Schmidt identified seven basic didactical forms:
the ‘Yearbooks of Children’s Theology’. There should actually be
• Socratic discourse, which aims at self-recognition and exists
no correction of unfortunate or incorrect statements, as these
in a ‘clarifying dialogue’ between child and ‘master’
enrich the position of the teacher or even call it into question.
• basic teaching, which identifies mistakes and what is
Methodologically, such approaches are used to exert the
• mythological narration, which suggests elementary
least influence on the thoughts and statements of children
narrative images and stories and thus addresses and
because these should be registered only descriptively. At this
connects deep-seated emotions
point we come up against the limits of such a perception,
• literary narrative also with pictures (picture books), which
because ultimately, it is adults who structure and focus the
stimulate and process questions using dramatic stories
interpretations through the theological setting, the materials
and vivid images
and the questions asked and it is adults who are active as
• question-oriented lessons, which are based on children’s
interpreters when they evaluate and present the children’s
questions and refer to these questions to unlock biblical
statements (Roebben 2011:19).
narratives, images, words, songs and music
• use of dilemma stories to activate and call into question
Theology with children children’s fundamental ideas and motivate children to
reconstruct their theological concepts
‘Theology with children’ or the more commonly used
• free work, in which children develop their own questions,
‘theologising with children’ is a middle position that feeds
process them independently using various resources and
out of the ‘theology of children’ where it originates, but
solve them as much as possible on their own (Schmidt
also introduces aspects into the discourse and thus recurs
2002:18–19).
as a ‘theology for children’. As the name itself reveals,
children are partners in the action. The term is based on
Both this list and the contributions in the ‘Yearbook of
‘philosophising with children’ and can be construed as a
Children’s Theology’ on teaching methods reveal that the
practically implemented integrative approach. However, the
above basic forms do not fundamentally differ from those of
role of the teacher, who needs the key skill of so-called flexible
classical religion or confirmation classes. The difference lies
role modulation, holds a central position (Freudenberger-
not in the method but in the goal of the pedagogical process.
Lötz 2007:351).
Here, the primary central interest is not on transmittal;
instead, the children are regarded as equal discourse
Theology for children
partners even on the factual level and are taken seriously
Although the term ‘theology for children’ was used early on in if they express their theological positions on a topic or
publications as a contrast to differentiate from the ‘theology of problem. Only by drawing on the theology of the children
children’ (Bucher 2002:9), it later became clear in many contexts do the adults introduce other positions not mentioned in
that the ‘theology of children’ is dependent on the stimulus the group or by the child. The openness of the outcome is
and supplementation arising from ‘theology for children’. decisive and this must not be confused with arbitrariness.
In 2012, one of the yearbooks was devoted explicitly to this As an example of such a theological conversation we can
topic. The astonishment at children’s theological capabilities use the image of a playing field upon which no entirely new
was no longer sufficient to prevent work being done on the areas are developed but rather limits are drawn and rules
shortcomings that had come to light in the framework of are outlined. The way in which the game develops within
Children’s Theology. Thus, empirically acquired data often the limits, however, depends on the players.
Page 5 of 6 Original Research
Methods oriented toward perception
Brings thoughts Offers further
Researchers have a variety of empirical methods available to into discourse interpreta(cid:9)ons
them which help to perceive the theology of children with
as little bias as possible (Zimmermann 2012:167–188). In Students Topic
reference to data gathering and evaluation we can identify
Understand
the following criteria:
• intersubjective conformability
Source: Author’s own construct.
• indication and coherence of the research process
FIGURE 1: Didactic triangle of theologising with children.
• empirically established according to the common
standards of the social sciences, for example, the
a position expressed in the class stimulates objection or an
justification of the selection of the test group, the relation
event or stimulus in their lives calls theological topics into
to the comparison group, the criteria of theoretical
question. Of course, it is difficult to adequately prepare for
saturation et cetera
such a situation. However, particularly in such situations,
• limitation and relevance, which help to determine the
the adult discourse partner is on an equal footing as seeker
validity of the research results
and questioner, bringing greater depth to exactly such
• reflected in subjectivity that is conscious of the fact
conversations (see Figure 1).
that the Children’s Theology is always meta-theology
because the researcher himself or herself is extensively
A planned conversation poses the following difficulties for
involved in the topic being researched as Children’s
the teacher. As the attentive observer, the teacher must first
Theology (for methodological problems see also
understand the students’ thoughts and at the same time,
Roebben 2011:17–18).
as the stimulating discourse partner, he or she must bring the
students’ thoughts into the discourse and as the accompanying
Methods oriented toward mediation
expert must offer further interpretations, as can be seen in the
didactic triangle (Reiß & Freudenberger-Lötz 2012:134).
If theologising is understood as the common search for
answers to theological questions during which children
A well-trained teacher of religious education (Schwarz
introduce and develop their own ideas and thus strengthen
2011:153f.) should be in a position to give answers to the
their own competencies, an important basis for this
following three questions: Where do these children come
activity is a dialogue in which all partners are equal. All
from personally and socially (context)? How can they be
interpretations must be honoured and contributions to
appropriately accompanied by adults in their search for
the dialogue that are not serious or ‘comments from the
meaning (communication)? What is a good elementary
students that are alarming or that contradict basic human
selection of key knowledge that helps them in their cognition
rights must be dealt with critically in the conversation’
(content) (Roebben 2011:16):
(Reiß & Freudenberger-Lötz 2012:124). True interest in
the student’s thoughts on the topic at hand is a basic
It is very important to follow the discourse rules:
requirement. This assumes a trust that the thoughts offered
will enrich the conversation and will motivate the teachers • no negative or judgemental comments
to reflect on them. Nevertheless, the teacher remains the • questions may be asked
official representative of theology. He or she must have • one’s own opinion should be simply expressed.
very good factual knowledge of the subject matter in order
to be able to integrate the student’s theological searches, The following techniques and questions help to understand
to systematise their interpretations and to offer further or what the students are saying:
alternative interpretations. It is important that the teacher
• Questions: Could you explain that again?
is conscious of his or her own approach and can justify it
• Repeating what has been said in order to confirm that
plausibly. Additionally, this approach should be offered
it has been understood correctly: Did I understand you
only as food for thought.
correctly, when you said …?
• Questions about justifications: How would you justify
The moments of reflection will be all the more successful
that?
the more they are (1) made elementary, (2) interesting,
• Questions about the underlying assumptions: What
which also and especially means rooted in the concrete
assumption are you making? Is it valid?
experience of the children, (3) intuitive and immediately
• Questions about terms, words or statements: What do
accessible, (4) challenging and didactically designed to
you mean with this term, word, or statement?
be open to a deeper and a wider exploration of the initial
problem, and (5) condensed and to the point (Petermann
What other terms could you use? What would be some
2009:143).
contradictory terms?
The most interesting situations in theologising tend to occur • Attempts to delimit ideas: What would be a contradictory
unexpectedly because a student poses an interesting question, idea?
Page 6 of 6 Original Research
• Questions about conclusions: What conclusions can we Dillen, A., 2007, ‘Religious participation of children as active subjects: Toward a
hermeneutical-communicative model of religious education in families with
draw? Are they logical? What changes if you think that young children’, International Journal of Children’s Spirituality 12, 37–49.
way, if everyone thinks that way? Freudenberger-Lötz, P., 2007, Theologische Gespräche mit Kindern: Untersuchungen
zur Professionalisierung Studierender und Anstöße zu forschendem Lernen im
• Questions about belonging to a group: Who else thinks
Religionsunterricht, Calwer Verlag, Stuttgart.
the same way you do? Freudenberger-Lötz, P., 2012, Theologische Gespräche mit Jugendlichen: Erfahrungen –
• Questions about biographical background: How did you Beispiele – Anleitungen. Ein Werkstattbuch für die Sekundarstufe, Calwer Verlag,
Stuttgart.
arrive at this idea? Has this always been your opinion?
Freudenreich, D., 2009, Spiritualität von Kindern, Kassel University Press, Kassel.
When did you change your position?
Hay, D. & Nye, R. 1998, The spirit of the child, Harper & Collins, London.
Horster, D., 1992, Philosophieren mit Kindern, Leske & Budrich, Opladen.
The following techniques help to relate the various parts of Kammeyer, K., 2009, ’Lieber Gott, Amen!’: Theologische und empirische Studien zum
the conversation to each other: Gebet im Horizont theologischer Gespräche mit Vorschulkindern, Calwer Verlag,
Stuttgart.
• A structure is found for the positions in the group: Which Kraft, F., Freudenberger-Lötz, P. & Schwarz, E. (Hrsgs.), 2011a, ’Jesus würde sagen:
Nicht schlecht!’: Kindertheologie und Kompetenzorientierung, Calwer Verlag,
positions do we have? How are they different from each
Stuttgart.
other? Kraft, F., Roose, H. & Büttner, G. (eds.), 2011b, Symmetrical communication?
• The positions are related to each other, similarities Philosophy and theology in classrooms across Europe, Religionspädagogisches
Institut Loccum, Loccum.
and differences are identified: How are they similar or
Lipman, M., 1980, Philosophy in the classroom, 2nd edn., Temple University Press,
different? Philadelphia, PA.
• The assumptions are clarified by making terms more Martens, E., 2009, ‘Children’s Philosophie und Childrens’s Theology – A family
resemblance’, in G. Yde Iversen, G. Mitchell & G. Pollard (eds.), Hovering over
precise, clarifying the context and asking about own the face of the deep. Philosophy, theology and children, pp. 97–115, Waxmann,
Münster.
experiences with the subject.
Matthews, G.B., 1984, Dialogues with children, Harvard University Press, Cambridge,
• The persuasiveness is weighted. Students, in particular
MA.
those who previously had no position on the subject, are Matthews, G.B., 1991, ‘Piaget und die Entwicklungspsychologie‘, Zeitschrift für
asked to examine the sustainability and persuasiveness of deutsche Philosophie 13, 4–8.
the arguments or positions. Matthews, G.B., 1993, Philosophische Gespräche mit Kindern, 2. Aufl, Freese E.G.,
Berlin.
Petermann, H.-B., 2009, ‘“The story wants to make us think…” – Opportunities for
It is possible to introduce theologically important but as yet theologizing and philosophizing with children’, in G. Yde Iversen, G. Mitchell &
G. Pollard (eds.), Hovering over the face of the deep. Philosophy, theology and
unmentioned positions by: children, pp. 129–145, Waxmann, Münster.
• referring to positions from systematic theology or from Reiß, A. & Freudenberger-Lötz, P., 2012, ‘Didaktik des Theologisierens mit Kindern und
Jugendlichen’, in B. Grümme, H. Lenhard & M.L. Pirner (eds.), Religionsunterricht
church history in a way that is suitable for children neu denken. Innovative Ansätze und Perspektiven der Religionsdidaktik,
pp. 133–145, Kohlhammer Verlag, Stuttgart.
• introducing (personal) experiences
Roebben, B., 2011, ‘Children’s theology: Concepts and contexts, problems and
• explaining the position of an important person. horizons’, in F. Kraft, H. Roose & G. Büttner (eds.), Symmetrical communication?
Philosophy and theology in classrooms across Europe, pp. 11–24,
Religionspädagogisches Institut Loccum, Loccum.
‘It all boils down [to] bringing children into enriching
Roose, H., 2006, ‘”Wieso muss ich zu Jesus beten, wenn er neben mir steht?” – Eine
“green pastures” of thoughts, where their own theological Kartographie zum Thema Gebet’, in A.A. Bucher, G. Büttner, P. Freudenberger-Lötz
& M. Schreiner (Hrsgs.), ’Vielleicht hat Gott uns Kindern den Verstand gegeben’:
imagination and reasoning is [sic] stimulated’ (Roebben Ergebnisse und Perspektiven der Kindertheologie, pp. 137–146, Calwer Verlag,
2011:16). Stuttgart. (Jahrbuch für Kindertheologie, 5).
Rupp, H., 2009, ‘Auf der Suche nach dem Unterschied – Theologisieren und
Philosophieren im Vergleich’, in A.A. Bucher, G. Büttner, P. Freudenberger-Lötz &
Acknowledgements M. Schreiner (Hrsgs.), ’In den Himmel kommen nur die, die sich auch verstehen.’:
Wie Kinder über religiöse Differenz denken und sprechen, pp. 170–181, Calwer
Competing interests Verlag, Stuttgart. (Jahrbüch für Kindertheologie, 8).
Schlag, T. & Schweitzer, F., 2011, Brauchen Jugendliche Theologie? Jugendtheologie als
Herausforderung und didaktische Perspektive, Neukirchener Verlag, Neukirchen-
The author declares that she has no financial or personal
Vluyn.
relationships which may have inappropriately influenced
Schmidt, H., 2002, ‘Kinderfrage und Kindertheologie im religionspädagogischen
her in writing this article. Kontext’, in G. Büttner & H. Rupp (Hrsgs.), Theologisieren mit Kindern, pp. 11–20,
Calwer Verlag, Stuttgart.
Schwarz, E.E., 2011, ‘“Theologizing and philosophizing with children’ – How can