CBMM Memo No. 025 December 12, 2014
When Computer Vision Gazes at Cognition
Tao Gao*, Daniel Harari*, Joshua Tenenbaum and Shimon
Abstract: Joint attention is a core, early-developing form of social interaction. It is based on our
ability to discriminate the third party objects that other people are looking at. While it has been
shown that people can accurately determine whether another person is looking directly at them
versus away, little is known about human ability to discriminate a third person gaze directed
towards objects that are further away, especially in unconstraint cases where the looker can
move her head and eyes freely. In this paper we address this question by jointly exploring human
psychophysics and a cognitively motivated computer vision model, which can detect the 3D
direction of gaze from 2D face images. The synthesis of behavioral study and computer vision
yields several interesting discoveries. (1) Human accuracy of discriminating targets 8°-10° of
visual angle apart is around 40% in a free looking gaze task; (2) The ability to interpret gaze of
different lookers vary dramatically; (3) This variance can be captured by the computational
model; (4) Human outperforms the current model significantly. These results collectively show
that the acuity of human joint attention is indeed highly impressive, given the computational
challenge of the natural looking task. Moreover, the gap between human and model
performance, as well as the variability of gaze interpretation across different lookers, require
further understanding of the underlying mechanisms utilized by humans for this challenging task.
* Tao Gao and Daniel Harari contributed equally to this work.
This work was supported by the Center for Brains, Minds and Machines (CBMM), funded by
NSF STC award CCF-1231216.
When Computer Vision Gazes at Cognition
Tao Gao∗, Daniel Harari∗ †,
Joshua Tenenbaum∗, Shimon Ullman∗ †
∗ Center for Brains, Minds and Machines, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, Cambridge, MA
† Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel
Joint attention is a core, early-developing form of social interaction. It is
based on our ability to discriminate the third party objects that other people
are looking at. While it has been shown that people can accurately determine
whether another person is looking directly at them versus away, little is
known about human ability to discriminate a third person gaze directed
towards objects that are further away, especially in unconstraint cases where
the looker can move her head and eyes freely. In this paper we address this
question by jointly exploring human psychophysics and a cognitively
motivated computer vision model, which can detect the 3D direction of gaze
from 2D face images. The synthesis of behavioral study and computer vision
yields several interesting discoveries. (1) Human accuracy of discriminating
targets 8°-10° of visual angle apart is around 40% in a free looking gaze task;
(2) The ability to interpret gaze of different lookers vary dramatically; (3)
This variance can be captured by the computational model; (4) Human
outperforms the current model significantly. These results collectively show
that the acuity of human joint attention is indeed highly impressive, given the
computational challenge of the natural looking task. Moreover, the gap
between human and model performance, as well as the variability of gaze
interpretation across different lookers, require further understanding of the
underlying mechanisms utilized by humans for this challenging task.
1 Introduction
1.1 Understanding social agency in real scenes
As a social species, humans are remarkably good at understanding other's mental states based
on visual perception alone. Recent work on social perception have been done in 2D toy world
with cartoon like characters (e.g., [1], [2]). In the meanwhile, there has been a growing interest
in understanding non-verbal social interactions in real scenes. Many developmental studies
have demonstrated that even young infant can understand others' mental states by observing
their non-verbal actions [3]–[5]. Nevertheless, this type of visual social understanding poses
a challenge for both cognitive sciences and computer vision. The reason is that most human
social interactions occur in real scenes, in which agents act freely. However, due to the
complex interactions between the 3D environment and human actions, analyzing these scenes
can be extremely challenging.
Addressing the above challenge encourages an inter-disciplinary research between cognitive
science and computer vision. From the cognitive science perspective, the advances of state-
of-the-art computer vision techniques, facilitate rigorous studies on human's spontaneous
social behaviors. More importantly, "grounding" a social process onto real images can force
researchers to consider computational challenges that may be absent in cartoon worlds. From
the computer vision perspective, working on cognitively motivated questions can lead the field
move toward human-like rich scene understanding, beyond object recognition (e.g. building a
vision model that can track the ‘false-belief’ of an observed person, given what this person
can or cannot see in the visual scene [6], [7]).
1.2 The perception of "free" gaze
To achieve the long-term goal of understanding social agency in real scenes, one initial step
is to interpret a person's gaze direction, which is a window to one's mental states. This ability
is the foundation of human’s joint attention, and many other important social interactions.
Infants begin to develop this ability [8], which plays an important role in development of
communication and language [3], as early as at the age of 3-6 months [5].
Gaze perception has been extensively studied in human perception since 1960s [9]–[15].
However, there are several interesting contrasts between the scope of existing behavioral
studies and the understanding of gaze perception in real scenes. First, most behavioral studies
have been focusing on judging whether the gaze is directly towards the observers or not [9],
[12]. The acuity of detecting direct eye-contact can be as high as 3° of visual angle [9], [10].
In a few studies in which the gaze is away from the observers' head, all possible directions are
still surrounding a close vicinity and centered around the observer (e.g., in [10], a circle of
12° of visual angle around the observer), which only covers a very small the space in a scene.
Secondly, almost all studies imposed strong constraints on the looker's gaze behavior, such as
fixing the head at a certain pose and only allowing the rotation of the eyes. While this certainly
helps to isolate the effects of head and eye orientations, it is unclear how to apply this results
in natural looking scenes, in which the looker moves her head and gaze freely [16]. Thirdly,
as developmental studies have shown, gazing towards an object is an important source for
infant's learning. However, in most research on discriminating gaze perception, the threshold
is measured by asking the looker to look at an empty space [9], [10]. This is again, different
than natural and realistic situations, in which the person's gaze is typically oriented at an object
in the scene.
In the field of computer vision, head pose and eye gaze estimations have been studied for a
long time [17]–[19]. The vast majority of these studies addressed either the head pose
estimation problem or the eye gaze tracking as disjoint problems. While these two research
areas demonstrate an impressive performance for each of the separate tasks, very little was
done addressing the problem of detecting the direction of gaze in natural and unconstrained
scenes, where observed humans can look freely at different targets. In this natural looking
settings, gaze events towards different targets may share the same head or eye poses, while
different poses may share the gaze towards the same target. A recent work [20] suggested to
estimate gaze under free-head movements by combining depth and visual data from a
Microsoft Kinect sensor. In order to reduce the complexity of the gaze problem, eye images
were rectified as if seen from a frontal view, by registering a person-specific 3D face model
and tracking the head under different poses. However, the eyes rectification procedure is less
likely to be cognitively plausible and sets limitation on the range of supported head poses (due
to self-occlusions at non-frontal poses). This approach is also not suitable to predict 3D
direction of gaze given only 2D images, as it requires the 3D head pose information during
testing.
1.3 Contrasting Human and Computer Vision Performance
While having a threshold number on the acuity of human’s gaze following skill is certainly
important, we also hope to evaluate human performance by contrasting it with state-of-the-art
computer vision models. This is a critical component of this study, as we are eager to know
how challenging the perception of natural gaze actually is. Researchers usually don't have a
good intuition about the difficulty of a cognitive process until they starts to reverse-engineer
it. For instance, people on the street may feel that solving a differential equation is remarkably
more intelligent than acquiring a common-sense knowledge of a 3-years old girl. It is actually
the latter that is much more challenging for a machines to learn [21]. From the perspective of
Figure 1: Experimental settings. (Left) The layout of the experiments consists of 52 objects
arranged on a table in 4 concentric arcs, relative to the looker position. A Microsoft Kinect
RGB-D sensor and a command screen are aligned in-front of the looker. 4 human subjects are
positioned on the other side of the table, facing the looker, and noting their best guesses of the
looker’s gaze target. (Right) The Kinect sensor provides a RGB color image and a depth image.
The Kinect’s face tracking algorithm provides additional information of the 3D head pose
orientation and facial feature locations.
cognitive studies, we would like to focus more on aspects of social perception in which
machine still cannot reach human-level performance. In addition, previous studies employed
highly-constrained settings to avoid the variance in the experiment. Exploring the social
perception in natural scenes will inevitably introduce a larger variance into the results. We
hope the computational models can provide explanations to the variance. From the perspective
of machine intelligence and computer vision, we would like to model the underlying
mechanisms of gaze following in order to reach human performance on this task. This will
provide AI systems with a powerful human-like ability for both scene and social
understanding.
The rest of this paper is laid-out as follows: In Section 2, we will describe our free-looking
task for both human observers and computational models. In Section 3, we will introduce our
appearance-based model which is able to predict a 3D gaze direction from a 2D image. In
Section 4, we will compare human and model performance side by side, which provides
valuable data for both cognitive sciences and computer vision. In Section 5, we will discuss
the implications of our results to human and machine gaze perception in general.
2 Experimental Settings
In a free-looking task, a looker sits in a chair, facing an array of 52 objects. On the other side
of the table (121cm), four human observers sit on chairs, facing the looker. In each trial, the
looker gazes at an object by following a command presented on the monitor of a laptop located
behind the observers. The action scene is recorded by a Microsoft Kinect Sensor with RGB-D
cameras (Figure 1). In this setup, the looker, the center of the object array, the Kinect sensor
and the screen of the command computer are all aligned in order, so that the looker will face
directly at the camera between every two trials. The observers' task is to follow the looker’s
gaze and to write down their best guesses of the looker's target. The object array is laid as a
concentric configuration with 13 columns consisting of 4 objects (width: 4.6cm; height:
3.6cm). The color (white, green, blue or red) and the number (1 through 13) painted on each
object represent the object’s row and column respectively. The radius of each row is 29.4,
49.7, 60.6 and 96.1cm respectively. In this configuration the visual angles between every two
rows is 10° given the center of the two eyes is 35cm above the table. The angular difference
between each two columns is 10° on the table surface. The corresponding visual angle is about
8°. In practice, the visual angles varies given the position of the head and can be computed on
a trial-by-trial basis. The left most observer position (Position 1) is 180cm away from the
looker. The angle between the looker's resting face direction and the direction to this position
is 47.7° (angular distance). Position 2 is 138cm away from the looker, with an angular distance
of 28.6°. Position 4 and Position 3 are mirror reflections of Position 1 and Position 2 over the
center of the table respectively.
Figure 2: Computational appearance-based model. (Left) In each of the gaze trials the
Appear-Face-Eyes model associates the face appearance with the head pose orientation
(cyan), and the eyes appearance with the eye-gaze correction offset (red). The ground truth
gaze direction (green) is the direction from the center of the eyes towards the target
(yellow). (Middle) Extracted nearest neighbors for both face and eyes during a query event.
Each neighbor is associated with an orientation, and the final direction is determined as
the weighted average of these orientations, where the weights correspond to the neighbors’
similarity with the query appearance. (Left) Rendered images of the Histogram of
Gradients (HoG) descriptors used to represent face and eyes appearance. These robust
general purpose image descriptors capture both edge and texture properties and allow
spatial tolerance.
In Experiment 1, two Asian lookers (TG and JP) and 16 Asian observers participated. All with
normal or corrected-to-normal vision. The observers were evenly assigned into 4 sections,
each of which containing 8 blocks. To estimate the relative contribution of the head and eyes,
there were two types of blocks: Eyes-Visible and Eyes-Invisible, in which the looker wore a
pair of sunglasses. In each block, the looker gazed at each object once in a random order (52
gaze trials per block). Each trial lasted 10 seconds. The looker kept staring at the target until
a ring sound indicating the end of this trial. The looker then returned to resting state by
watching the command computer’s screen. Observers rotated their positions during the
experiment, so that the combination of looker, eye-condition and position (center or
peripheral) were balanced. Experiment 2 was identical to Experiment 1 except that only the
Eyes-Visible condition was included. There were two Caucasian lookers (VO and HE) and 10
Caucasian and African-American observers, which were assigned into three sections. There
were 12 blocks in each section.
In addition to the two formal experiments, we also invited 10 new lookers to perform the free
looking task for 3 blocks (30 blocks in total), which were also recorded by the RGB-D camera.
These were the training data of our computational models.
3 Appearance-based computational model
Here we construct a computational model that can infer a 3D gaze direction given a 2D image.
In our model, the RGB-D data is used only for training purposes, while for prediction, only
2D images are given. In real world, we can look at a single point with infinite head-eye
combinations. The final direction of gaze is determined by both the head orientation (pitch,
yaw and roll) and the correction due to the eyes-gaze. In our setup, the final gaze direction is
known, given the position of the trial target, and the head orientation is provided by the RGB-
D sensor. Therefore, eyes-gaze direction can be deducted by subtracting head-orientation from
the final gaze direction. Our Appear-Face-Eyes model, first associates the whole face
appearance to the 3D head orientation, and then corrects for the final direction of gaze by
associating the appearance of the eyes with the 3D eyes-gaze offset.
We compare the Appear-Face-Eyes model with two additional models: (1) The Appear-Face
model associates the whole face appearance directly to the final gaze direction. In this model,
information about the 3D head pose orientation and eyes-gaze appearance are disregarded.
This model should capture the role of the whole face appearance in detecting the final direction
of gaze; (2) The Kinect-Linear model is a linear regression model between the Kinect’s head
pose orientation and the final gaze direction. In this model all information about the face and
eyes appearance are disregarded. This model provides a reference performance for the Appear-
Face-Eyes model, which is trained on the Kinect’s head pose orientation data.
The Appear-Face-Eyes model is based on a gaze detection method used in [22], in which
grayscale image patches of faces were associated with the 2D direction vector of the gaze (the
vector connecting the face center to the regarded target position in the 2D image). During
training, a set of face image patches are observed and associated with the 2D direction of gaze
corresponding to each of the faces. To detect the direction of gaze in a new query image, a
small set of the most similar faces to the face in the query image, are extracted from the
training set. The direction of gaze is then estimated as the weighted average of the gaze
directions associated with the query face neighbors from the training set. This approach
demonstrated full generalization across faces and directions of gaze.
Our model extends the above 2D model, to cope with direction of gaze in 3D while associating
both head orientation and eyes-gaze direction with the 2D image of the face and eyes. The
Kinect’s RGB-D sensor combined with Microsoft’s face tracking method provides us with the
required 3D and 2D information we need for the supervised training phase. We utilize
Microsoft Kinect’s face tracker to extract both the 3D position and orientation of the head, as
well as the position of several face features, whenever a human actor is looking at a given
target. The 3D position of the target is also extracted from the Kinect’s depth image. From
both head and target positions we can calculate the 3D eyes-gaze correction as the difference
between the head orientation and the final direction of regard from the face center to the target
(Figure 2). The Kinect RGB-D sensor also provides a 2D color image, from which we extract
image patches of the whole face and eyes region. In our model, the face appearance is
associated with the 3D head orientation, and the eyes region appearance is associated with the
3D eyes-gaze correction to the target. We use Histograms of Gradients descriptors (HoG, [23])
for the representation of the face and eyes appearance, and quaternions for representing the
3D orientations. HoG descriptors are robust general-purpose image descriptors, which capture
both edge and texture properties and allow spatial tolerance.
During detecting in a query gaze event, our model is applied to the 2D query image as follows:
First, image patches around the face and eyes region are extracted, and HoG appearance
descriptors are computed. The model then searches for the nearest neighbors from the training
set for both face and eyes appearances. The 3D face orientation is estimated as the weighted
average of the 3D head orientations associated with each of the face neighbors, where the
weights are proportional to the neighbors’ similarity with the query face. The 3D eyes-gaze
correction is estimated similarly, using neighbors of the eyes region. Note that in our model
similar eyes-gaze corrections, may be associated with different eyes region appearances which
relate to different face orientations, as we do not rectify the eyes appearance back to frontal
Figure 3: Accuracy graphs. Horizontal axis represents four different lookers. Different bars
represent human (Eyes-Visible for all 4 lookers and Eyes-Invisible for TG and JP only) and
models’ results. (Left) The accuracy of getting the exact column and row right. (Right) The
accuracy of allowing one row or one column off.
view from different head orientations. This may be a more realistic and cognitively plausible
approach, similar to humans experiencing different face and eye appearances at different poses
when observing other humans around them.
The overall performance of humans and the models are shown in Figure 3 (left). The
performance is measured as the percentage of trials in which humans or models get both the
correct target row and column positions. Figure 3 (right) presents the percentage of trials in
which the errors are no larger than one column or one row. This corresponds to about 12° of
visual angle range around the true target. The results reflect several interesting patterns: (1)
humans outperform all the models, suggesting that humans' gaze perception is indeed highly
efficient. (2), there is a significant amount of across-looker variance. Both human and models
are much better at reading JP's gaze than the rest of the lookers, showing that the models
actually capture some intrinsic variances of human performance. (3) For both humans and
models, most errors are within a 12° range. For models, this performance is very good
compared with current reported accuracy on a similar task [24].
The contrast of Eyes-Visible and Eyes-Invisible conditions also reveals the importance of both
the eyes and the gaze. The performance is much lower when the eyes are invisible (~15% drop
in accuracy). Interesting, the performance difference between TG and JP do not change at all,
suggesting the spurious performance of reading JP's gaze is primarily due to head-pose, instead
of eyes. In addition, humans' Eye-Invisible performance is much similar to the models'
performance. By using the Kinect head pose tracking, the performance reaches the human
level. For the other more challenging appearance-based models, using head pose alone or using
both head and eyes makes little difference, suggesting that the HoG descriptors we used here
are indeed able to capture important visual information of the head pose but not the eyes.
Figure 3 plots the overall accuracy of each observer with the Eyes-Visible condition. It reveals
a remarkable individual difference, varying from ~20% to ~65% (Note that there are 208 trials
for each observers in Experiment 1, and 624 trials in Experiment 2. It is unlikely that this is
just due to random variance). The individual difference of gaze perception has not been
emphasized in previous studies. It is interesting to explore how this difference can impact
subsequent social processes. For modeling purpose, this range of performance also indicates
that the “optimal” performance of this task can be much higher than the averaged human
performance.
We also explored the interaction between the looker’s gaze direction and the observers’ viewing
Figure 4: Position effects. (Left) The averaged accuracy of getting the row (blue) and
column (green) right when the looker gazes at a target in the left most column. Observes
sitting in Position 1, 2 on the left side of the table are much more accuracy at discriminating
the columns, but not the rows. (Right) The averaged row and column accuracy when the
looker gazes at a target in the right most column. Observers siting in Position 3 and 4 on
the right side of the table are much more accurate at discriminating the column, but not the
row.
Table 1: Bias and standard deviation. colBias represents the bias in the column (left-right)
direction. colStd represents the standard deviation in the column direction. rowBias represents
the bias in the row (up-down) direction. rowStd represents the standard deviation in the row
dimension. It is very clear that the models’ standard deviation is comparable, even smaller than
human. However, the bias of the models are much larger and inconsistent.
Type Looker colBias colStd rowBias rowStd
Model HE 0.14 5.32 -2.73 4.93
Appear-Face JP -2.74 3.89 0.69 3.76
TG 4.92 4.38 -3.61 4.91
VO -3.63 4.81 6.96 3.87
Model HE 0.77 4.90 -1.50 4.32
Appear-Face-Eyes JP -1.35 4.39 -2.66 4.19
TG 5.96 4.36 -5.48 4.12
VO -2.65 4.73 3.42 3.85
Model HE 5.75 4.32 -4.66 3.53
Kinect-Linear JP 0.53 3.11 0.79 3.52
TG 1.62 5.69 -0.24 4.24
VO -3.45 4.68 3.31 3.35
Human TG 3.18 6.09 -2.82 4.53
Eyes-Visible JP 0.67 5.51 0.53 3.47
VO -0.57 8.88 -0.73 4.83
HE 0.76 8.18 -1.76 4.59
Human TG 3.76 7.42 -1.81 7.12
Eyes-Invisible JP 2.00 6.79 0.25 5.10
positions. Figure 4 shows the accuracy of getting the row and the accuracy of getting the column
right when the target is in the left most column and right most column across the different observer
positions. The observers performs the best when the looker is gazing towards their direction, while
their column accuracy drops significantly as the viewing direction of the looker is getting further
towards a side view. This drop in performance does not occur for the row accuracy.
Bias and Variance
Here we further explored the results by analyzing the distributions of humans and models
responses to a given target. Two summary statistics are chosen: Bias and standard deviation
(SD). For both humans and models, a poor performance could be due to a large systematic
bias, or a large variance.
Bias measures the mean of the response relative to the true position. For the column dimension
(left-right), a positive bias is defined as the mean is biased toward the peripheral of the looker's
visual field (e.g., for columns on the left side of the looker, a positive bias indicates the
perceived gaze direction moves toward the left even further. For the right side, a positive bias
is more toward the right). For the row dimension (up-down), a positive bias means that the
perceived gaze direction moves downward (further away from the resting direction).
Table 1 depicts the bias and variance along the left-right and up-down dimension. What really
strikes us is that the models’ SDs are almost as good as those of humans. The relatively small
SD indicates that given the same actor, when he/she looks at the same object in different
blocks, the models' predictions are consistent. What makes the models' perform worse is the
lack of small bias across lookers and dimensions (row and column). Both bias and variances
had been discussed in previous studies (e.g. [9], [10]). However, since then, much attention
has been given to the small variance of gaze perception. Our contrast of human perception and
computer vision suggests that at least in the context of free looking, it is the small bias that is
most difficult to achieve.
5 Discussion
In this paper, we explored the acuity of reading others' gaze in a “free looking” task with both
human participants and computer vision models. The guide lines for this study are to keep the
ecological validity as high as possible, while maintaining quantitative precision. The
ecological validity is emphasized, as the results should serve for understanding social
interactions in real scenes.
One straightforward result is that the human accuracy of discriminating targets 8°-10° of visual
angle apart is around 40% in a free looking gaze task. However, the most challenging part of
this project is not to obtain this accuracy, but how to interpret it. By comparing with several
computer vision models, it turns out that human visual perception achieves a remarkable level
of performance, considering the computational challenge involved. More interestingly, by
comparing model performance with the Eyes-Visible, and Eyes-Invisible conditions, we found
that while a general-purpose appearance descriptor captures useful information about the head
pose, it's processing of the eyes region makes very little additional contributions. This result
indicate that in a free-looking paradigm, in which the appearance of the eyes region varies
dramatically for the observer, a better representation of the eyes may be required. This
representation should still capture the inter-pose variations, since assuming that eyes
appearance should always be represented and analyzed as rectified to a frontal head pose is
less likely to be cognitively plausible.
In addition, we also observed a significant across-looker variance. Both the humans and
models are much better at reading one looker (JP)'s gaze. Since our models are only good at
detecting head poses, it suggests that this across-looker variance is primarily due to the head
pose associated with each target. This is consistent with the behavioral data showing that this
difference was still present when the looker's eyes were invisible in Experiment 1. Taken
together, the current research shows how the computational process of human social
perception can be analyzed in depth by combining cognitive paradigms with computer
vision.
Acknowledgments
This material is based upon work supported by the Center for Brains, Minds and Machines
(CBMM), funded by NSF STC award CCF-1231216, and NSF National Robotics Intuitive.