Page 1 of 8 Original Research
Where is the church on Monday? Awakening the church
to the theology and practice of ministry and mission
in the marketplace
Authors: Recent research by the Call42 group has shown that South African Christians experience
Dion A. Forster1,2 that they are not adequately prepared or equipped for Christian living and discipleship
Johann W. Oostenbrink3
in the world of work – here called the marketplace. This article has argued for the
Affiliations: importance of a rediscovery of a theology of work that can empower and equip the church
1Faculty of Theology, and individual Christians for ministry in the marketplace. The article traces why such
Stellenbosch University,
a theological deficiency exists in the South African church by considering areas such as
South Africa
an inadequate theology of work and mission, a dualism between faith and work, and an
2Beyers Naudé Center unbalanced emphasis on the role of clergy and a lesser focus on the role of the laity in the
for Public Theology, missio Dei. Having considered these challenges to the mission and theological identity of
Unit for Innovation and the church, the article discusses the three general theological views of the church in South
Transformation of Church
Africa as presented by Smit and adapted by Forster. It considers how the church could
and Society, South Africa
become an agent of mission and transformation in the marketplace in each of these three
3Camino Consultancy, forms. The article comes to the conclusion that the church will need to revisit its missional
Organisational Development theology, refocuses its efforts on broader society, and empowers and equips its members
Specialists, South Africa
for ministry in the marketplace in order to be faithful in partnering with God in the
Correspondence to: missio Dei.
Dion Forster
Email:
Waar is die kerk op Maandag? Ontwaking van die kerk tot die teologie en praktyk van
dionforster@sun.ac.za
bediening en sending in die markplein. Onlangse navorsing deur die Call42 groep het
Postal address: bevind dat Suid-Afrikaanse Christene ervaar dat hulle nie voldoende voorbereid en toegerus
Faculty of Theology, is vir die Christelike lewe en dissipelskap in die arbeidsmark - hier genoem die markplein –
Stellenbosch University, 171
nie. Hierdie artikel poog om aan te toon dat ’n herontdekking van ’n teologie van werk
Dorp Street, Stellenbosch
7600, South Africa belangrik is ten einde die kerk in die algemeen asook individuele Christene te bemagtig
en toe te rus vir die bediening in die markplein. Hierdie artikel poog dus om die kwessie
Dates:
van die sodanige teologiese leemte in die Suid-Afrikaanse kerk na te vors. Terreine soos
Received: 23 Feb. 2015
onvoldoende teologie van werk en sending word ondersoek, ’n dualisme tussen geloof en
Accepted: 22 June 2015
Published: 21 Aug. 2015 werk word uitgewys, en daar word aangetoon dat ’n oorspeling van die predikant se rol
en ’n onderspeling van gewone kerklidmate se rol die kerk se betrokkenheid by die missio
How to cite this article:
Dei benadeel. Met inagneming van hierdie uitdagings aan sending en die kerk se teologiese
Forster, D.A. & Oostenbrink,
J.W., 2015, ‘Where is identiteit, bespreek die artikel drie algemene teologiese standpunte van die kerk in Suid-
the church on Monday? Afrika, soos deur Smit aangebied en deur Forster aangepas. Die artikel besin hoe die kerk in
Awakening the church to elk van hierdie drie bestaansvorme ’n agent van sending en transformasie in die markplein
the theology and practice of
kan wees. Die gevolgtrekking word gemaak dat die kerk die missionale of sendingteologie
ministry and mission in the
marketplace’, In die Skriflig moet heroorweeg, opnuut moet fokus op die uitreik na die breër gemeenskap en lidmate vir
49(3), Art. #1944, 8 pages. bediening in die markplein moet bemagtig en toerus. Sodoende sal die kerk getrou wees aan
die medewerking met God in die missio Dei.
ids.v49i3.1944
Copyright:
Introduction
© 2015. The Authors.
Licensee: AOSIS
OpenJournals. This work is This article wishes to honour the theological legacy of George Lotter by focussing on an
licensed under the Creative important aspect of Christian life and witness. Work is an important part of contemporary
Commons Attribution
life. Not only does it provide an opportunity for persons to earn an income to meet their
License.
survival needs, it can also be a source of great joy and creative expression, or of hardship and
struggle. Moreover, if Christians were inspired and equipped to understand the potential that
Read online:
their presence, talents and abilities could make towards achieving the aims of God’s kingdom
Scan this QR
code with your in society, we could see a new missional thrust emerging within the church. Sadly, very few
smart phone or
mobile device South African churches have realised the potential of a theology and practice of ministry for the
to read online.
church in the marketplace.
Page 2 of 8 Original Research
The marketplace,1 as seen in this article, includes those sectors these problems find both their genesis and their resolution
of life where persons are engaged in tasks described as work. in the marketplace. Persons with strong values and a robust
It includes tasks in education, production, the delivery of theology that is focussed on societal engagement have
services, the arts and healthcare amongst others. The point the potential to be agents for change. Sadly, the reverse is
is that this location is identified by the kind of activities frequently seen: because of an inadequate theology of faith
members are engaged in beyond the life of the gathered, and work or a lack of skill or support for discipleship and
worshipping, congregation or church.2 The marketplace, in witness in the world of work, Christians become part of the
this context, is where church members are when they are not problem. There are innumerable scandals in which Christian
’at church’ for worship services, teaching or fellowship.3 This individuals and communities are found to be complicit in
article investigates how the church as community, and also social and moral decay, economic abuse and the degradation
the church as individual Christians, is called to be active in of the common good (Batchelor 2008).
the marketplace.
In response to this, there has been a rise of para-church
There is a growing awareness that the great commission movements and ministries that aim to support Christians in
(as expressed in Mt 28:18–20) can only be successfully the marketplace. Amongst the more prominent South African
addressed in the environment where people spend most examples are Unashamedly Ethical (Anon n.d.a), Alpha in
of their labouring and productive hours (Forster 2014a; the workplace (Anon n.d.b) and HalfTime (Anon n.d.c).4 The
Forster & Power 2011:70–71; Keller & Leary-Alsdorf rapid growth and social prominence of these movements in
2012:19; Volf 2005;). Whilst South Africa has largely a self- the last decade is evidence that Christians in South Africa are
identified Christian population – as high as 85.6% (Anon seeking guidance, support and information to sustain and
2014:32) – actual church attendance in South Africa is not deepen their faith in the world of work.5
very high (Nieman 2010:37). It would thus stand to reason
that a sensible strategy for mission and evangelism should The challenge and opportunity
not be focussed only on the gathered community of the of ministry in the marketplace in
church, but should also focus on locations and settings
South Africa
where the majority of the population is to be found: the
marketplace. Therefore, the mobilisation of marketplace
South Africa has undergone some radical social and religious
Christians is essential if the Sunday-Monday gap is to be
shifts since the dawn of participative democracy in 1994. The
bridged and the goal of world mission is to be accomplished
adopting of the new South African constitution ensured
(Le Bruyns 2004:10).
religious equality and freedom for all people in South
Africa. A consequence of that is that Christianity is no longer
Furthermore, the Christian is not only called to make
afforded protected or special status in society.6 Before 1994
disciples, but also to be an agent of change (salt and light –
it was possible to defer Christian education to the National
Mt 5:13, 14) through whom the principles of God’s kingdom
Education System, or to assume that evangelism would take
such as justice, equity, human dignity, flourishing, et cetera,
place through public media broadcasts, or even that social
are to be established in society (Costa 2007:17–27; Forster &
ills could be resolved within the legal system by appealing
Power 2011:47–62; Greene 2001:4–8, 2010:17–23; Silvoso
to Christian moral values. Many Christians and churches
2006:104–121, 2007:15–26; Spada & Scott 2011:20–41; Van Der
in South Africa continue to function with a theology and
Merwe et al. 2010: chapter 8).
worldview assuming that the work of evangelism, social
transformation and the establishment of the principles of
In addition to the above, globalisation is forcing the church to
God’s just and equitable kingdom can be left to the state or
think about the concerns of broader society in more effective
private enterprise. What are the theological reasons that lead
and creative ways. These challenges include economic
to such a perspective? In addition to this, what opportunity
inequality, corruption, political and economical instability,
is there for Christians and the church to be more faithful and
difficult and unfair labour practices, lack of social, economic
effective in society?
and political integrity, unethical or destructive leadership,
over-exposure to information, continuous change and
turmoil, unemployment, poverty and hunger, HIV and
4.One example will be sufficient to illustrate the growth of these movements. The
environmental degradation and a host of others. Many of Unashamedly Ethical movement was launched in Cape Town in 2010. Within three
years it has amassed over 20 000 individual members and nearly 5000 corporate
signatories. There are Unashamedly Ethical communities in each of the provinces
1.A variety of terms are employed in popular discourse and academic scholarship in South Africa and signatories in 107 countries around the world. The founder of
to describe the environment of work. Among the more popular descriptors are the movement, Graham Power (a Christian businessman in Cape Town), is confident
the ‘marketplace’ (Le Bruyns 2004:7–9; Silvoso 2006:17, 37–45), the ‘sphere’ or that the movement will continue to grow in size and influence. (Power 2013)
‘domain’ of work (Johnson 2011:21–58) and the ‘world of work’ (Keller & Leary-
Alsdorf 2012:19–24; Spada & Scott 2011:104–123). 5.See the recent article by Forster (2014a) for a thorough theological discussion of
this issue. Please also refer to the Call42 survey for the original empirical data (Anon
2.See Smit’s article (1996:119–129) for a succinct discussion of the theological 2013d:42).
understanding of the three forms of church, that is, church as gathered community
or congregation, church as denomination, church as scattered community of salt 6.In the opinion of the authors it is to the church’s benefit not to be favoured by the
and light in the world (Philander 2011:177; also see Smit 2007b:61–68). This will state any longer. There are two primary reasons for this: firstly, this allows for both
also be discussed in detail in the section on the different forms of church in the critical prophetic distance from the publics of state and business, and secondly, it
marketplace. also challenges the church to take up its mission of discipleship, evangelism and
pastoral care within society, because it cannot delegate this role to the state or
3.For a more detailed discussion of this understanding of category identity, refer to private sector. For a thorough discussion of this line of argumentation, see Bentley
Volf (2005:386–387). and Forster (2012:73–88).
Page 3 of 8 Original Research
A poorly developed theology sustainable in the world of work. As in the local congregation,
Christians may stand back from ministry, considering it as
One of the primary reasons why the church is missing the
something to be done by an appointed professional, rather
opportunity of mission and ministry in the marketplaces is
than being the task of every disciple in their particular
because of ignorance. The most recent research on faith and
context.
work in South Africa has shown that pastors are not informed
well enough regarding the challenges or the opportunities
The point is that millions of faithful Christians across the
for kingdom work available to the members of their work
world are inadequately nurtured and supported within the
environment (cf. Forster 2014a). The result is that members
local congregation with a robust theology of discipleship and
feel inadequately equipped for faithful Christian discipleship
mission in the world of work. Even fewer are adequately
in the world of work. Rather, the research showed that the
supported, nurtured and equipped for faithful mission and
emphasis of most churches was focussed on equipping
discipleship in the world of work itself. A great gap exists
members to play a role in the local church’s7 ministry. The
between what takes place on Sunday or within the ambit of
result of this is that Christians lack the knowledge, skills and
the local congregation, and what members do with the rest of
spiritual maturity necessary to function effectively as agents
their time. Keller and Alsdorf (2012) write:
of God’s mission and kingdom in the marketplace (Bosch
A job is a vocation only if someone else calls you to do it and
2011:67–70). Daily challenges such as economic corruption,
you do it for them rather than for yourself. And so our work
sexual temptation, economic and social justice or the
can be a calling only if it is reimagined as a mission of service to
appropriate use of influence and power in the world of work
something beyond merely our own interests. (p. 19)
are seldom dealt with from the pulpit, in church programs or
in congregational prayer. A lack of creative and practical skill for ministry
in the marketplace
Mark Greene (2001:4–8) points out that a flawed theology
of work has resulted in a distorted view of both work and The Call42 research on faith and work in South Africa shows
economic production. This flawed theology is characterised that a majority of Christians have questions about their calling
by two views of the world of work as an ontologically corrupt and role in the world of work (Anon 2013b; Forster 2014a:3–4).
and evil domain of life. In such extreme views, wealth and However, the majority also indicated that they did not feel
economic production are regarded as products of greed, effectively or adequately equipped to respond as Christians
mammon or evil. Any pleasure or profit derived from the to the challenges and opportunities they encountered in the
world of work is thus evil and not in keeping with the will world of work (Anon 2013c; Forster 2014a:3).
and purpose of God. On the other hand, extreme work is seen
as a necessary burden to be endured and survived – it is an The Call42 research shows that while pastors and church
evil to be escaped in favour of the holiness of spiritual living leaders believe that their members should be using their skills,
that takes place in and through the life of the church. network of relationships and location in the marketplace to
bring about transformation in society, their theological and
There are of course those Christians who have a less binary discipleship focus is most frequently not in that area (Anon
view of faith and work. There are numerous examples of 2013c). Rather, the research shows that members are trained
pietistic Christians who will hold prayer meetings, Bible for functions and tasks related to the ‘gathered church’ such
studies or evangelistic outreaches at their place of work or as congregational leadership, prayer ministries, leading
amongst colleagues within working hours. However, since groups within the congregation, sacrificial giving, worship
they lack a robust and well-rounded theology of work, and biblical interpretation. However, they are seldom taught
they return to ‘business as usual’ (Hillman 2005:45) once how to deal with conflict, pressure, temptation, discernment
the activity is concluded.8 These dualistic and sometimes or ethical dilemmas in their church life (Greene 2001:4–8;
pietistic practices can be criticised harshly by sceptics – even 2010:5–16).
from within Christian circles. Moreover, they are seldom
framed within a broader understanding of the missio Dei On the other hand, Forster’s research shows that companies
(Bosch 2011:363–364). and businesses, identifying themselves as operating from
a Christian belief and value system, often address matters
In recent years there have been some instances of ‘full time’ of social concern whether through Corporate Social
ministry workers such as corporate chaplains, working in Investment, or caring for the practical needs of their staff,
businesses.9 However, such workers are very few and far or the communities in which they work (Forster 2014a:5).
between. In addition to this, it is questionable whether such Yet, very few of these companies have a vision of the
practices are missiologically responsible and economically opportunities for exercising systemic influence in the
realm of policy, ethics development or the generation and
7.Please see the section on the different forms of church in the marketplace in this development of products and services, which have a social
article for a thorough discussion on the use of the word church in this context.
benefit that is in line with the values and ideals of God’s
8.Another important contribution to a dualistic view of faith and work stems from an kingdom as expressed in terms of the church’s holistic
inadequate understanding of the public’s notion and role of faith (Dreyer & Pieterse
2010; Habermas 1991; refer to Smit 2007a). mission (Bosch 2011:415–418; Johnson 2011:171–174; Keller &
9.See one South African example in Forster and Power (2011). Leary-Alsdorf 2012:19).
Page 4 of 8 Original Research
Simply stated, it is essential for the church to rediscover a According to Preece, Miyast and Kotiuga (2012):
theology that can shape faithful worship and witness for
there is huge potential for church growth in the next generation
every place and every day of the week. The contemporary in the form of those who hunger for meaningful relationships
church operates far too frequently with a dualistic theology in the workplace. Increasingly, multi-ethnic work environments
that emphasises it as a gathered community in opposition in the West offer opportunity to enter into the lives of people
to the kingdom of God, which covers all spheres of society. from all nations. Two things need to happen if the church–work
This is not a new debate as John Howard Yoder reminds us. divide is to be bridged: rethinking the role of the church in
The World Council of Churches spent many hours debating supporting our workplace emissaries, and rethinking the role of
work in motivating emissaries. (p. 3)
the deficiencies of an ecclesiocentric missiology, rather than
a kingdom centred missiology (Yoder 2013:282). In recent
There is a growing awareness for the great need for spiritual
years there has been a rediscovery of the somewhat radical
and ethical guidance in the marketplace, but for this to
views of Johannes Hoekendijk, which became prominent
happen individuals, companies, churches and marketplace
after the 1952 World Missionary Congress held in Willingen,
ministry leaders have to be theologically formed, shaped and
Germany. On that occasion he argued that the dominant
equipped for ministry in the wider world. They also have to
missionary theology of the 1900’s, which was based on
be mobilised and sent for such work.
church planting and mission as an extension of the gathered
community, needed a correction, namely that mission
Ed Silvoso (2006) considers the reality that there is some
should be refocused on the biblical understanding of God’s
nuance in the awareness and ability amongst Christians for
kingdom. This meant a less institution centred missional
ministry in the world of work. In this regard he distinguishes
focus and paved the way for a more kingdom minded
between four types of Christians in the marketplace. The
approach to God’s mission in the various spheres of society –
first type he calls ‘survivors’ whose primary objective is to
both through the gathered and scattered church (Anderson
survive at work. Many Christians find themselves in this
1999:297; Bosch 2006:177–178).
position – perhaps they are not in a ‘dream job’, or find
themselves in a conflict ridden, dull or unfulfilling work
If the church were to rediscover and adopt such a view
environment. Such a perspective on work is not likely to
of mission, it would necessitate that Christians are
have a missional view of work and therefore will have little
prepared, equipped and inspired for ministries of service,
or no effect for Christ in their workplace. The second type
transformation and influence in a variety of contexts in
of Christian strives to live by Christian principles, yet their
society. Being a teacher, doctor or lawyer could be a vocation
faith is largely a private matter with little or no impact on
of service, an act of ministry where the kingdom of God is
social, economic or political systems. Often persons in this
established through the presence and work of the scattered
category cannot see how their work life could be a means
church membership throughout the week.
of faithfulness to Christ or a participation in the missio Dei.
The third type of Christian seeks to discern the will of God
The opportunity
for their entire life (including their work) and so seeks
As pointed out in the previous section, a kingdom focussed God’s guidance and direction in work. Such a person will
missiology understands that the church has a witness and often seek to live faithfully and intentionally as a disciple of
work that extends beyond a particular building or certain Christ in their work life. The fourth type of Christian takes
times of the week, – which are frequently the predominant their discipleship one step further and purposefully seeks to
focus of the gathered congregation. Since God is active transform the society in which they live to match the values
in every aspect of creation, the missional church should and ideals of God’s kingdom (Silvoso 2006:148–150). Such a
participate in the missio Dei [work of God], and thus also be person may even choose to take on work of a certain kind in
active in bringing healing and transformation in all spheres order to be able to transform or influence a social or political
of society. Missional theology has become increasingly aware reality, or may stay in a position of work in spite of conflict
that the church is already present and active in ministry in or a lack of stimulation in order to obediently participate in
just about every aspect of society, as church members go to the missio Dei.
work, live in their communities and live out their faith in
their everyday lives (Bosch 2011:400–402; Forster & Power In light of the argument being made in this article, the
2011:53–55). The challenge is to equip, mobilise and support challenge that the church faces is to equip Christians to live
its members to fulfil their calling as ministers and kingdom their lives along the lines of Silvoso’s third and fourth type
ambassadors in the marketplace, everyday and everywhere as discussed above.
(Greene 2010: 17–23).
Considering the different forms of
Therefore the lay-clergy gap also needs to be bridged (Greene church in the marketplace
2010:1–3). In the words of Le Bruyns 2004):
Up to this point this article has argued that the church should
To bridge the lay-clergy gap we need to change our basic image
of who we are from ‘Church’ with a minister or two, referring to be awakened or re-awakened to a theology of work with a
the Sunday gathering, to the People of God, who are all ministers, missional orientation towards the kingdom of God that has
both gathered and scattered, Sunday and Monday. (p. 23) an impact upon every aspect of life. Leslie Newbigin (1991)
Page 5 of 8 Original Research
captures this concept very clearly and succinctly when he which is active outside of their buildings’ boundaries and
writes: their regular worship and meeting times.
It should become part of the normal work of the Church to equip
its members for the exercise of priesthood in the many different Quite apart from the immeasurable spiritual value and the
areas of secular life, and in terms of the specific powers that rule work of moral formation, added through local worshipping
those areas. (p. 84) communities, there is another way in which such communities
act as catalysts for ministry and mission in the world of work
What is meant by the expression church?10 This term is (Philander 2011:176–179).
complex and refers to a number of theological concepts. It
finds expression in different ways in society. The level of involvement in the local community as described
above is characterised as first and second-generation
Dirkie Smit (2007b:61–68) suggests that there are three general involvement, to use the terminology of the social development
forms of being ‘the church’. These forms will be briefly scholar, David Korten (1990:117–118). First generation
described below and, in doing so, each of these different engagement refers to relief and charity work (soup kitchens,
forms of church as agents of mission in the marketplace will etc.), whereas second generation engagement refers to the
be discussed: work of empowering a community, often through projects
• The church as a local congregation of Christian members. such as skills development projects (sewing classes, trades,
etc.).
For many Christians this is most likely to be their primary
perspective of the church: a localised community of Christians We cannot deny that whilst this form of church has potential
organised around regular common worship. Philander for great good, it also has the potential for harm. According
(2011:177) points out that this is the place and social group to Smit (2007b:63) ‘the Christian religion is also a dangerous
that people often think of when they answer the question of power, and has been such and still is, in South Africa’. Many
where they go to church or what church they are members of. of the persons surveyed in Call42 showed that it was this
form of church that focussed on its own survival, programs
What role can this ‘form’ of church play in being an agent and needs, rather than training its members for ministry in
of God’s mission for the world of work? As Smit (2007b) their daily work and life (Forster 2014a:4–5).
rightly points out, this requires careful reflection. Firstly, it
is important to recognise that the largest grouping of South John de Gruchy (1986) notes that at times in South Africa’s
Africa’s Christians belong to African Initiated Churches. history, church worship, teaching and liturgy has been the
The last reliable census data showed that 48% of South cause of the preventing the gospel from taking hold in society
Africa’s Christian population fit into such church groups,11 (cf. Smit 2007b:63). Smit (2007b:63) notes that this may not be
with a further 31% belonging to other groups that include the kind of contribution that theologians or religious leaders
the mainline denominations (Nieman 2010:37). The church would like to see.
as congregation does have a role to play in South Africa if
not simply by its sheer numbers in our population. Nieman The question would thus be: How do we engage with this
(2010:37) comments that, ‘the 23 main religious groupings, significant sector of Christian community in order to further
with a membership of 37,157,820 in 2001 (84% of the the aim of an active and vibrant church that is engaged
population) represent a potentially powerful voice and with every sphere of society, equipping its members for
resource’. participation in the missio Dei?
• The church as institution, denomination and ecumenical
Scholars argue that these local communities provide a great
body.
deal of social cohesion, faith identity that foster hope and,
at times, even concrete expressions of hope such as feeding
For many people the word church primarily refers to the
schemes, education, skills development and social care
organisational or institutional structures they identify with.
(Nieman 2010:37–44). In terms of this article’s argument, we
When some people hear the word church they may think
could say that this is certainly part of the work of missional
of the confessional community that they are part of (e.g.
engagement emerging from the local congregation. In a deeply
the Catholic, Orthodox or Methodist church). Philander
religious nation such as South Africa, most communities can
(2011:177) notes that often this expression of church is what
cite examples of individuals whose lives have been positively
people would point to in answer to a collective question
changed and transformed. Even examples can be cited of
such as ‘what does the church say about unemployment
communities that have experienced transformation as a result
in South Africa’. It could also refer to collective groupings
of a local worshipping community’s positive contribution,
such as Evangelical Christians, African Initiated Churches
or even more formal groupings such as ecumenical bodies
10.This approach stems from Smit (2007b), however, it was adapted by Forster (World Council of Churches or the World Communion of
(2014b) and is further adapted for the purposes of this article’s arguments. It thus Reformed Churches). Smit (2007b:65) notes that we must
uses similar terminology, but locates the theological emphasis in different areas
from the earlier uses by both Smit and Forster. take care not to confuse numerical prominence of a grouping
11.For a thorough theological discussion please see Hendriks and Erasmus (2005). with the social and theological contribution of that church.
Page 6 of 8 Original Research
Simply knowing how many Methodists or Anglicans there faith on a daily basis in their own particular ways. This is a
are in South Africa does not tell us much about the respective very important way in which the church can participate in
groupings’ contribution to society. being an agent and bearer of hope in society.
From a theology and development perspective this form As mentioned earlier, the most recent research on how
of church would be understood to engage society from a individual Christians feel about faith and work in South
third generation development strategy, namely to engage Africa was done by Forster (2014a). He draws on the
institutions’ policies in society such as the church’s mission qualitative research statistics of Call42. In the introduction
and justice policies, the policies and laws of government, and to their research findings, Call42 explains why they felt
the decisions and policies of regulatory bodies in society, et motivated to conduct this research:
cetera (Korten 1990:119; Nieman 2010:8).
God’s ultimate plan is to redeem all parts of creation back to Him
[sic]. This includes hearts, minds, culture, nature, environment,
Forster’s article (2015) on the church in South Africa since government, law, media, craft, relationships, education etc. God
the dawn of participative democracy in 1994 discussed the has not called us out of the workplace, but he has specifically
demise of the ecumenical movement in South Africa. His planted us in the workplace for a definite reason. It’s important
research shows that ecumenical the church has been left that the body of Christ understand [sic] that we are called to fill
somewhat weakened and voiceless in the new South African every position that exists; teachers, principals, political positions,
industries … every business that exist … with a mission to
dispensation (Forster 2015:8). Unlike the period leading up
manifest the Kingdom of God. (Anon 2013a)
to 1994, there is thankfully no longer a state church that can
speak on behalf of the people, and sadly no longer a struggle
Granted, not everyone would agree with the theological
church linked to a strong functional ecumenical body like
tenets in the above statement. Yet, such a focus on faith
the South African Council of Churches that represents the
and work is laudable. It shows that some Christians have a
collective will and intentions of the churches in South Africa
clear understanding that they have a task and a role to play
(Forster 2015:6–8). Smit (2007b:66) notes that the ecumenical
as agents of God’s hope in society. However, the reality is
movement that was ‘strong during the apartheid years when
that this perspective is a minority view amongst both South
many churches were committed to their common struggle
African Christians and many churches in South Africa.
against apartheid, has lost most of its appeal and influence’.
Forster’s analysis (2014a:5) of the Call42 data showed the
following (cf. Anon 2013d:1–2):
However, the demise of traditional ecumenical structures has
• Christians in South Africa are struggling to find significant
led to new groupings in an attempt to fulfil this vital role of
meaning and purpose in their work.
the witness and mission of the institutional church. Examples
• There is a hunger for a deeper focus on God and the
of such movements are the Religious Leaders Forum, South
principles of God’s kingdom in every aspect of life (both
African Christian Leaders Initiative (SACLI), Unashamedly
those parts that are formed around the gathered church
Ethical, Transformation Africa, and the re-birth of the
and the scattered church).
South African Council of Churches. Not surprisingly, many
• It appears that churches struggle to adequately envision,
denominations continue to be active in their prophetic work
equip and support Christians in the world of work. There
and witness in the public sphere and seek to empower their
is not sufficient training and support for business leaders
members to use their influence and resources to bring about
and employees.
social and policy change. One could site many wonderful
• A professional career matters to God and is useful for the
examples of projects that denominations and groupings
purpose of advancing God’s kingdom in society.
are involved in, which have a significant impact on society.
However, there is scope for greater partnership, particularly
In an ideal situation the contribution of the church would
as it relates to policy issues in society, matters of social justice,
be characterised as a fourth generation contribution, to use
economic inequality and political accountability.
Korten’s terminology (cf. 1990:11–132) once again. Fourth
generation engagement is, according to Swart, Rocher &
How could the denominational church be more strategic
Erasmus (2010):
in using its membership to achieve the objectives and aims
of the gospel and the kingdom? Many of the ministers in akin to a social movement that makes extensive use of networks
and people’s independent mobilising actions to work for justice
government, captains of industry and even persons engaged
and people’s self-actualisation in society. It is guided by an
in crime and corruption are members of churches. What work
alternative vision in society that mobilises people to voluntary
could be done to transform society if the churches worked
action. (p. 8).
together in addressing some of the ills and evils that plague
South Africa as a predominantly Christian nation?
Events such as the eviction of informal dwellers from land
• The church as believers, salt and light in the world. owned by the South African National Roads Agency in
Lwandle and Nomzamo on the 04th of June 2014 serve as an
Smit (2007b:68) notes that this is the third way in which example of the emergence of a people’s movement around
people think of the church – as individual believers who are a cause for justice. When the public saw Murray Williams’
salt and light in the world, each involved in living out their pictures (2014a; 2014b) of people struggling to save their
Page 7 of 8 Original Research
meagre belongings being exposed to the rain and cold, they Prof. Lotter's first doctoral student and would like to honour
were incensed. The public outcry put a halt to the injustice him for the fact that he was not only his Doctoral promotor
and even garnered apologies from government officials. It but also a wonderful mentor, friend and in many ways, a
was the presence of Christians on the ground (particularly role-model. In the 20 years after his graduation Prof. Lotter
the work of Bishop Michel Hansrod), local ministers and continued to play a major role in Dr Oosterbrink's life, firstly
members of churches who helped to bring the injustice to in his ministry as a pastor and later as a marketplace minister
light and to bring about a tentative solution. in the capacity as a specialist in organisational development
in the business sector. Prof. Lotter has not only been a pastor
Gerald West challenged the church to recover the importance and lecturer who gave guidance to congregants and students
of people’s theology in a paper he delivered at Stellenbosch about their careers and life in general, but also spent several
University entitled ‘People’s theology, prophetic theology, years in the business world and maintained a keen interest in
and public theology in post-liberation South Africa’ (in the property market.
Claassens & Birch 2015). In his paper he writes how biblical
scholars and theologians have been engaging with social Competing interests
movements like Abahlali baseMjondolo [shack dwellers]. His
The authors declare that they have no financial or personal
challenge reminded of Albert Nolan’s description (1988) of
relationship(s) that may have inappropriately influenced
the South African church – the majority church – that we do
them in writing this article.
not often think about:
The part of the Church that I am referring to is the oppressed
Authors’ contributions
part, the poor and the oppressed Christians of South Africa …
This cuts across all our Church denominations and includes
Both authors worked on the article and shared the
leaders from various traditions. In fact, this part of the Church
responsibility for research and writing equally.
must now be, far and away, the majority of Christians in South
Africa. (p. 211)