Where to look first? Behaviour control for fetch-and-carry missions of
service robots
Markus Bajones1, Daniel Wolf1, Johann Prankl1, Markus Vincze1
Abstract—This paper presents the behaviour control of Our solution for this problem is to develop a flexible
a service robot for intelligent object search in a domestic behaviour controller for fetch-and-carry tasks implemented
environment.Amajorchallengeinserviceroboticsistoenable
withSMACH,aPython-basedlibraryforbuildinghierarchi-
fetch-and-carrymissionsthataresatisfyingfortheuserinterms
cal concurrent state machines, as pictured for our proposed
of efficiency and human-oriented perception. The proposed
behaviour controller provides an informed intelligent search implementation in Fig. 1. We present a framework that is
basedonasemanticsegmentationframeworkforindoorscenes able to generate locations on-the-fly without the need of
and integrates it with object recognition and grasping. Instead pre-learned object-location relationship and show in a first
of manually annotating search positions in the environment,
experiment in an ambient-assistive-living lab to proof the
theframeworkautomaticallysuggestslikelylocationstosearch
robustness of our approach.
for an object based on contextual information, e.g. next to
tables and shelves. In a preliminary set of experiments we Theremainderofthispaperisstructuredasfollows:First,
demonstrate that this behaviour control is as efficient as using we review related research on service robots performing
manually annotated locations. Moreover, we argue that our fetch-and-carry tasks in Section II. We then outline how
approach will reduce the intensity of labour associated with
the SMACH framework works in Section III. Each of the
programmingfetch-and-carrytasksforservicerobotsandthat
modules and their integration in the behaviour controller is
it will be perceived as more human-oriented.
then described in Section IV with a focus on the modules,
I. INTRODUCTION but not the individual methods. Finally, a first experiment in
Theabilityofarobotautonomouslyinteractingwithahu- a living room setting is presented in Section V. A summary
man requires sophisticated cognitive skills including percep- of lessons learned from the experiment and an outlook on
tion, navigation, decision making and learning. Impressive future work conclude the paper.
achievements have already been made in the research field
of HRI considering robots as tour guides in museums [1],
[2], shopping malls [3] and also for assistive robots in the
care and domestic context [4].
However,oneofthebiggestchallengesstillistheintegra- INIT
tionofmethodsintooperationalautonomoussystemsforthe succeeded
domestic context, which achieve satisfying results for their
GET_ALL_POSITIONS
end-users.Oftenamiss-matchbetweenuserexpectationsand
robot performance can be observed in HRI studies [5], for succeeded
instance because the robot behaviour is not legible to the GET_ROBOT_POSE wait for data
users or is simply too slow. Imagine you command your
succeeded next_room
household robot to bring you your mug and the robot could
aborted CLEAN_POSITIONS LOCATE_OBJECT
onlysearchforitatpre-programmedplaces:Whatifthemug
is at none of these places or the user rearranged the flat? aborted succeeded succeeded succeeded
Another solution could be that the robot would navigate to
GET_CURRENT_ROOM SET_SUCCESS POSE_ITERATOR
the center of the room, rotate several times and then start a
succeeded aborted succeeded aborted
time-consuming brute-force object detection everywhere in
the map. This behaviour would already increase flexibility, PLAN_PATH aborted succeeded preempted aborted succeeded
but would still not be very legible for the user: Why getting
an overview and then start a time-consuming search?
failure MOVE_BASE_GO SEGMENTATION
Would it not be much more intelligent and legible if the
robot first gets an overview of the environment and then failure succeeded aborted succeeded
looked at the most probable locations for the mug to be, CLEAN_UP LOCATION_REACHED aborted
e.g. on tables or in the cupboard? One way to gain the
information about this kind of relations is to extract it from
Fig.1:Simplifiedstatemachinerepresentationofour“fetch-
knowledge databases.
and-carry”objecttaskapproach.Greystatesdenotesub-state
1Faculty of Electrical Engineering and Information Technology, Vienna machines.
University of Technology, 1040 Vienna, Austria {bajones, wolf,
prankl, vincze}@acin.tuwien.ac.at
1v45510.0151:viXra
II. RELATEDWORK • Transitionsdefine,givenanoutcome,towhichstateor
Object search and fetch-and-carry tasks represent one of container the execution chain should turn to.
themostcommontasksofservicerobots.Intraditionalfetch- • Userdata is data which can be shared between mul-
and-carry tasks the robot ”simply” has to pick up an object tiple states and containers, allowing to adapt the state
fromaknownlocationanddeliverittotheuser.Forinstance, outcome based on accumulated data from previously
intheRoboCup@Homecompetition2008/9[6]thishasbeen executed states.
oneofthemajortasks.Thecomplexityofthistaskcanvary, For seamless integration SMACH provides interfaces to
e.g. the robot has to identify the correct object from a set the three communication methods available in ROS, i.e.
of objects or in a cluttered scene or the robot gets a very messages, services and Actionlib. Provided is the Moni-
concrete instruction from where to fetch it, such as “Bring torStateforlistening topublishedtopics,executing aservice
me the mug from the kitchen table”. Thus, fetch-and-carry representedasastatewithServiceState,callinganActionlib
also includes object recognition and autonomous grasping, interface within SimpleActionState as well as the possibility
popular examples are e.g. [7] and [8]. ofwrappingastatemachineinsideanActionlibserver.With
Recently, the perception part has come more into the SMACH viewer, a tool to debug and visualize the running
focus of fetch-and-carry tasks by adding the search for statemachine,theprovideduserdataaswellasthecurrently
objectcomponents.ApopularexampleisGeorge,thecurios executed states and containers, is also integrated.
attentivesemanticrobot[9].TheideaofGeorgeissimilarto
thatpresentedinthispaper:Makearobot’ssearchbehaviour
IV. IMPLEMENTATION
more intelligent. An intelligent search procedure is more Forthefetch-and-carryscenariowecomparetwodifferent
efficientandthereforethefetch-and-carrytaskbecomemore implementationswithinaROSenvironmentandtheSMACH
satisfyingfortheend-user.[10]and[11]havealreadyshown state machine architecture. Both methods rely on a SLAM
that there is the need to make robot’s behaviour more based2Dmapofourlaboratoryinwhichweannotatevirtual
efficient and legible for the user. rooms as seen in Fig. 2 to create a multiple room scenario.
Therefore, the aim of the work presented in the following
A. Manual definition of search positions
is to enable a domestic service robot to perform fetch-
and-carry tasks in a user-satisfying manner. To that end, a Starting from the SLAM-based map we manually place
cognitiveroboticsystemneedstointegratemultipledifferent “search positions” at user-defined locations inside the map.
subsystems. Different tools, libraries and frameworks to To determine the pose at which the robot begins its task we
develop robotic architectures already exist, such as Rob- define a cost function
letRTechnology by Baier et al. [12], graphical tools such as
ChoreographeandNAOqiforNaorobots[13],thebehaviour bat 1 prob 2 pen
Markup Language (BML) [14] and the Robot Operating
modelling the cost to search for a given object x at each
system ROS [15]. A good overview and discussion on the
possible search location y. c (y) represents the cost of
advantagesanddisadvantagesofalltheseapproachesisgiven
the battery usage estimated by the path length to the pose
in [16].
associated to search location y. c (x,y) is the probability
InthefollowingwewillpresentSMACH,aPython-based
of object x being found at location y transformed to a cost
framework that allow ROS module integration, we used to
andisinitializedwithauniformdistributionacrossallsearch
develop a behaviour control combining intelligent object
locations. The constant factors k and k are introduced to
search, grasping objects, and bringing them to the user.
normalizethecostlevels.c (y)isapenaltytermdepending
III. SMACH on the room the user is currently in:
SMACHisaPython-basedlibraryforbuildinghierarchical (cid:40)
k y in same room as user
concurrent state machines, which also provides a ROS inte- c pen (y)= pen (2)
0 otherwise
grated module to design and execute simple tasks as well as
complex robot behaviours. SMACH provides the possibility The penalty term is based on the assumption that the user
toquicklycreateprototypestatemachinesbyreusingPython does not ask the robot to look for objects which are in the
design patterns. Within SMACH a task is defined by the same room as the user himself. It ensures that the robot
following elements: does not search in this room unless the object has not been
• State represents a blocking execution with pre-defined detected at the locations in all other possible rooms. During
outcomes. The result of a state specifies the transitions the search task all the objects, which can be recognized, and
to the next states. are localized at a certain position trigger the adaptation of
• Container is a set of one or multiple states and defines c prob . Through this simple method Fig. 3 we will learn in
theirfinaloutcomebasedontheintegratedstates.Espe- course of time where the user places objects and where the
ciallyimportantandusefularetheStateMachineandthe robotshouldstartitssearch.Thisprovidesawaytolearnthe
Concurrence containers. In the StateMachine container locationofspecificobjectsbasedontheuserspreferenceand
all the states are executed one at a time, whereas in a does not leverage upon a pre-defined knowledge database or
Concurrence multiple states are executed in parallel. data mining from online sources.
B. On the fly extraction of search locations
Our proposed approach automatically generates search
positions on the fly after entering a room and executing
the algorithm in Fig. 4 which uses semantic segmentation,
returning at least 2 search positions or none at all (when no
table planes were detected).
Move to center pose in a room
while rotation <360◦ do
Rotate 30◦ ccw
Call semantic segmentation service
Receive possible search poses
Remove poses from outside of the known map and
outside the current room
Fig. 4: Algorithm: obtain search poses
Fig. 2: Virtual room arrangement in our ambient-assistive-
Semantic segmentation: Our proposed point cloud pro-
living lab.
cessing pipeline consists of four steps, depicted in Fig. 5.
First,wecreateanover-segmentationofthescene,clustering
itintomanysmallhomogeneouspatches.Inthesecondstep,
we compute a manifold but efficient-to-compute feature set
foreachpatch.Theresultingfeaturevectoristhenprocessed
while object located is FALSE do
by a classifier, which yields a probability for each patch
for all search positions do
being assigned a specific label. To that end, we use a
Calculate path length c
obj randomized decision forest, a classifier which is intensively
if available then
discussed in [17]. We train the classifier on the publicly
prob available NYU Depth V2 dataset [18], containing 1,449
Look up search positions room r
sp indoor frames, recorded by a Microsoft Kinect and densely
labelled with more than 1,000 labels. In the last stage of
if r (cid:54)=r then
user sp our processing pipeline the classification results set up a
penalty pairwise Markov Random Field (MRF), whose optimization
yieldsthefinallabelling.Thislaststepsmoothesthelabelling
penalty out to correct ambiguous classification results due to noisy
localpatchinformation.Thefinallabellingthencorresponds
if c <c then
obj min to the Maximum-a-posteriori of the output of the MRF. In
min obj particular, because our robot can only grasp objects located
on tables, we only consider positions next to large clusters
of points labelled “table” as suitable positions to detect (and
Move to search position
consequently grasp) objects. Therefore, after calculating the
Remove location from list of search positions
semanticlabelsofthecurrentscene,weusesimpleEuclidean
Start object recognition
clustering to obtain all tables in the scene. The resulting
if object is recognized then
searchpositionsarethendefinedbyasimpleheuristic,which
Set object located to TRUE
is explained in Fig. 6. For further details about our semantic
Grasp object
segmentation pipeline we refer to [19].
From this method we gain the knowledge of search
if Grasp succeeded then
locations inside the map, which provide a horizontal plane
Put object on tray
in a certain height range (to filter out the floor and the
lower surface of wall-mounted cupboards or the ceiling).
Update probabilities of all recognized objects
As these locations depend on the first and second principal
Move to the user
components derived from the segmented planes we have to
Inform the user about the object location
filter out positions which are not reachable (e.g. inside of
another piece of furniture, or outside of the map) as well
Fig. 3: Algorithm: locate object procedure as locations behind a wall. For this we first check if the
detected table surfaces and the robot are within the same
room boundaries and remove any search locations which do
notfulfilthiscriteria.Secondlywedonotconsiderpositions
that are inside of an occupied grid cell of the static map.
C. Object recognition
After the robot reaches a “search position” an attempt to
recognize the object inside the scene and obtain the objects
6-DOF pose (position and orientation). The recognizer is
called with the RGB-D data collected by the Kinect on the
robot’shead.Itcombinesthreedifferentrecognitionpipelines
(2D and 3D) and merges the results during the verification
stage. For details of the recognition process we refer to
(a) (b) [20]. Results from successfully recognized objects are the
names as well as the poses of all objects. Prerequisite for
the recognition process is a trained model of every object
which should be localized.
D. Inform the user
After the robot recognizes the object at a certain pose the
user has to be informed about the current location, therefore
the “search user” procedure is activated. This procedure will
plan a path from the current room to the one in which the
user has been detected the last time (either by the robot
itself or by a motion detection system), move there and
floor wall ceiling table attempt to detect the user by combining 2D face detection
technique, introduced by Viola and Jones [21] as well as 3D
chair cabinet object unknown
detectionandtrackingofhumanbodyparts[22],[23].Ifthe
user is not detected the search will continue until all rooms
Fig. 5: Intermediate steps of our segmentation pipeline have been visited by the robot. After detection the user gets
(a) input image (b) oversegmentation (c) conditional label informed about the location of objects, during which we use
probabilities (here for label table, red=0, blue=1) (d) final theannotationoftheroomsinareverseordertogivetheuser
result after MRF. (e) Colour code of final result a pose in human understandable form instead of the 6-DOF
pose values.
V. EXPERIMENTS
All experiments were conducted on the first prototype of
our custom made HOBBIT platform [24] Fig. 7. Its base is
a mobile platform with two drive motors with an integrated
gearandattachedwheelswithdifferentialdrive.Thepercep-
tionsystemconsistsofoneRGB-Dcamera(ASUSXtionPro
Live) mounted ground-parallel at a height of 40cm and one
RGB-D camera (Kinect) mounted at 124cm height as part
of the robot’s head on a pan-tilt unit. The lower camera is
used for self-localization, the upper one for user and object
detection, gesture and object recognition and both cameras
contribute to the obstacle detection during navigation. For
d manipulation PT1 is equipped with an IGUS Robolink arm
with a 2-finger Finray-based gripping system. Further parts
of the platform include a 15in tablet computer for touch
input and speech recognition as well as a 7in display for
the purpose of displaying the robot’s face. To stash away
Fig. 6: Heuristic to define search positions for a table
retrieved objects a tray is mounted behind the tablet and
clusterprojectedontheground-plane(redpoints).Bluelines:
above the robot arm.
Principal axes of the cluster. The search positions (green
To evaluate and compare the two implementations de-
dots) are placed on the second principal axis, adhering a
scribed in Section IV we conducted four tests, each consist-
security distance d from the edge of the table.
ing of one execution of both implementations. The object
that had to be located was placed according to table I. As
objectsweusedanAsusXtionProbox,abrownhandbagand
cloud acquisition after the entrance of a room. As they both
take almost the same time to complete (5sec and 4sec) we
can save 48sec for each room. In our 5 virtual room set-up
this would lead to a reduction of up to 4min, depending
on the number of actually visited rooms. This leaves us
room for future improvements for our proposed approach.
The third culprit is the higher number of “search positions”
(up to 20) that are inside of the desired room opposed to
only one, which leads to a higher probability to find an
object at the cost of increased search duration. To reduce
this number of positions it is possible to cluster these poses
together under the premise that they are close enough and
the field of view will overlap at least a certain amount so
that a possibly located table plane is not discarded. Fig. 8
shows the result of search position calculations without the
virtual room constraints and a number of poses which could
be clustered together, especially on the left side and in the
Fig. 7: HOBBIT platform - prototype 1 right handed lower corner.
Another approach is to combine the semantic search
algorithm with the pre-defined locations where the “search
locations” are autonomously generated once instead of the
an orange wallet, which were placed at the same locations
manuallabelling.Thiswouldimprovethespeedofthewhole
for the corresponding search runs. The robot was placed at
search procedure but remove any flexibility towards changes
the same start location before each pair of runs, with a total
in the environment.
of 4 different start locations. For each run we collected the
following data:
• The duration of the entire run until the robot detected
the object or ended the search run.
• The number of “search positions”. (Pre-defined, calcu-
lated and with outliers removed)
• The success rate of the search run. (Was the object
recognized on the actual location?)
object duration
object start location #
detected? [min]:[sec]
Asusbox Kitchen room Y Y 7:12 16:31 9
Living Bedroom
Handbag N N* 9:52 12:15 17
room nightstand
Wallet room Y N 7:04 23:07 36
hall shelf Fig. 8: Manual overlay of 12 search position calculations in
Dining Kitchen our lab
Asusbox N Y 8:51 10:45 17
room cupboard
TABLEI:Testrunset-upandresults.#...numberof“search
positions”, N*...false positive recognition of the object, VII. CONCLUSION
P...pre-defined locations, S...semantic segmentation-based In this paper we presented a SMACH-based behaviour
control for more intelligent indoor fetch-and-carry tasks by
the means of semantic segmentation. Our approach does not
VI. DISCUSSIONANDOUTLOOK
require manually annotated search positions and thereby in-
At a first sight the results of our approach uses up to 2.5 creases flexibility and human-oriented perception. We could
times the time of the pre-programmed search task, which show the feasibility of the approach by the means of a first
wasexpectedduetothefactthattherobotnotonlysearches seriesofexperimentsandoutlinedsuggestionshowitcanbe
on pre-defined tables but also on window sills, shelves, further improved. After implementing these improvements,
etcetera. We further identified 3 major time-costing culprits we will perform a user study to assess how our approach
in our system and set-up. First is the sequential order of the is evaluated in terms of perceived intelligence and overall
semantic segmentation and the 30◦-rotation plus the point satisfaction by naive users.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT [12] T. Baier, M. Huser, D. Westhoff, and J. Zhang, “A flexible software
architecture for multi-modal service robots,” in Multiconference on
This work has been partially funded by the European ComputationalEngineeringinSystemsApplications,IMACS.,vol.1.
Commission under FP7-IST-288146 HOBBIT. IEEE,2006,pp.587–592.
[13] E. Pot, J. Monceaux, R. Gelin, and B. Maisonnier, “Choregraphe:
a graphical tool for humanoid robot programming,” in The 18th