Interdisciplinary Description of Complex Systems 13(1), 167-172, 2015
WHO CREATES THE TIME: NATURE OR HUMAN?
Sergey B. Kulikov*
Tomsk State Pedagogical University
Tomsk, Russian Federation
Regular article Accepted: 11 January 2015.
The aim of this article is to defend the thesis that analysis of time meaning within history and
philosophy of natural sciences and philosophical anthropology allows making clear the basis of
human being. It’s opened the opportunity of constructing special model of general understanding of
time as a creation of nature or as a creation of human. Two main methods are used: comparative
analysis and hermeneutics.
Article presents the discussion of following results. Orientation on discretization and virtual nature of
cultural interaction, or orientation on mutual tension of limits of cultural and historical process allows
connecting philosophy of natural sciences and philosophical anthropology with system of physical
categories: energy, weight, distance, etc. It finds an application as in the physical and mathematical
sphere so in the field of humanistic studies. The general conclusion made is that neither nature nor
human solely creates the time. Time is an imaginary phenomenon connecting human activity and
natural processes in the limits of human consciousness.
time ontology, meaning of time in physical and mathematical science, meaning of time in
philosophical anthropology, creator of time
CLASSIFICATION
APA: 2340, 2630, 4010
PACS: 04.90.+e
*Corresponding author, : kulikovsb@tspu.edu.ru; +7 382 2 522 382;
*Faculty of University-wide Disciplines, Kievskaja St. 60, Tomsk, Russia
S.B. Kulikov
INTRODUCTION
BACKGROUND
An article is clearing up the ratio of meanings of time in a context of philosophy of physical
and mathematical natural science and philosophical anthropology. Relevance of the matter is
caused at least from two parties. Firstly, cultural development of scientific knowledge
assumes philosophical justification [1; pp.259-260]. According to Kant, time concept is the
cornerstone of mathematical knowledge and because of that it allows developing conditions
of possibility of understanding of physical processes [2; pp.84-88]. Therefore the analysis of
understanding of time opens the specific direction of philosophical justification of physical
and mathematical natural science. Secondly, the time concept sends not only to area of
natural processes but also their sense concerning a being perspective in general and questions
of human being in particular [3; p.27, 3; p.451]. Therefore the analysis of time meaning
allows clearing up the basis of human being and constructing special model of its
philosophical and anthropological understanding.
APPROACHES AND METHODS
The analysis of question of time meaning as relation “Nature vs. Human” allows to reveal
specifics of philosophy, natural sciences and anthropology in structure of ontological
knowledge as itself. It is revealed ways of creation of the general theory of nature
development and also human interaction. Thereby, we can answer the question is whether
nature or human creates the time.
During research were applied methods of the comparative analysis and a hermeneutics. These
methods allow comparing the features of interpretation of time within fundamentals of
physical and mathematical natural sciences and philosophical anthropology. So, it could be
constructed the general model of interpretation.
CLASSICAL POSITION: NATURE “CREATES” THE TIME
There are two most important positions in the history of time ontology: classical natural
philosophical approach (Aristotle, Hegel, etc.) and accenting on human being approach
(Husserl, Heidegger, etc.). Bulks of modern theories, both in physical and mathematical
natural sciences, and within humanitarian thought are in fact continuation of these directions.
For example unlike traditional views in the theory of strings total more than three dimensions
of space-time continuum. However, in its basis the theory of strings is a kind of natural
philosophy. In a counterbalance to it modern historical issues (for example by H. White) are
in many respects obliged to philosophical and anthropological ideas of the first half of the
XXth century.
Aristotle analyzes time in categories of existence and nonexistence as natural (physical)
phenomena [4; pp.145-156]. As starting position fixing of essentially problematical nature of
disclosure of the nature of time acts [4; p.145]. The analysis of traditional for its era concepts
leads Aristotle to a number of the important conclusions. Firstly, time is not movement. It
cannot “move” (in itself) regarding some necessary way of measurement of mobility for it,
but such way coincides with time and it conducts to need of time interpretation through
concepts of immovability and invariance [4; p.147]. Secondly, time also has to possess
variability and mobility signs [4; p.147]. Therefore time possesses both immovability signs
and lines of mobility. Time in itself cannot be divided but in the same relation has to be
subdivided into separate parts. The nature of time is inconsistent and demands the special
Who creates the time: nature or human?
understanding allowing eliminating the revealed contradiction. In this regard Aristotle
believes that time is a measure of the movement expressed in the numerical relation to any
possible movement and change [4; pp.149-150]. It is issued the understanding of time as the
paradoxical phenomenon acting both as complete image and internally divided phenomenon.
The paradox of time demands representation it as the formation similar to points of
mathematical lines. It is expressed that division of time is applied in cases of ensuring
understanding of the message on some event [4; p.155]. Thus, time is inconsistent (uniform
and multiple) forming is in itself motionless and invariable and acts as numerical expression
of occurring movements and changes, and time also appears in the form of a complex of
pragmatic rules of ordinary language practice. All this testifies Aristotle understands time in a
relative separation from real processes in the material nature, pulls together it with area of
human relationship and gives the grounds to identify it with epiphenomenon of public life.
Special interpretation of time within history and philosophy of natural sciences is represented
by Hegel. Hegel correlates time to space including it in process of dialectic formation of
Absolute Spirit at an embodiment stage as initially Absolute Idea within an alter-being of this
Idea ordering of one of the parties of a material world [5; p.51]. Thus, the general
understanding of time coincides with two moments: 1) contradiction to space; 2) the
discretization forming in total of points of gap independent images namely the line and a
surface (i.e. the plane).
Hegel reproduces Aristotle’s idea of rather paradoxical character of the nature of time, but
Hegelian position only in a form coincides with the point of view of Aristotle [5; p.52]. Time
reveals in categories of existence and nonexistence as internally inconsistent phenomenon, by
permission of this contradiction the direction opposite to the Aristotelian line of thought acts.
Hegel believes that time in itself coincides with physical process (duration) and puts forward
the thesis about limited character of its paradoxicality, abnegation of this paradoxicality at
higher steps of development of the nature [5; pp.54-55]. Time is a pure form of the
organization of representation of natural processes. In this regard processes are constituted by
the moments of distinction which reveals as infinite division and uniform reproduction of
reference points of change of an ontological situation. Being is represented within the
concepts sending to possibility of some number of positions and states (past, present or
future) and reveals as correlated to a necessary scale of transitions between these positions
and states. The scale possesses inconsistent properties and cannot be understood with
accuracy as cash actually or absent in it. It is connected with Hegelian interpretation of time
in itself as “being disappearances in nothing and nothing in being” [5; p.56].
On the basis of the analysis of classical approaches to representation of time it is possible to
draw some general conclusions. Firstly, the nature of time has internally inconsistent
(paradoxical) character and consists in unity of its existence and nonexistence. Secondly, time
is identified with imaginary movement in the Greek classics and also ideal (formal) process
of formation of the nature in the German classical thought. Thirdly, the general understanding
of time is connected with its "mathematic" character, i.e. formality and universalistic meaning
as regulation of language practice, according to Aristotle, and also the organization of
quantitative parameters of intelligence of natural processes, according to Hegel.
These conclusions allow correlating natural philosophical interpretation of time to its
philosophical and anthropological understanding. The foundation is laid by Heidegger who
developed Husserl’s ideas in a context to consecutive criticism of bases of science in Modern
Times. Husserl in his criticism came to idea of replacement in physical and mathematical
natural sciences of a direct reality of the sensual world a complex of geometrical methods of
S.B. Kulikov
idealization of the phenomena of the material nature [6; pp.8-9]. Heidegger developed that
researches and opened special understanding of time.
NON-CLASSICAL POSITION: HUMAN EXISTENCE AS THE “CREATOR”
PHILOSOPHICAL POINT OF VIEW
According to Heidegger, basis of conceptualization of time is the existential analytics of
presence, i.e. being of human in the world and also conditionality of scientific knowledge
(about the human, society and nature) as basic intentions of its existence [3; p.29]. According to
Heidegger, the nature of time coincides with two versions of interpretation: “ordinary” which
sense corresponds to irreflexively accepted assumption of identity of time and direct fixing of
course of natural processes [3; p.475] and also the “ecstatic and horizon” interpretation
meaning a reflection of the intention of an ordinary understanding of time in the form of
irreversible alternation of the moments of change of states within surrounding reality. The
second interpretation assumes that daily intention sets a way of understanding of the world
and Heidegger considers that time nature in principle corresponds to this ability of the human
to be present, be in the world, in a literal word meaning proceeding from itself [3; p.475].
Thus, the classical understanding of time and modern interpretation correspond, firstly, as
intention on correlation allocation between natural processes and the sphere of their
knowledge, and, secondly, as the form of intension on time restriction with area of human
being. Aristotle and Hegel reveal a paradoxicality, the general formality and universality of
time regulating (to all appearances and through a prism of language norms, according to
Aristotle, and also it is ideal, according to Hegel) natural processes. Heidegger opens
irreflexivity of this concept at all and believes that time belongs only to the sphere of being of
the human in the world, but not to world being as itself.
It is easy to see that the philosophical and anthropological concept complicates exact
compliance of time of area of natural sciences. In a necessary way time cannot be included in
all completeness of own sense in a framework of the valid process of natural-science
research. The reality of such process has to be called into question in borders of actual
understanding of time. But we can show the way to solve this problem.
INTERDISCIPLINARY POINT OF VIEW: PHILOSOPHY OF TIME WITHIN PHYSICS?
We take the principled stand that there are some fundamental prerequisites in following
relations:
(1) idea of discretization of cultural and historical process;
(2) virtual nature of interaction of consciousness limits in philosophical and scientific
knowledge (elements of limitation are found in real history and are in the oppositional
relation to last and (or) hypothetically possible future moments) [7; pp.11-44].
Our position sends to a complex of philosophical provisions but also can be formulated in
natural-science categories of a time point as t, energy as E, m as body mass, and also
distances as r (enter the classical theory of gravity (Newton) and relativistic mechanics
(Einstein)). There is possible a special interpretation of time. Time connects action of the
phenomenon or its energy with some kind of weight, the historical importance of a separate
limit of consciousness through distance analogue as intensity of cultural and historical space,
i.e. oppositional nature of interaction of intentions.
Who creates the time: nature or human?
So, the complex of philosophical and physics ideas which allow finding a way of rational
justification of natural sciences comes to light coordinating philosophical and anthropological
understanding of a ratio of time and being, and also elements of physical science.
CONCLUSION
Evolution of representations results of time meaning within history and philosophy of natural
sciences (esp. within history and philosophy of physics) leads to the problematical correlation
of time to natural processes. The meaning of time assumes its paradoxical, ideal and universal
character; reality and time correspond only to the world of phenomena of human existence.
We have found one of the ways of solving this problem. Orientation on the rules of
discretization and virtual nature of interaction, or orientation on mutual tension of limits of
cultural and historical process allow connecting philosophy with system of physical
categories (energy, weight and others), which find application as in the physical and
mathematical sphere so in the field of humanitarian researches.
Thus one can conclude that neither nature nor human create the time. Time is an imaginary
phenomenon connecting human activity and natural processes in the limits of human
consciousness.