]hp-tnauq[
1v11000.1051:viXra
Why now is the right time to study quantum computing
Aram W. Harrow∗
January 5, 2015
Quantumcomputingisagoodwaytojustifydifficultphysicsexperiments. Butuntilquantumcomputers
are built, do computer scientists need to know anything about quantum information? In fact, quantum
computing isnotmerelyarecipe fornew computingdevices,but anew wayoflookingatthe worldthathas
been astonishingly intellectually productive. In this article, I’ll talk about where quantum computing came
from, what it is, and what we can learn from it.
1 The development of quantum computing
Inpreviouscenturies,ourdeterministicviewoftheworldledustoimagineitasagiantclockworkmechanism.
But as computers have become ubiquitous, they have also taken over our metaphors and changed the way
we think about science, math and even society. Not only do we use computers to solve problems, we also
think in ways that are informed by building, programming and using computers.
For example, phenomena as diverse as DNA, language and cognition are now thought of as mechanisms
forinformationtransmissionthathaveevolvedtooptimizeforbothcompressionanderrorcorrection. Game
theory and economics have begun to incorporate notions of computational efficiency, realizing, as Kamil
Jainfamously saidof Nashequilibria,“Ifyourlaptopcan’t find it, then neither canthe market.” Computer
science has also reshaped the goals of these fields. Mathematics increasingly concerns itself with matters of
efficiency, and has been rapidly growing in the computer-related fields of information theory, graph theory
and statistics. The P-vs-NP question is the newest of the Clay Millenium problems, and if resolved would
shed light on the oldest puzzle in mathematics: what makes it hard to find proofs?
In hindsight, the computational view seems natural. But when computers first appeared, even those
few who predicted their commercial success could not have foreseen the intellectual revolution they would
cause. For example, entropy (which is central to compression and error correction) could easily have been
invented in the time of Gauss or even by medieval Arabs or ancient Greeks. But in practice the impetus
to develop it came first in the 19th century, when thermodynamics was developed to understand steam
engines, andagainin the 20th century, when Bell Labs employedClaude Shannonunder a wartime contract
to studycryptography. This isnotunique tocomputer science;Einstein’sworkasa patentclerkhelped him
devise relativity, as clock synchronization on railway networks was an important engineering problem, and
metaphors of clocks on trains provided grist for his famous thought experiments. In general, science often
follows technology because inventions give us new ways to think about the world and new phenomena in
need of explanation.
The story of quantum computing is similar. Quantum mechanics was invented in the first few decades
of the 20th century, and its modern form was mostly known by 1930. But the idea that quantum mechanics
might give computational advantages did not arise until physicists tried to simulate quantum mechanics on
computers. Doing so,they quickly raninto a practicalproblem: while a single system(e.g., the polarization
of a photon) might be describable by only two complex numbers (e.g., the amplitudes of the horizontaland
vertical components of the polarization), a collection of n such systems requires not 2n but 2n complex
∗CenterforTheoretical Physics,MIT
numbers to fully describe, even though measurement can extract only n bits. Physicists coped by develop-
ing closed-form solutions and physically motivated approximations that could handle an increasingly large
number of cases of interest (more on this later).
The exponentially large state spaces of quantum mechanics should have been a clue that nature con-
tains vastly more computational resources than we ever imagined. Instead, it and other strange features of
quantum mechanics were seen mostly as limitations and quirks of the theory. For example, Heisenberg’s
uncertainty principle was often thought of as a restriction on measurements. Phenomena such as entangle-
mentwereconsideredpartof“quantumfoundations”orthe philosophyofquantummechanics,butwerenot
considered operationally relevant until quantum computing and quantum cryptography were independently
developed in the 1970s and 80s.
Quantumcomputing(ormoreprecisely,theideaofquantumadvantageincomputing)camefromRichard
Feynman’s 1982 suggestion that since conventional computers appeared to require exponential overhead
to simulate quantum mechanics, perhaps a quantum-mechanical computer could perform the task more
efficiently. The model was formalized in 1985 by David Deutsch, who also showed, surprisingly, that a
quantum-mechanical computer could be faster than a conventional computer for a problem (computing the
XORoftwobits) that onits face hadnothing to do withquantummechanics. Aseriesof strongerspeedups
followed, albeit for contrived problems, until Peter Shor’s 1994 quantum algorithm for factoring integers in
polynomial time.
Much earlier (1970), then grad student Stephen Wiesner proposed using Heisenberg’s restrictions on
measurements to prevent an adversary from learning a secret message. Thus quantum cryptography was
born, although Wiesner’s paper was almost universally rejected from journals, and its ideas were largely
unknown until Charles Bennett and Gilles Brassard published a scheme for quantum key distribution in
1984 (and even this wasn’t taken seriously until they implemented their proposal in 1991).
The key conceptual shift enabling both quantum computing and quantum cryptography was to start
thinking about the effects of quantum mechanics on information in operationalterms instead of as a source
of limitations, curiosities and paradoxes. Once this shift was made, the technical aspects of quantum infor-
mation were much simpler than earlier developments in quantum mechanics, such as the unification in the
1950s of quantum mechanics with special relativity.
2 Computing with qubits
One of the basic contributions of the computational approach to quantum mechanics is the idea of a qubit.
In general, a quantum system with d perfectly distinguishable states can be described as a unit vector in
Cd. The simplest interesting case is when d = 2, and the resulting system is called a qubit. Measuring the
vector x = 0 yields outcome 0 with probability x 2 and outcome 1 with probability x 2; hence the
(cid:18)x 1(cid:19) | 0 | | 1 |
requirementthat x be a unit vector. Any linear dynamics are possible, as long as they preservethe normof
thestate. Inotherwords,evolutionisgivenbymappingxtoUx,whereU isaunitarymatrix,meaningthat
italwayspreserveslength. Mathematically,this is equivalentto the equationU†U =I ,where (U†) =U¯ .
Thebeautyofthisexplanationisthatitiscompletelyindependentoftheunderlyingsystem,beitaphoton’s
polarization, the energy level of an electron bound to an atom, the spin of a nucleus or the direction of a
loop of superconducting current. In this way, a qubit is a device-independent way of describing quantum
information, just as bits enable us to reason about classical information without needing to know whether
it is encoded in RAM, a hard drive, or an abacus.
Single qubits are interestingfor physics experiments,but for computationalpurposes,we aremore inter-
ested in what happens when we have n qubits. In this case, the state x is a unit vector in
, with entries
labeled by n-bit strings. Most n-qubit states are entangled, meaning that their amplitudes are in some way
correlated across the n bits. Dynamics are now given by unitary matrices, which are built out of a series of
two-qubit gates. To represent a gate acting only on qubits, say, 3 and 7, we consider a unitary matrix U in
whichU is nonzeroonlyif the n-bitstringsi andj areequaleverywhereexceptonbits 3and7. Moreover,
the value of U should depend only the four bits i , j , i and j .
ij 3 3 7 7
Thislinear-algebraformalismmayseemabstract,butcanalsobe usedto describeclassicaldeterministic
and randomized computations. An n-bit string can be represented, albeit somewhat wastefully, as a vector
of length 2n with one entry equal to 1 and the rest equal to 0. Dynamics can be represented by mapping x
to Mx where M is a 0/1 matrix with a single 1 in each column. Randomized computation is similar. This
time the state is a vector of nonnegative real numbers summing to one, and x Mx is a valid transition
for any M with nonnegative entries whose columns each sum to one. In each case, this picture neglects the
fact that some transformations of n bits are easier than others. To represent a single operation on, say, two
bits, we use a matrix M for which, again, M = 0 whenever i and j disagree on some bit not being acted
upon, and M depends only on the values of i,j for the bits being acted upon. This represents the idea
that if we don’t act on a bit, it shouldn’t change or affect what happens.
Thusthe keydifferencesbetweenrandomizedandquantumcomputationappeartobe “merely”the shift
fromrealtocomplexnumbers(andevenallowingnegativerealscapturesmostofthisdifference)andtheshift
fromℓ toℓ normforthestate;thatis,quantumstateshavethesquaredabsolutevaluesoftheiramplitudes
summing to one, while probabilities sum to one without squaring. However,the fact that different branches
of a computation can have different phases means that when they recombine their amplitudes can either
add up (called constructive interference) or can cancel each other (called destructive interference). If “0” is
represented by the vector and “1” is represented by , then the NOT operation can be expressed
(cid:18)0(cid:19) (cid:18)1(cid:19)
(quantumly or classically) as . Geometrically, this is a rotation by π/2. However, only a quantum
(cid:18)1 0(cid:19)
computer can perform the following “square root of NOT,” which corresponds to a rotation by π/4.
√NOT= − .
Ifwestartwiththe“0”stateandapply √NOT, thenweobtainthe state . Werewetomeasure,
(cid:18)1/√2(cid:19)
the outcomes 0 or 1 would each occur with probability 1/2. However, if we apply √NOT a second time
beforemeasuring,thenwealwaysobtaintheoutcome1. Thisdemonstratesakeydifferencebetweenquantum
superpositionsandrandommixtures;placingastateintoasuperpositioncanbedonewithoutanyirreversible
loss of information. When we have n qubits, superposition and interference enable us to achieve greater
computational advantages. One famous example is Grover’s algorithm, which, given a binary function f on
n bits, allows us to search for an input x 0,1 n with f(x) = 1 using 2n/2 evaluations of f; a square-
root advantage. What makes Grover’s algorithm possible is the fact that probabilities are the squares of
amplitudes. Thus, a uniform superposition over 2n states assigns amplitude 1/√2n to each one. Moreover,
one can show that with effort comparable to that required to calculate f, it is possible to increase the
amplitude of each target x (i.e. with f(x)=1) by roughly 1/√2n . This breaks down only when their total
amplitude is large. Thus, the total effort is on the order of 2n/2, or more generally 2n/M if there are M
solutions. p
A more dramatic speedup over classical computing occurs with Shor’s algorithm for factoring integers.
Shor’s algorithm has a substantial classical component which reduces the problem of factoring to the more
abstract problem of period finding. This problem takes as input a function f on the integers 0,1,,2n 1
with the property that f(x)=f(y) if and only if x y s divisible by r for some hidden period r. The goal
is to find r. Since r can be exponentially large in n, classical computers require exponential time to find it
if they are required to treat f as a black box.
However, it is possible for a quantum computer to create a superposition of states with amplitude
r/2n in each of z,z + r,z + 2r,... for some randomly chosen z 0,1,...,r 1 . So far this is
anaplogoustowhataprobabilisticcomputerwoulddoifitchosearandomx,calculatedf(x),andconsidered
the distribution on x conditioned on this choice of f(x). The next step is uniquely quantum, and involves
applying a unitary matrix called a quantum Fourier transform (QFT). This matrix has y,z entry equal to
e2πiyz/2n /√2n. Performingitefficientlyispossiblebyadaptingthe classicalfastFouriertransform(FFT)to
thequantumsetting,butitsactionisdramaticallydifferent,sinceittransformstheamplitudesofaquantum
state rather than transforming a list of numbers as the classical FFT does. Applying the QFT in this case
maps our superposition to a state where the amplitude of y is r (1+eπi2 y n r +eπi2 2 y n r +eπi3 2 y n r +...). If
yr is (approximately) divisible by 2n then this sum will be large, and if yr is far from divisible by 2n then
it will involve many complex numbers with different phases that tend to cancel out (as can be verified by a
quick calculation). Thus, measuring y will return an answer that is close to a multiple of 2n/r. Finally, a
classical continued fraction expansion can recover r.
Whilequantumsimulationislikelytobecomemorepracticallyimportantoncewedevelopnewpublic-key
cryptosystems that resist quantum attacks, Shor’s algorithm is a far more surprising demonstration of the
power of quantum computing because the problem it solves has no obvious relation to quantum mechanics.
After Shor’s algorithm, it also became increasingly difficult to believe that quantum mechanics might be
efficiently simulatable classically. Previously, many scientists had hoped for a model of quantum mechanics
that would tame some of its most counterintuitive features, such as exponentially large state spaces, while
remaining consistent with our observations. But now we know that these models cannot be much simpler
than quantum mechanics itself (or at least no easier to simulate) unless factoring and period-finding can
be performed much more quickly on classical computers. This situation is like the development of NP-
completeness, which showed that efforts in disparate areas to solve NP-complete problems were in a sense
equivalent.
Shor’s algorithm and Grover’s algorithmare the most famous quantum algorithms, but are not the only
two. Onerecentalgorithm[1]solveslargelinearsystemsofequations;thatis,givenamatrixAandavector
b, it finds x such that Ax=b. However,unlike classicalalgorithms for the problem, in the quantum version
x andb are quantum states (and thus can be 2n-dimensionalvectorsusing only n qubits). Further, A needs
to be sparseand givenby animplicit representationso that givenany rowindex i it is possible to efficiently
find allthe nonzeroA . These restrictionsmake itpossible in principle to solveexponentially largesystems
of equations in polynomial time. However, there is an important caveat: the runtime of the algorithm also
scales with the condition number of A, a parameter which is related to the numerical instability of solving
the system of equations classically. Finding a natural scenario in which this algorithm can be used remains
a compelling open problem.
AnotherrecentalgorithmicdevelopmentisaquantumanalogueoftheMetropolissamplingalgorithm[2].
Classically,theMetropolismethodisatechnique forsamplingfromhard-to-analyzedistributionsoverexpo-
nentiallylargestatespaces(indeed,exponentialspeedupviauseofrandomnessisalessglamorousexampleof
howpowerfulachangeofcomputationalmodelcanbe). Itsamazingrangeofapplicationsincludesstatistical
inference and approximation algorithms for the permanent of a nonnegative matrix, but it was originally
developedtosamplefromthe thermaldistributionofasystem. IfstatexhasenergyE(x), thenthethermal
distribution at temperature T assigns x probability proportional to e−E(x)/T, so that lower temperatures
push the system harder into low-energy configurations. The quantum Metropolis algorithm, by analogy,
produces quantum states in thermal distributions. Like its classical cousin, the quantum Metropolis algo-
rithm takes longer to produce lower-temperature states, as this corresponds to solving harder optimization
problems, but proving rigorous bounds on its runtime is difficult in all but a handful of cases. Without
formal proofs, we can nevertheless run the classical Metropolis algorithm and observe empirically that it
works quickly in many cases of interest. An empirical evaluation of the quantum Metropolis will of course
have to wait for the arrival of a large-scale quantum computer. But we may already know enough tools, if
we can figure out how to combine them, to develop new quantum algorithms that use quantum Metropolis
as a subroutine, just as the classical algorithm for the permanent used classical Metropolis.
New proposeduses forquantumcomputerscontinue toarise. One excitingdevelopmentisthe increasing
number of applications being found for quantum computers with 10 or so qubits; small enough to be easily
simulatable classically, while large enough to interact in ways not previously demonstrated. Such quantum
computing devices could be used to improve precision quantum measurements (e.g. in atomic clocks, or
to detect gravity waves), as “quantum repeaters” in a network to distribute entanglement for use in cryp-
tographic protocols or even to construct arrays of telescopes that could synthesize apertures of unlimited
size. Just as the usage model of classical computers has gone beyond the Turing machine model, quantum
computing devices are likely to be more flexible than we can currently imagine.
3 Science through the (quantum) algorithmic lens
Building large-scalequantum computers will undoubtedly cause large and unpredictable changes in how we
think about science. But even without a physicalquantumcomputer, our theoreticalprogressso far has led
to many conceptual advances.
One major advance is the idea of separating the informational content of quantum mechanics from the
physics. Teaching these together, as is done now, mixes counterintuitive features such as measurement and
entanglement with the mathematically complicated picture of the Schr’o¨dinger equation as a PDE, and of
states as living in the infinite-dimensional space of functions on R3. It is as though probability were only
taughtinthe contextofstatisticalmechanics,andthe firstdistributions thatstudents sawwerethe thermal
distributions of idealgases. Instead, I believe quantum mechanics wouldmake moresense if its implications
for information were taught first, and then this framework was used to explain atoms, photons, and other
physical phenomena.
Starting students are not the only practitioners of quantum mechanics who can benefit from the quan-
tuminformationalperspective. Manyphenomenainvolvingquantummechanicsarerelatedto issuessuchas
entropy,entanglementorcorrelationthathavephysicalrelevancebutarebestdescribedintermsofinforma-
tion. One early success story concerns the problem of finding the lowest-energy state of a quantum system
(of n qubits, with pairwise interactions). For classical systems, such problems are NP-complete, except in
special cases, such as when the systems are arranged in a line or on a tree. For quantum systems, the
energy-minimization problem is QMA-complete. QMA stands for “Quantum Merlin-Arthur games,” and is
believed to be (roughly) as far out of the reach of quantum computers as NP is out of reach of classical
computers.
This gives some theoretical justification to the empirically observed phenomenon that many physical
systems,suchasglasses,havetroublefindingtheirgroundstates. Surprisingly,energyminimizationisQMA-
complete even for systems on a line with identical nearest-neighbor interactions, contrary to the previously
held intuition of physicists that the 1-D case should be easy.
In other cases, the quantum information perspective yields positive results, and even new classical algo-
rithms. One example relates to the gap between the lowest energy level of a system and the second-lowest
level. Physically,this energygapcorrespondstothemassofanexcitation. Someexcitations,likephotonsor
the vibrations of a solid, will be massless while others, like extra electrons moving through semiconductors,
willhaveeffectivemasses. Fromthispicture,weexpectthatasmallgapwillcorrespondtolong-rangecorre-
lations,while alargegapwillmeanthat correlationsrapidlydecay. The realityturns outto be more subtle.
For any single observable, say the strength of the magnetic field at a particular point, correlations indeed
decay rapidly when the gap is large. But the state of the system as a whole may still exhibit long-range
correlations. A good analogy for the situation arises from considering fixing a thousand random one-to-one
functionsonthespaceofamillionbits. Ifthefunctionfischosenrandomly,thenthepair(x,f(x))willhave
a nearly-maximal amount of mutual information, meaning that learning x will narrow down the number
of possibilities for f(x) from 21,000,000 down to 1000. On the other hand, any individual bit in x will be
nearly uncorrelated with any particular bit in f(x). This argument also works if the random functions are
replaced by an expander graph with suitable parameters, meaning that this behavior can also be achieved
constructively. Guided by this intuition, researchershave developed quantum analoguesof expander graphs
that demonstrate systems with a large gap and rapidly-decaying correlations of any individual observable,
but nevertheless a large amount of overall mutual information between distant pieces of the system. Why
should we care about these different kinds of correlations, apart from the desire to use theory to predict
observable quantities in the real world? One exciting application is the old problem of simulating quantum
systemsonclassicalcomputers. Ifasystemofnqubitshadnoentanglement,thenthenumberofparameters
requiredtodescribeitwouldnotbe2n,butmerely2n. Ifthequbitsarearrangedonaline,withcorrelations
roughly bounded in range to some short distance k, then the number of parameters scales as n exp(k).
Thus, controlling correlations in quantum systems also helps us simulate them efficiently.
This line of research can be seen as part of a larger project to divide quantum systems into those
that are efficiently simulatable classically (say because they have limited entanglement), and those that are
capableofuniversalquantumcomputing. Ontheotherhand,ahandfulofsystemsofapparentlyintermediate
complexityhavebeenfound,whichareneitherknowntobeclassicallysimulatable,noruniversalforquantum
computing. These include systems of non-interacting photons, as well as the case when the noise rate is
too high for known quantum error-correcting codes to function, but too low to rule out the possibility of
large-scale entanglement. Resolving the complexity of these boundary cases is a fascinating source of open
problems.
The scientific benefits of the quantum information perspective are not restricted to quantum mechan-
ics. Some important problems with no apparent relation to quantum mechanics relate to performing lin-
ear algebra on multidimensional arrays. For example, given a 3-d collection of numbers A , with i,j,k
ranging over 1,...,n , how hard is it to compute the following analogue of the largest singular value:
max A x y z over all unit vectors x,y,z? While computing this to accuracy 1/poly(n) can be
i,j,k i,j,k i j k
readiPly shown to be NP-hard, for the often more realistic case of requiring constant accuracy, the only
hardness result known involves quantum techniques, as does the most promising classical algorithm. One
possible reason for the effectiveness of the quantum information perspective here is that multidimensional
arrays correspond naturally to entangled states, and our increasingly quantitative understanding of entan-
glement often yields results about linear algebra that are more widely useful. Linear algebra appears to be
gaining in importance within theoretical computer science. Examples include using Fourier analysis on the
Boolean cube and taking advantage of the way that graphs and matrices can be viewed interchangeably,
thereby mixing combinatorial and algebraic pictures. In the future, I expect that our view of linear algebra
and probability will become increasingly shaped by tools from quantum information.
Finally,mostofthecontributionsofquantuminformationtocomputerscienceareatthisstagetheoretical,
sincelarge-scalequantumcomputershaveyetto bebuilt. Butoncetheyare,wecanexpectthemtobe used
inwaysthat theoristswillstruggleto explain,justas wesee classicallywithsuccessfulheuristicssuchasthe
simplex algorithm. For example, periodic structure was exploited by Shor’s algorithm, and can be applied
to obtain several other exponential speedups. In the future, we might use tools such as period-finding for
exploratory data analysis, much as linear regression is used today. Many of these new tools will initially be
deeply counter-intuitive, but as we master them, they promise radically new ways of looking at the world
scientifically.