]MI.hp-ortsa[
1v9413.3090:viXra
Wide-Field Astronomical Surveys in the Next Decade:
A White Paper for Astro2010
Michael A. Strauss (Princeton), J. Anthony Tyson (UC Davis), Scott F. Anderson
(Washington), T.S. Axelrod (LSST), Andrew C. Becker (Washington), Steven J.
Bickerton (Princeton), Michael R. Blanton (NYU), David L. Burke (SLAC), J.J.
Condon (NRAO), A.J. Connolly (Washington), Asantha Cooray (Irvine), Kevin R.
Covey (Harvard), Istv´an Csabai (E¨otv¨os), Henry C. Ferguson (STScI), Zˇeljko Ivezi´c
(Washington), Jeffrey Kantor (LSST), Stephen M. Kent (FNAL), G. R. Knapp
(Princeton), Steven T. Myers (NRAO), Eric H. Neilsen, Jr. (FNAL), Robert C. Nichol
(Portsmouth), M. Jordan Raddick (JHU), Baruch T. Soifer (IPAC), Matthias Steinmetz
(Potsdam), Christopher W. Stubbs (Harvard), John L. Tonry (Hawaii), Lucianne M.
Walkowicz (Berkeley), R.L. White (STScI), Sidney Wolff (NOAO), W. Michael
Wood-Vasey (Pittsburgh), Donald G. York (Chicago)
Wide-angle surveys have been an engine for new discoveries throughout the
modern history of astronomy, and have been among the most highly cited and
scientifically productive observing facilities in recent years. This trend is likely
to continue over the next decade, as many of the most important questions
in astrophysics are best tackled with massive surveys, often in synergy with
each other and in tandem with the more traditional observatories. We argue
that these surveys are most productive and have the greatest impact when
the data from the surveys are made public in a timely manner. The rise
of the “survey astronomer” is a substantial change in the demographics of
our field; one of the most important challenges of the next decade is to find
ways to recognize the intellectual contributions of those who work on the
infrastructure of surveys (hardware, software, survey planning and operations,
and databases/data distribution), and to make career paths to allow them to
thrive.
1strauss@astro.princeton.edu,1-609-258-3808
1 Introduction
Very crudely speaking, breakthroughs in observational astronomy in the last fifty years
have been driven by two types of facilities (often working in synergy):
• Observatories are designed to allow detailed studies of individual objects or rela-
tively small fields in a given waveband. Much of the push towards telescopes of ever
larger aperture is motivated by studies of individual objects.
• Survey facilities are often dedicated telescopes (or systems of telescopes) with a
wide field of view, which gather data on large numbers of objects, for use in a wide
variety of scientific investigations.
Both types of facilities are driven by, among other things, new technological devel-
opments in the field. This has been especially true for the opening of new wavelength
regimes, and the history of astronomy has taught us over and over again that there are
unanticipated surprises whenever we view the sky in a new way.
Astronomers carry out the equivalent of experiments by discovering, and then study-
ing, different sorts of astrophysical systems. Surveys generate the list of available labora-
tories for such studies, and, as such, are central to progress in the discipline. Complete,
unbiased surveys are the best technique we have both for discovering new and unexpected
phenomena (Harwit 1981; Kellerman & Sheets 1983), and for deriving the intrinsic prop-
erties of source classes so that their underlying physics can be deduced.
Survey science tends to fall into several broad categories:
Statistical astronomy, where large datasets of uniformly selected objects are used
to determine distributions of various physical or observational characteristics. Ex-
amples include measurements of the large-scale distribution of galaxies, or searches
for stellar streams in the halo of the Milky Way. Often, surveys are designed as
experiments to make very specific measurements along these lines, such as many of
the CMB mapping surveys.
Searches for rare and unanticipated objects. Every major survey that has broken
new ground in sensitivity, sky coverage or wavelength has made important serendip-
itous discoveries; surveys need to be designed to optimize the chances of finding the
unexpected. Examples include the discovery of pulsars, of ultraluminous infrared
galaxies by IRAS, and of supernova light echoes in the MACHO survey. Some sur-
veys are explicitly designed to look for very rare objects of a certain type, such as
the planet searches by Corot and Kepler.
Surveys of the sky become a legacy archive for future generations, allowing as-
tronomers interested in a given area of sky to ask what is already known about the
objects there, to photometrically or astrometrically calibrate a field, or to select a
sample of objects with some specific properties.
In optical astronomy (the field in which most of the authors of this white paper work),
the state of the art for wide-field surveys for many years was the Palomar Observatory
Sky Survey (POSS; 1948-1957), and its successors in the 1980s on the UK Schmidt and at
Palomar, which imagedtheentirecelestial spherewithphotographicplates. Thishasbeen
used as a resource for a great deal of statistical astronomy: Abell’s famous cluster catalog
and the major galaxy catalogs of the 1970s such as the UGC come to mind, although its
real power for quantitative analysis came when it was digitized in the 1980s by STScI
and other teams. However, the limitations of photographic film, especially in sensitivity
and linearity, meant that the next generation of surveys had to wait until CCDs became
large enough to be competitive with film, telescope optics advanced to the point to allow
wide-field focal planes on large telescopes, and computers became powerful enough to
handle the resulting enormous data flow.
The Sloan Digital Sky Survey (SDSS; 1998-present) was enabled by exactly these
developments. It has imaged roughly 1/3 of the Celestial Sphere to r ∼ 22.5 in five
photometric bands, and obtained spectra of over 1.5 million quasars, galaxies, and stars.
The imaging camera, the largest astronomical camera in the world at the time it was
built, has about 150 million pixels on the focal plane, and produces data at a rate of 5
Mbytes per second. The CCDs themselves were among the most expensive components
of the hardware, and the data rate was large enough that the survey would have been
unthinkable with the computer power available a decade earlier.
The SDSS’ core science goal was a three-dimensional map of the large-scale distribu-
tion of galaxies, but one of the lessons from this survey is that wide-field imaging and
spectroscopy of the sky are fundamental for essentially all branches of observational as-
tronomy. The project has resulted in over 2200 refereed papers to date, the majority of
which are authored by people outside the SDSS collaboration itself. Indeed, the author
lists of these papers include roughly 4000 unique individuals, an appreciable fraction of
theworld totalofactive research astronomers. These paperscover abroadrangeoftopics,
from the structure of the asteroidal main belt, to the white dwarf luminosity function,
to the structure of the Milky Way halo, to the dark matter masses of galaxies and the
most distant quasars in the universe, to the large-scale structure studies for which the
survey was designed. The SDSS was the first or second most highly cited observatory
facility in each of the years from 2003 to 2006 (Madrid & Macchetto 2006, 2009), and
is of comparable cost or cheaper than the other facilities with which it was compared,
including HST and the 10-meter telescopes.
The SDSS experience is not unique. In the 1990s, the FIRST and NVSS 20 cm
surveys with the VLA, each covering thousands of square degrees, have become absolutely
essential resources for the astronomical community. The WMAP survey of the CMB sky
hasresulted inthe most cited paper inthe history of astronomy (Spergel et al. 2003). The
IRAS survey in the mid-infrared carried out in 1983 is still used by a large community
of astronomers, and has resulted in over 5000 refereed papers, including the second-most
cited paper in astronomy (Schlegel et al. 1998). The ROSAT survey of the sky at soft
X-rays has resulted in over 3500 papers since it was carried out a decade ago. The Two-
Micron All-Sky Survey has yielded fundamentally new insights into the structure of the
Milky Way and the coolest brown dwarfs. There are of course many other examples. In
each case, the data and resulting catalogs have been made available to the community in
a scientifically useful form, and the majority of the papers produced by them were written
by astronomers outside the group of people responsible for producing the survey.
The exponential increase in survey data and the resulting science opportunities has
resulted in the development of a new breed of scientist, the “survey astronomer”. These
include both the people who do the very hard work of developing the infrastructure of
these surveys (the “builders”), and those who analyze these data for exciting science
results (the “miners”). As we will argue below, one of the challenges of the next decade
is to make sure that the work of this important new demographic component of our
community is recognized, and that rewarding career paths are developed for them.
2 The Next Decade
The success of the SDSS and other surveys, and the important scientific questions facing
ustoday, have motivatedastronomerstoplanthenext generationof majorsurveys. Inthe
optical and near-infrared in particular, wide-field cameras are being built for a variety of
telescopes. On-going and planned post-SDSS imaging surveys include the CFHT Legacy
Survey, Pan-STARRS 1 and 4, the Dark Energy Survey, SkyMapper, VISTA, Hyper-
SuprimeCam on Subaru and the Large Synoptic Survey Telescope. These surveys will
go appreciably deeper than SDSS, and will open the time domain to study the variable
universe. The next generation of spectroscopic surveys includes SDSS-III, The Hobby-
Eberly Telescope Dark Energy Experiment (HETDEX), LAMOST, RAVE, several of
the concepts associated with JDEM planning, and WFMOS, the wide-field spectroscopic
capability planned by the Gemini community to beplaced onthe Subaru telescope. There
are similarly ambitious plans in other wavebands; WISE will survey the entire sky from
3 to 20 microns, eROSITA is a planned medium-energy X-ray sky survey, and the radio
community is planning ASKAP as a pathfinder for the Square Kilometer Array, which
will carry out major redshift surveys of HI in galaxies. Note that some of these surveys
use dedicated telescopes, but the majority will work on already existing facilities, and
thus will observe only a fraction of the available clear nights.
These surveys are driven by some of the most important questions in astrophysics
today, as can be seen by the many science white papers submitted to the Decadal Survey.
A partial list of the themes follows:
Cosmological Models, and the Nature of Dark Energy and Dark Matter: Surveys
of the Cosmic Microwave Background, the large-scale distribution of galaxies, the
redshift-distance relation for supernovae, and other probes, have led us to the fas-
cinating situation of having a precise cosmological model for the geometry and
expansion history of the universe, whose principal components we simply do not
understand. A major challenge for the next decade will be to gain a physical under-
standing of dark energy and dark matter. Doing this will require wide-field surveys
ofgravitationallensing, ofthelarge-scaledistributionofgalaxies, andofsupernovae,
as well as next-generation surveys of the CMB (including polarization). Many of
the next generation of surveys will carry out aspects of this research program.
The Dark Ages: One of the best probes we have of the physics of the universe
between redshifts of 30 and 6 is emission and absorption of the 21 cm line of neutral
hydrogen over large angular scales. The technical challenges to mapping this (from
both terrestrial and Galactic foregrounds) are formidable, but a number of surveys
are being developed or planned, including the Mileura Widefield Array, LOFAR,
the SKA, and others.
The Evolution of Galaxies: Surveys carried out with the current generation of 10-
meter-class telescopes in synergy with deep X-ray (Chandra, XMM) and infrared
(Spitzer)imaginghaveresultedintheoutlineofapictureofhowgalaxiesevolvefrom
redshift 7 to the present. We now have a rough estimate, for example, of the star
formation history of the universe, and we are starting to develop a picture of how
the growth of supermassive black holes is coupled to, and influences, the growth of
galaxy bulges. But the development of galaxy morphologies and the dependence on
environment are among many poorly understood questions, and the next generation
of surveys promises to yield insights into these problems.
Structure of the Milky Way: Encoded in the structure, chemical composition and
kinematics of stars in our Milky Way is a history of its formation. Surveys such
as 2MASS and SDSS have demonstrated that the halo has grown by accretion and
cannibalization of companion galaxies, and it is clear that the next steps require
deep wide-field photometry, proper motions, and spectra to put together the story
of how our galaxy formed. This is one of the principal drivers for a variety of
surveys, including SDSS-III, RAVE, GAIA, WFMOS, Pan-STARRS, SkyMapper,
LSST, and LAMOST, among others.
The Variable Universe: Variable and transient phenomena have historically led to
fundamental insights into subjects ranging from the structure of stars to the most
energetic explosions in the universe to cosmology (think SN Ia). Existing surveys
leavelargeamountsofdiscovery parameter space(inwaveband, depth, andcadence)
asyet unexplored, andthenext generationofsurveys isdesigned tostartfillingthese
gaps.
Asteroids in the Solar System: We now know of over 1000 minor planets in or-
bits beyond that of Neptune, and are realizing that they fall into a wide variety of
dynamical classes which encode clues to the formation of the solar system. With
over 100,000 main-belt asteroids with known orbits, we can look for subtle cor-
relations between their physical properties and dynamics. Many asteroids live on
Earth-crossing orbits, and Congress has mandated that NASA catalog 90% of all
potentially hazardous asteroids larger than 140 meters in diameter. Dramatically
increasing the available sample sizes are major goals of Pan-STARRS and LSST,
among other surveys.
Many of these science goals require similar data; in particular, wide-field repeated
deep optical imaging can contribute to nearly all of them. The observing efficiency of a
survey (´etendue) scales with the telescope size, field of view of the instrument, and duty
cycle (fraction of the time on the sky); with high enough´etendue, a single cadence gathers
data that can be used by multiple science projects (Ivezi´c et al. 2008). Many of these
science goalsneed a major increase in spectroscopic survey capability as well; for example,
surveys like DEEP2 and VVDS only whet the appetite for spectroscopic survey volumes
comparable to the SDSS main galaxy sample in several redshift bins to high redshift.
It is also worth mentioning that both the hardware and computational technical chal-
lenges, and the exciting science opportunities, are attracting scientists from other disci-
plines, including high-energyphysics, statistics, andcomputer science. This isawonderful
opportunity for astronomers to learn from, and take advantages of the advances in, these
other fields, and to grow the community of scientists interested in survey science.
3 Lessons Learned, and Recommendations
What have the current generation of surveys, and the planning for the next generation of
surveys, taught us?
Data quality is paramount
Large projects are always starved for time and money, and an obvious temptation is to
cut corners by skimping on data quality: not ferreting out all the systematic errors in
photometry, astrometry or wavelength calibration, not optimizing algorithms to reduce
false positives in the data stream, or not putting sufficient effort into quality assurance
tools to catch problems as they crop up in the data. A lesson that the SDSS team found
itself learning over and over, and is shared by other surveys, is that it is always cheaper
to do things right the first time. Survey requirements are defined by first deciding on the
core science goals, then designing a telescope, instrument and survey strategy that will
meet these goals. One then asks what the data quality that these, together with the laws
of physics allow, and designs rigorous quality validation tools to verify that the data meet
these requirements. Doing this will give a much more uniform dataset and enable science
well beyond that anticipated at the time the survey was designed.
Of course, such an approach will inevitably result in tensions between the need to keep
on budget and schedule, and the desire to do things right. There are no simple answers to
balancing these two, and it means that a survey must budget with realistic contingencies
to allow flexibility when problems inevitably arise.
Software is important
It is a truism that the software necessary to run a major survey is at least as large
an intellectual effort, and requires similar resources, as the design and building of the
telescope and instruments. The software must therefore be included in plans and budgets
from the beginning of any substantial survey, especially those surveys which break new
ground in terms of the quantity or nature of the data they gather. Moreover, writing
the software is not a one-off deal; the survey will continue to need further pipeline and
quality assurance work throughout its lifetime (the final data release paper of SDSS-II
(Abazajian et al. 2008), coming out a decade after first light, included 18 pages describing
the pipeline improvements made in the final year of operations).
Support the people who make the surveys happen
Major surveys involve large groups of talented people working on the instrument, survey
design, software pipelines, observations, databases, and other aspects. These people are
often at early stages of their careers: graduate students, postdocs, or assistant professors.
If they are working on the early stages of a many-year survey, they will not necessar-
ily have the data or the time needed to write first-author papers. Lead-author papers
have traditionally been the currency by which astronomers are traditionally recognized,
and those who work on the survey infrastructure are often at a disadvantage in career
advancement. A major challenge in the next decade will be finding ways to change the
astronomical culture to more directly recognize the tremendous intellectual contribution
of those people working on survey infrastructure, and to understand that papers are not
the only mark of productivity and creativity in the field. This can be done both in
traditional academia, for promotion to faculty positions, and also through non-academic
environments in which people working on survey infrastructure may be supported. As an
example of the latter, consider IPAC, which has played a major role in IRAS and 2MASS,
among other surveys.
It is worth recognizing that an increasing number of astronomers are building suc-
cessful careers by carrying out science enabled by surveys. It was not too long ago that
“armchair astronomer” was a derogatory term meant for those working with data that
they themselves didn’t obtain at the telescope, but a glance at the current generation
of assistant professors around the country reveals many who have made ground-breaking
discoveries using data drawn from large surveys. The best of those people have managed
to work on both science and infrastructure of the surveys; working “in the trenches” is
the best way to understand the data in all its nuances, and therefore be able to exploit it
for all its scientific value.
TheNationalScienceFoundationhasbeenverygenerousinitssupportofsurveys. The
typicalmodelhasbeentosupporttheconstructionandoperationofagivensurvey, leaving
the scientific analysis of the data (i.e., the process that results in papers) to be funded
separately. Weareoftwo mindsaboutthis. Ontheonehand, surveys areusuallydesigned
with very specific scientific goals, and cannot claim to succeed until those goals aremet; in
this context, funding the analysis to the point of completed papers makes sense for many
projects. NASA tends to operate this way, for both surveys and observational facilities;
the grant that enabled the construction of WMAP and its resulting data products also
funds the core scientific papers the team writes. Giving the young people working on
the infrastructure of the project some science support can be an important boost to their
careers. We have seen cases in which survey builders apply for grants to do the science
that their surveys that they have spent the previous decade bringing to fruition were
designed to do, only to be turned down with referees remarking on their apparent lack of
published papers in the previous five years! With this in mind, it might make sense to set
aside funds specifically for survey builders to reap the scientific benefits of the data that
they helped create.
On the other hand, as we argue below, most of the good science for any given survey
will ultimately be done by people outside the collaboration (i.e., the “miners”), and the
existing grants mechanism within the NSF has worked adequately to support those people
(given the limitations of the huge oversubscription ratio that the NSF grants program
faces).
The data must be made public
We have already emphasized that major surveys have scientific value far beyond that for
which the surveys were originally designed. This means, in particular, that the pipelines
and databases should be developed with the general user in mind, not just those working
on the core scientific goals of the project. Moreover, this means that a survey will enable
far more science than the builders of the survey will be able to carry out themselves.
Therefore a survey must plan to make its data and software pipelines public and properly
documented ina formthat allows thefull scientific community to use them. Aproprietary
period, whereby those who built the project get exclusive access to the data, may be
considered necessary in the beginning as a motivation for people to put in the work;
big projects will also need time to analyze their data and check its quality. But it is
hard to imagine circumstances in which this proprietary period should be longer than
a year or two. And of course, proprietary periods make no sense for synoptic surveys,
where rapid follow-up on a wide variety of other facilities is key. Indeed, the trend in the
field is towards “open source/open data”, that is, surveys with no proprietary period for
the data, and with publicly available software (a welcome trend for all astronomy, not
just surveys!). Despite the lack of exclusive privileged access to the data, those people
working onthe survey itself have an inside track; their intimate knowledge of the data and
survey characteristics withallitsquirks offersasignificant advantageingettinginteresting
results.
Major surveys are increasingly a resource for more than the broad astronomical com-
munity: they are gathering growing interest from the general public, from school children
to interested amateurs. Data from surveys are being incorporated into K-12 classroom ac-
tivities, and websites like Google Sky and Microsoft’s WorldWide Telescope have reached
millions. The overwhelming success of the Galaxy Zoo project , which has involved over
150,000 members of the public to gain real scientific insights into the nature of galax-
ies, tells us that the public and the astronomical community can gain both from active
outreach, and from exploring creative ways to make public databases accessible to non-
professionals.
Needless tosay, distributing datapublicly doesnot comeforfree; aswe nowargue, this
requires sophisticated databases and extensive documentation, which must be budgeted
for when the survey is first designed.
Data distribution and archiving should be built in from the be-
We live in the era of large databases. The surveys of the current decade have data sizes
measured in terabytes, and those of the next decade will exceed petabytes. This is orders
of magnitude more data than can usefully be examined as flat files, or which can easily be
distributed by putting it online for people to download. Databases for distributing and
examining the data must be built into the survey plans from the beginning, and must
be designed for the sort of scientific analyses that people will do; the database has to
be general-purpose enough to allow for scientific projects that were unanticipated by the
survey designers at the beginning of the project. This is perhaps an obvious statement for
the purposes of making the data public, but it is just as crucial for distributing the data
within a collaboration. Modern surveys are often carried out with consortia spanning the
globe, and the researchers at the various member institutions will need ways to access
the data as early as possible. Indeed, given the sizes of the next generation of surveys, it
becomes impractical to pull all the data one needs for many scientific analyses to one’s
home institution; surveys have to plan to provide computational power along with the
data themselves to the end scientific user.
This remains an issue long after the survey is completed; the survey data will have
archival value for decades. Astronomers will want to use the astrometry to measure
proper motions with very long time baselines and to look for variable phenomena of all
sorts, and of course they will continue to mine the data for various scientific projects .
Given the rapidity with which computer and data storage systems change and become
obsolete (Rothenberg 1995), long-term data archiving becomes a real challenge, and one
that requires continuous attention.
Real project management is important
Modern surveys are big, expensive projects involving large numbers of astronomers who
are typically spread between a number of institutions. Such projects are much too large
to be managed by the astronomers who lead the projects scientifically, and they need
professional project management to keep track of budgets, schedules, and the responsi-
bilities of the different institutions. There will be inevitable tensions between the project
managers and the scientists who are ensuring the quality of the data, for which there
are no easy answers. Keeping communication lines open and maintaining mutual respect
between distant collaborators is a continuous challenge, best met with archived e-mail
exploders, frequent phone conferences, and clear lines of authority and statements about
requirements and responsibilities. Face-to-face meetings are essential, and should be held
at least twice a year.
3Awonderfulexampleoftheneedforverylong-termarchivesmaybefoundinthetitleofapresentation
atthe lastAAS meeting, Front-line Recurrent Nova Science Requires Century Old Data (Schaefer2009).
Synergy between surveys, and with observatories
The intercomparison of surveys allows science that would be impossible with any one
survey alone. This comparison can be temporal (e.g., comparing the proper motion of an
object between the POSS and the SDSS; Munn et al. 2004) or across wavelength regimes
(e.g., looking for long-term optical counterparts to gamma-ray bursts). The standards
of the Virtual Observatory give us a mechanism to make cross-survey comparisons easy,
and most planned surveys intend to follow these standards. Indeed, many of the most
important astronomical problems we face require multiple probes via interlocking surveys.
AmajorthemeofthenextgenerationofCMBmappingsurveys, forexample, willbecross-
correlating with surveys in the X-ray, ultraviolet, and optical to ameliorate foreground
contamination, and to measure the Integrated Sachs-Wolfe Effect, the Sunyaev-Zel’dovich
effect, and the gravitational lensing of the CMB by foreground structure.
The discoveries made in surveys are often best exploited by detailed study with other
telescopes. Unusual objects from an imaging survey will require follow-up spectroscopy
to determine their physical nature; one can imagine, for example, a great deal of synergy
of this sort between the LSST and the GSMT. Similarly, transient objects such as the
gamma-ray bursts which synoptic surveys will find, require multi-wavelength follow-up
over an extended period of time, to allow these discoveries to be placed in astrophysical
context. We are particularly excited about plans for arrays of robotically controlled
moderate telescopes, designed specifically for following up transients found in the next
generation of synoptic surveys.
4 Concluding Remarks
Based on our experience with the surveys of the 1980s through the present, the major as-
tronomical surveys of the next decade have the potential to revolutionize our understand-
ing in many areas of modern astrophysics. In doing so, they will involve an appreciable
fraction of the worldwide astronomical community, at institutions from small liberal-arts
colleges to major research universities. The non-proprietary nature of data from these
surveys means that students and faculty are not limited by a lack of access to large ob-
serving facilities in order to carry out meaningful and cutting-edge research. Thus the
current and next generation of large surveys are serving as a democratizing force in as-
tronomy, helping to level the playing field for researchers and students at smaller and less
well-endowed institutions. Moreover, there are tremendous opportunities to involve the
general public in surveys, both in educational activities and in real scientific enterprises
such as Galaxy Zoo.
Survey astronomy will play a major role in the direction and development of astro-
nomical research in the next decade. But surveys are not easy: doing them well requires
tremendousattentiontodataquality, andasubstantialallocationofresourcesforsoftware,
database/data distribution systems, documentation, and long-term archiving. Carrying
themoffrequiresinputfromastronomerswithaverylargerangeofskills, including survey,
telescope, and instrument design, software, databases, and scientific analysis. As surveys
become ever more a part of the astronomical landscape, our community has to find ways
to support the growing community of scientists who make them happen, and to fund the
scientific exploitation of these data. There is a real demographic shift in the community,
with more and more scientists falling under the rubric of “survey astronomer”, both the
builders and the miners. This is a trend we should welcome and nurture, while making
sure that those data miners are fully experienced in, and cognizant of, the inner workings
of the surveys that they use, and that survey builders are given the scientific support they
need to exploit the surveys they help create.
Abazajian, K. et al. 2008, arXiv:0812.0649
Harwit, M. 1981, Cosmic Discovery (Sussex: Basic Books)
• Ivezi´c, Zˇ. et al. 2008, arXiv:0805.2366
Kellerman, K., & Sheets, J. 1983, Serendipitous Discoveries in Radio Astronomy (Green
Bank: NRAO)
Madrid, J.P. & Macchetto, D. 2006, BAAS, 38, 1286
Madrid, J.P. & Macchetto, D. 2009, arXiv:0901.4552
Munn, J.A. et al. 2004, AJ, 127, 3034
Rothenberg, J. 1995, Scientific American, January issue, page 42
Schaefer, B.E. 2009, BAAS, #213, #320.05
Schlegel, D.J, Finkbeiner, D.P., & Davis, M. 1998, ApJ, 500, 525
Spergel, D.N. et al. 2003, ApJS, 148, 175