You Can Run, You Can Hide:
The Epidemiology and Statistical Mechanics of Zombies
Alexander A. Alemi,1,∗ Matthew Bierbaum,1,† Christopher R. Myers,1,2,‡ and James P. Sethna1,§
1Laboratory of Atomic and Solid State Physics, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853
2Institute of Biotechnology, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York
(Dated: June 5, 2015)
We use a popular fictional disease, zombies, in order to introduce techniques used in modern
epidemiologymodelling,andideasandtechniquesusedinthenumericalstudyofcriticalphenomena.
Weconsidervariantsofzombiemodels,fromfullyconnectedcontinuoustimedynamicstoafullscale
exact stochastic dynamic simulation of a zombie outbreak on the continental United States. Along
the way, we offer a closed form analytical expression for the fully connected differential equation,
and demonstrate that the single person per site two dimensional square lattice version of zombies
lies in the percolation universality class. We end with a quantitative study of the full scale US
outbreak, including the average susceptibility of different geographical regions.
PACSnumbers: 87.23.Cc,87.23.Ge,87.10.Mn,87.15.Zg
I. INTRODUCTION he makes the connection to disease explicit, describing
zombies as the result of a hypothetical virus, Solanum.
Zombies captivate the imagination. The idea of a Zombies form a wonderful model system to illus-
deadly disease that not only kills its hosts, but turns tratemodernepidemiologicaltoolsdrawnfromstatistical
those hosts into deadly vectors for the disease is scary mechanics, computational chemistry, and mathematical
enoughtofuelanentiregenreofhorrorstoriesandfilms. modeling. Theyalsoformanidealvehicleforpublicout-
Butatitsroot,zombismisjustthat–a(fictional)disease reach: the Center for Disease Control uses preparation
– and so should be amenable to the same kind of anal- for a zombie apocalypse [17, 18] to promote emergency
ysis and study that we use to combat more traditional preparedness. In this work, we will build up to a full-
diseases. scale simulation of a zombie outbreak in the continen-
Much scholarly attention has focused on more tradi- tal United States, with realistic values drawn from the
tional human diseases [10], but recently, academic atten- literature and popular culture (section V, simulation ac-
tionhasturnedabitofthoughtontozombiesasaunique cessible online [14]). Before that, we shall use statistical
and interesting modification of classic disease models. mechanicstoscrutinizethethresholdofzombievirulence
One of the first academic accounts of zombies was the thatdetermineswhetherhumanitysurvives(sectionIV).
2009 article by Munz et al. [12], in which an early form Preceding that, we shall show how methods from com-
of a compartmental model of zombism was introduced. putational chemistry can be used to simulate every indi-
Since then, there have been several interesting papers vidual heroic encounter between a human and a zombie
published including works that perform Bayesian esti- (section III). But we begin by describing and analyzing
mations of the zombie disease parameters [22], look at a simple model of zombies (the SZR model) – the sim-
howemotionalfactorsimpactthespreadofzombies[16], plest and most natural generalization to the classic SIR
using zombies to gain insight into models of politics [9], (Susceptible-Infected-Recovered) model used to describe
or into the interaction of a zombie epidemic and social infectious disease spread in epidemiology.
dynamics[11,19]. Additionalessayscanbefoundintwo
books collecting academic essays centered around zom-
bism [4, 20]
II. SZR MODEL
Besides the academic papers, zombies have seen a
resurgence in fiction. Of particular note are the works
of Max Brooks, including a detailed Zombie Survival We start with a simple model of zombies, the SZR
Guide [1], as well as an oral history of the first zom- model. There are three compartments in the model: S
bie war [2] in a hypothesized post outbreak world. In representsthesusceptiblepopulation, theuninfectedhu-
both these works Brooks provides a rich source of infor- mans; Z represents the infected state, zombies; and R
mation about zombies and their behavior. In particular, represents our removed state, in this case zombies that
havebeenterminatedbyhumans(canonicallybydestroy-
ing their brain so as to render them inoperable). There
are two transitions possible: a human can become in-
∗ aaa244@cornell.edu fected if they are bitten by a zombie, and a zombie can
† mkb72@cornell.edu be destroyed by direct action by a human. There are
‡ c.myers@cornell.edu two parameters governing these transitions: β, the bite
§ sethna@lassp.cornell.edu parameter determines the probability by which a zombie
]EP.oib-q[
3v40110.3051:viXra
will bite a human if they are in contact, and κ the kill Given the analytical solution, it is clear to see that the
parameter that gives the probability that a human kills sign of P governs whether there will eventually be hu-
the zombie. Rendered as a system of coupled differential mans or zombies in the final state. If α < 1,P > 0,
equations, we obtain, for a particular interaction site: so
Notice that these interactions are density dependent, in andthesystemwillalwaysflowtoafinalstatecomposed
the sense that the rate at which we convert humans to of entirely zombies and no humans, where P denotes the
zombiesandkillzombiesisdependentonthetotalcount number of zombies that survive.
of zombies and humans in this site. This is in contrast Ifhowever, α>1, humansaremoreeffectiveatkilling
with most models of human diseases, which frequently zombiesthanzombiesareatbitinghumans. Withenough
adopt frequency dependent interactions wherein S,Z,R zombiesintheinitialstate, wecanstillconvertallofthe
would have been interpreted as the fraction of the popu- humans before they have time to kill all of the zombies.
lation in the corresponding state. We can recast the dynamics in terms of the variables
This distinction will become stark once we consider P ≡Z+(1−α)S and χ=S/Z to gain further insights.
large simulations with very inhomogeneous populations. First note that:
Byclaimingthatzombiescanbemodeledbyasinglebite
parameterβ thatitselfisarateperpersonperunittime, =P(cid:48) =Z(cid:48)+(1−α)S(cid:48) (13)
we are claiming that a zombie in a block with 5,000 peo-
ple would be one hundred times as effective at infecting =(1−α) −(1−α) =0 (14)
new zombies as a zombie in a block with fifty people;
similarlythezombieinquestionwouldbekilledonehun- so P is a constant of the dynamics. As for χ:
dred times faster. This would seem false for an ordinary S(cid:48) SZ(cid:48)
disease like the flu, but in the case of zombies, we argue χ(cid:48) = − (15)
thatitisappropriate. Zombiesdirectlyseekouthoststo
infect, at which point the human and zombie engage in =− −(1−α) (16)
a duel to the (un)death.
To facilitate analysis we can nondimensionalize the =− (1+(1−α))χ (17)
equations by choosing a relevant population size N, and
recasting in terms of the dimensionless time parameter =− χ (18)
τ =tβN and dimensionless virulence α=κ/β N
Hence if we choose N = |P|, we end up with the very
=− simple dynamics:
=(1−α) (4)
dR SZ (20)
Unlikeatraditionaldisease(e.g.,asmodeledbySIR), +χ P <0
for the zombie model, we have a stable configuration (cid:40)
when either the human or the zombie population is de- χ(τ)= =χ (22)
feated(S =0orZ =0). Furthermore,unlikeSIR,SZR Z(τ) 0 e+τ P <0
admits an analytical solution, assuming R(0) = 0, and
with Z 0 ≡Z(0),S 0 ≡S(0): χ 0 ≡ Z 0 (23)
P ≡Z +(1−α)S (5) Here we see that the dynamics is simply an exponential
S P decay or increase in the ratio of humans to zombies χ=
µ≡ 0(1−α)= −1 (6) S/Z. The final populations in either case are easy to see
0 0 due to the conservation of P. If zombies win we have
Z(τ)=P −f(τ) (8) And if humans win
1. SIR model
This dynamics should be compared to the similarly
nondimensionlized density-dependent SIR model:
(cid:18) (cid:19)
Here τ = tβN as above, but µ = ν/(βN) = R−1, be-
causeintheSIR modelourinfectedpopulationrecovers
on itsown. This is contrasted with SZR, where thepro-
cess of infection and recovery have the same functional
form,dependingontheproductSZ. Thisµistheinverse
FIG.1. DeterministictrajectoriesfortheSIRandSZRmod-
of the usual R parameter used to denote the infectivity
0 els with an initial population of 200 people, 199 uninfected
of the SIR model, here used to make a closer analogy and 1 infected. The (susceptible, infected, removed) popula-
to the SZR model. It is this parameter that principally tion is shown in (blue, red, black) (color online). The SZR
governs whether we have an outbreak or not. Unlike the results are solid lines while the SIR results are lighter lines.
α parameter for SZR which depends only on our dis- For both models τ = tβN where N was taken to be the to-
easeconstantsβ,κ,therelevantvirulenceforthedensity tal population. For the SZR model α was chosen to be 0.6,
dependent SIR model (µ) has a population dependence. whilefortheSIRmodelµwaschosentobe0.6toshowsim-
ilar dynamics. Notice that in this case, in SZR the human
Notice again that while the only stable configuration
population disappears and only zombies remain in the end,
fortheSIRmodeliswhenthereisnoinfectedpopulation
while the SIR model is self-limiting, and only a fraction of
(I =0),theSZRmodelisstablewheneitherthehumans
the population ever becomes infected.
or zombies are depleted (S =0 or Z =0).
The SIR model does not admit a closed form analyt-
ical solution, but we can find a parametric solution by
dividing the first equation by the third, revealing.
Using the observation that in the limit of infinite time,
no infected population can persist, we can choose N to
be the total population
andsoobtainatranscendentalequationfortherecovered
population at long times.
R ∞ =N −S 0
UnliketheSZRmodel,hereweseethatnomatterhow
virulent the disease is, the epidemic will be self-limiting,
FIG. 2. Example Gillespie dynamics for the SIR and SZR
and there will always have some susceptibles left at the
models with the same parameter settings as Figure 1. The
end of the outbreak. This is a sharp qualitative differ- (susceptible,infected,removed)populationisshownin(blue,
encebetweenzombiesandmoretraditionalSIR models, red, black) (color online). The SZR results are solid lines
arising from the fact that the “recovery” of zombies is while the SIR results are lighter lines. The two simulations
itself dependent on the presence of susceptibles. were run with the same seed so as to match their dynamics
Tovisuallycomparethedifference,inFigure1wehave at early times.
shown deterministic trajectories for both SIR and SZR
for selected parameter values.
interesting when we try to model discrete populations.
Bytreatingthenumberofzombiesandhumansascontin-
III. STOCHASTIC SIMULATION uousvariablesinthelastsection,weareignoringtheran-
dom fluctuations that arise in small populations: even a
While most previous studies modeling zombie popula- ferociouslyvirulentzombieinfestationmightfortuitously
tion dynamics have been deterministic, things get more be killed early on by happy accident. Similar problems
ariseinchemicalreactions: reactionsinvolvingtwotypes
of proteins in a cell can be described by chemical reac-
tionkineticsevolvingtheirconcentrations(likeourSZR
equations 4), but if the number of such proteins is small,
accuratepredictionsmustsimulatetheindividualbinary
reactions (each zombie battling each human). Interpret-
ingourSZR transitionsasreactionrates, givesusasys-
tem akin to a chemical reaction with two possible tran-
sitions:
When a human and zombie are in contact, the prob-
FIG.3. Distributionforfinalzombiesover100,000stochastic
ability of a bite in a small period of time is given by
trajectories with the same parameters as Figure 2. Not pic-
the bite rate and the size of the populations of the two
turedarethe60%ofrunsthatendwithnozombiesinthefinal
species (βSZdt), and similarly for the probability of a
state. Compare these to the analytical result, in which the
kill. In order to efficiently simulate this dynamics, we
finalpopulationofzombieswouldbe81withnopossibilityof
use the Gillespie algorithm [7], which efficiently uses the surviving humans.
computertosequentiallycalculatetheresultofeachone-
on-one battle.
The stochasticity gives more character to the simula-
tion. The fully connected continuous dynamics modeled
bythedifferentialequationisstraightforward: eitherthe
humans win and kill all of the zombies, or the zombies
winandbiteallofthehumans. Whilethecontinuousap-
proximation may be appropriate at intermediate stages
of the infection where the total population is large and
there are a non-trivial number of infected individuals,
we will eventually be interested in simulating an actual
outbreakonaninhomogeneouspopulationlattice,where
every new site will start with a single infected individ-
ual. But even though we may be interested in modeling
the outbreak case (α < 1), we would like to allow the
possibility that the humans manage to defeat the out-
break before it really takes off. The stochastic Gillespie
FIG. 4. The observed fraction of simulations that end in
dynamics allows for this possibility.
an extinction for the zombie outbreak, for 1,000 runs of 104
In Figure 2 we have shown an example of a single
individuals at various values of α (eqn. 33). The observed
stochastic simulation using the same parameter settings
extinction probabilities agree with the expectation that they
asthoseusedinFigure1. Thestochastictrajectoryover- should go as α, here shown as the dashed line. This is the
alltrackstheanalyticresult,butatpointsinthesimula- same behavior as the SIR model.
tiontheremaybemoreorfewerzombiesthananticipated
if the dice fall that way.
Another implication of stochastic dynamics is that it before it bites anyone, we guarantee extinction. Other-
is not always guaranteed that a supercritical (α < 1) wise,thezombiewillbiteanotherhuman,atwhichpoint
outbreakwilltakeovertheentiresusceptiblepopulation. there will be two independent zombie lines that need to
FortheparametersettingsusedinFigure1and2,namely be extinguished, which will occur with probability P e 2 xt .
α = 0.6 with a population of 200 and one infected indi- This allows us to solve:
vidual to start, the zombies win only 40% of the time. κ β
Additionally, the number of zombies we end with is not P ext = β+κ 1+ β+κ P e 2 xt (32)
fixed, as shown in Figure 3. κ
In fact, we can solve exactly for the probability P ext P ext = β =α . (33)
that an α < 1 simulation will go extinct in the limit
of large populations, using an argument drawn from the The probability of extinction is just given by our dimen-
traditional SIR literature. At the very beginning of the sionless inverse virulence α. In Figure 4 we have shown
simulation, there is only one zombie, who will be killed the observed extinction probabilities for 1,000 Gillespie
with probability κ/(β +κ). If the first zombie is killed runs of a population of 104 individuals at various values
of α, and overlaid our expected dependence of α. left for both the SZR model (top row) and SIR model
This same extinction probability (P = µ = R−1) is (bottom row) for different parameter combinations of α
observed for the SIR model [10]. This is not a coinci- and the initial population. In all cases, the N parameter
dence. In precisely the limit that is important for study- waschosentobe100. Foreachbox, 1,000independently
ingtheprobabilityofanextinctionevent,namelyatearly seeded stochastic trajectories were calculated until com-
times with very large populations, the SZR model and pletion. Looking at the SZR results in the top row, we
SIRareeffectivelythesame,sincethepopulationofsus- can see that the dynamics is fairly independent of popu-
ceptibles (S) is nearly constant. Writing S as S −δS, lationsizeoncethepopulationsizegetsabovearound100
we have: individuals. The population dependence for lower popu-
lationsizesisaneffectofthestochasticity. Wecanclearly
dZ S Z (δS)Z
=(1−α) 0 −(1−α) (34) see a transition in the susceptible population near α=1
(cid:18) (cid:19) corresponding to where our continuous dynamics would
dI µN S I I
= 1− 0 −(µN +δS) . (35) show a sharp boundary. Here the boundary is blurred,
0 again due to the stochasticity. The final dead zombie
Here as δS → 0, the two models are the same with α = population R remains small for all values of α; for ex-
µN/S , another indication that the density dependent tremely virulent zombies α (cid:28) 1, very few will be killed
SIR model’s virulence is dependent on population size. by the humans before all of the humans are converted,
To get a better sense of the effect of the stochasticity, while in the other extreme few zombies are created so
we can look at the mean fractional population in each there are few to be killed.
state for various settings of α and choices for initial pop- ContrasttheseresultswiththedensitydependentSIR
ulation size. The results are shown in Figure 5. dynamics shown in the second row. There can be no in-
fectedindividualsleftintheend,soonlythefractionofS
andRinthefinalstateareshown. Thetwotransitionsin
SIR couple differently to the population of infected and
susceptible. While our nondimensionalized SZR model
has Z(cid:48) =(1−α)SZ/N, our nondimensionlized SIR has
I(cid:48) = (S/N −µ)I. This creates a very strong population
dependence. ThetransitionobservedintheS population
islargelyindependentofµ,exceptontheverysmallend.
Whenwemovetoinhomogeneouspopulationlatticesthis
means that for the density dependent SIR model, the
most important parameter governing whether a particu-
larsitehasabreak-outinfectionisthepopulationofthat
site on the lattice.
IV. CRITICAL BEHAVIOR OF LATTICE
Until now, we have considered fully connected, well-
mixed populations, where any infected individual can
infect any susceptible individual with equal probability.
But surely, a zombie in New York cannot bite someone
in Los Angeles. Investigation of the spatial spread of in-
FIG. 5. Mean final states as a function of model param- fectious diseases is an important application of network
eters. One thousand different simulations are run for each science; social diseases spread among intimate contacts,
cell. Each simulation starts with a single zombie or infected Ebola spreads by personal contact in a network of care-
individual. The runs are run until they naturally terminate, givers,influenzacanbespreadbydirectcontact,through
eitherbecausethesusceptiblepopulationisdeleted,thezom-
theairorbyhand-to-mouth,hand-to-eyeorhand-to-nose
biepopulationisgone,ortherearenomoreinfectedindivid-
contact after exposure to a contaminated surface. For
uals. Each cell is colored according to the mean fraction of
most diseases, ‘long bonds’ dominate the propagation to
the population occurring in each state. The top row is for
distant sites [13]; airplane flights take Ebola to new con-
SZRsimulationsandthebottomrowisforSIRsimulations.
InbothcasesN ischosentobe100. Herethesharpcontrast tinents. Zombies do not fly airplanes, so our model is
betweendensity-dependentSZR andSIR ismadeapparent. closer in spirit to the spread of certain agricultural infes-
Notice that density-dependent SIR is very strongly popula- tations,wherethediseasespreadsacrossalatticeofsites
tion dependent. alongthetwo-dimensionalsurfaceoftheEarth(although
not in those cases where pathogens are transported long
Plottedarethefractionalpopulationsinthefinalstate distances by atmospheric currents).
To begin, we will consider a two-dimensional square humans) of all sizes in the figure. This reflects the prox-
lattice,whereeachsitecontainsasingleindividual. Each imity to the threshold: the battle between zombies and
individualisallowedtobeinoneofthreestates: S,Z,or humans is so evenly matched, that one gets an emergent
R. Theinfectionspreadsthroughnearestneighborbonds scale invarianceinthesurvivalpatterns. Thisisinkeep-
only. That is, a zombie can bite or be killed by any ingwithstudiesoftheSIRmodel,whichshowsasimilar
susceptible individuals in each of the four neighboring critical behavior and phase transition [8].
sites.
To make direct contact with our zombie model, the
rate at which an susceptible cell is bitten is given by βZ
where Z is the number of zombie neighbors (since S is
one), and the rate at which a zombie site is killed is κS
where S is the number of susceptible neighbors.
Because all state transitions in the SZR model de-
pendonlyonZ–S contacts, forcomputationalefficiency,
we need only maintain a queue of all Z–S bonds, that is
connections along which a human and zombie can in-
teract. At each step of the simulation, one of these
Z–S bonds is chosen at random, and with probability
β/(β+κ) = 1/(1+α), the human is bitten, marking it
as a zombie. We can then query its neighbors, and for
all of them that are human, we can add a Z–S link to
our queue. With probability κ/(β+κ) = α/(1+α) the
zombie is killed, removing any of its links to neighbor-
ing humans from the queue. This process matches the
stochastic dynamics of our zombie model operating on
the lattice.
Simulating zombie outbreaks on fixed lattices, there is
qualitatively different behavior for small α and large α.
When α is large, the zombies do not spread very far, al-
waysbeingdefeatedbytheirneighboringhumans. When
FIG.6. Exampleclusterresultingfromthesinglepopulation
α is very small, the zombies seem to grow until they in- per site square lattice zombie model with periodic boundary
fect the entire lattice. This suggests evidence of a phase conditions near the critical point α =0.437344654(21) on a
transition. Technically, the presence of a phase transi- lattice of size 2048×2048.
tion would mean that if we could simulate our model on
an infinite lattice, there should be some critical α (α c ), Systems near critical points with this kind of scale
abovewhichanyoutbreakwillnecessarilyterminate. Be- invariance fall into universality classes. Different sys-
low the critical value, there is the possibility (assuming tems (say, a real disease outbreak and a simple com-
the infection does not die out) of having the infection putational model) can in many ways act precisely the
grow without bound, infecting a finite fraction of indi- sameonlargescalesneartheirtransitions(allowingusto
viduals in the limit that the lattice size becomes infinite. predict behavior without knowing the details of zombie-
The SIR model has been demonstrated to undergo such human (anti)social interactions). The SIR model on a
aphasetransition,andweexpectthezombiemodeldoes two-dimensionallatticewithasinglepersonpersitefalls
as well. into the percolation universality class [3], though details
The study of critical phenomena includes a series of of its cluster growth can differ [21]. Given that the SZR
techniquesandanalysesthatenableustostudytheprop- model has two second order couplings, it is of interest
ertiesofphasetransitionsevenonfinitelattices. Amajor whether it falls into the same percolation universality
theme of critical phase transitions is the importance of class.
critical points–whereasystemistuned(herebyvarying To extract the scaling behavior of our zombie infesta-
α) to a value separating qualitatively different behaviors tion, we study the distribution P(s,α), the probability
(here separating low-infectivity transient zombie infesta- that a single zombie will generate an outbreak of size s
tions from a potentially world-spanning epidemic). At at inverse virulence α. (An outbreak will be a fractal
critical points, the system can show scale free behavior; cluster in two dimensions, with ragged boundaries if it
there is no natural length scale to the dynamics, and dies out before reaching the entire world.) At α = α
various physical parameters will usually be governed by where the zombies and humans are equally matched, we
power laws (see below). have an emergent scale invariance. A large outbreak will
With α chosen to be precisely at the critical value, appear to almost stop several times – it can be viewed
we indeed see a giant component with fractal structure as a sequence of medium-sized outbreaks triggering one
(Fig. 6). Note that there are holes (surviving pockets of another. Medium-sized outbreaks are composed of small
outbreaks,whichareinturncomposedoftinyoutbreaks.
At threshold, each of these scales (large, medium, small)
is related to the lower scale (medium, small, tiny) in the
same fashion. Let us oversimplify to say that at critical-
ity an outbreak of size 3s is formed by what would have
been three smaller outbreaks of size s which happened
to trigger one another, and these in turn are formed by
what would have been three outbreaks of size s/3. If the
probabilities and form of this mutual triggering is the
same at each scale, then it would not surprise us that
many properties of the outbreaks would be the same, af-
ter rescaling the sizes by a factor of three. In particular,
weexpectatthecriticalpointtofindtheprobabilitiesof
outbreaks of size s to be related to the probabilities at
size s/3 by some factor f:
This formula implies that P(s,α ) ∝ s−τ, with τ =
log(1/f)/log(3). The distribution of epidemic infection
rates is a power law.
Figure 7 shows a thorough test of this dependence for
our zombie model, following a procedure akin to that
of reference [21]. We simulated a zombie outbreak on
a two-dimensional lattice with periodic boundary condi-
tions starting with a single zombie. With the outbreak
sizes following a power law distribution, the probability
that a site belongs to a cluster of size n is P =sn , so
that at the critical point P ∼ s1−τ. Integrating from s
to ∞, the probability that a point belongs to a cluster
of at least s in size (P ) should at the critical point it- FIG. 7. The cumulative distribution of epidemic sizes for
self follow a powerlaw: P ∼ s2−τ. To find our critical thetwodimensionalzombiemodelnearthecriticalvirulence.
point α c , we ran many simulations until our integrated The critical point found was α c =0.437344654(21). The top
cluster size distribution followed a power law, using the plot shows the probability of a site being in a cluster of at
least s in size (P ). The fact that it forms a straight line
interpolation methods of reference [21] to get a precise ≥s
on a log-log plot indicates that P is a power law, and the
estimate of the critical point. ≥s
slope is 2−τ. For comparison, the red (color online) line
For zombies on a two dimensional lattice, this critical
shows the powerlaw corresponding to the percolation critical
point occurs at α = 0.437344654(21), the resulting in-
c exponent: τ =187/91. Thebottomplotshowsthesamedata
tegrated cluster size distribution is shown at the top of times sτ−2 using the exponent from percolation theory. The
Fig.7. Percolationtheorypredictsτ =187/91intwodi- plot is very nearly flat suggesting the percolation exponent
mensions,andwetestthatpredictioninthebottompart accurately describes the zombie model.
of Fig. 7. Here, if we were precisely at the critical point
and the SZR model is in the percolation universality
class, with infinite statistics we would have asymptoti-
cally a perfectly straight line. Notice the small vertical
scale: ourfractionalfluctuationsarelessthan0.1%,while
tal behavior near the transition; one or two decades of
our experimental results vary over several order of mag-
scalingshouldbeconvincing. Butitturnsoutthatthere
nitude. Theclearagreementconvincinglyshowsthatthe
are multiple different universality classes for this kind of
zombie model on the two dimensional lattice is in the
invasionprocess,andtheirexponentsτ andD arerather
percolation university class.
similar. And a small error in α can produce large shifts
As an additional check, we computed the fractal di- c
in the resulting fits for τ and D – demanding efficient
mension of our clusters near the critical point using box
programming and fast computers to achieve a definitive
counting, a distribution for which is shown in Figure 8.
answer.
We find a fractal dimension D = 1.8946(14), compared
to the exact percolation value of D =91/48=1.895833.
Why did we need such an exhaustive test (many We conclude that the single person per site zombie
decades of scaling, many digits in our estimate of α )? infestation,nearthecriticalvirulence,willonlonglength
On the one hand, a much smaller simulation could have scales develop spatial infestation patterns that are well
toldusthattherewasemergentscaleinvarianceandfrac- described by two-dimensional percolation theory.
occupied grid sites is 420, the median population of an
occupied site is 13.
FIG.8. Ahistogramoftheobservedfractaldimensionofthe
zombieepidemicclustersasmeasuredbyboxcounting. These
give a measured value of D = 1.8946(14), consist with the
exactpercolationfractaldimensionofD=91/48=1.895833.
V. US SCALE SIMULATION OF ZOMBIE
Having explored the general behavior of the zombie
model analytically, stochastically and on homogeneous
single person lattices, we are prepared to simulate a full
scale zombie outbreak.
A. Inhomogeneous Population Lattice
We will attempt to simulate a zombie outbreak occur-
ringintheUnitedStates. Thiswillbesimilartoourlat-
tice simulation, but with an inhomogeneous population
lattice. We based our lattice on code available for creat-
ing a “dot map” based off the 2010 US Census data [15].
The2010Censusreleasedcensusblockleveldata,detail-
ing the location and population of 11,155,486 different
FIG. 9. A 1500×900 grid of the 2010 US Census Data. The
blocks in the United States. To cast these blocks down above figure gives the raw results. Notice the multitude of
to a square grid, we assigned each of the 306,675,005 re- squareswithnopeopleinthemintheWesternUnitedStates.
ported individuals a random location inside their corre- The bottom figure shows the resulting map after 6 steps of
sponding census block, then gridded the population into binary closing added to the original population.
a 1500 × 900 grid based on latitude and longitude co-
ordinates. The resulting population lattice can be seen
in the top half of Figure 9. You will see the presence
of many empty grids, especially throughout the western
UnitedStates. Thisdisconnectstheeastandwestcoasts
in a clearly artificial pattern – our zombies in practice
willgraduallywanderthroughtheemptygridpoints. To
addinlatticeconnectivity,wedidsixiterationsofbinary
closing (an image processing technique) on the popula- B. Augmented Model
tion lattice and added it to the original. The effect was
to add a single person to many vacant sites, taking our
total population up to 307,407,336. The resulting popu- In order to more ‘realistically’ simulate a zombie out-
lationmapisshowninthebottomhalfofFigure 9. This break, we made two additions to our simplified SZR
grid size corresponds to roughly 3 km square boxes. The model. The first was to add a latent state E (Exposed).
most populated grid site is downtown New York City, The second was to introduce motion for the zombies.
with 299,616 individuals. The mean population of the Considered as a system of differential equations, we now
have: β 3.6×10−3 /hr/person
i i i κ αβ
Z˙ =νE −κS Z (39) µ 0.0914 /hr
Z˙ i =µ (cid:88) Z j −µZ i (41) T ti A on B s L o E fa I. zo T m h b e ie p o a u ra t m br e e t a e k r . s T ch h o e s s e e n pa fo r r am o e u t r er U s S w -s e c r a e l c e h s o i s m en ul t a o -
(cid:104)j(cid:105) correspond with standard depictions of zombies and simple
physical estimations explained in the main text.
or as a set of reactions:
(S ,E )− β −− S −i Z −→i (S −1,E +1) (42) transitionsofaround11hours, whichforazombiestum-
bling around a 3 km block agrees with our intuitions.
(Z ,E )−−−−−i→(Z +1,E −1) (43) Finally, to set a rate for our bite parameter, we similarly
assume that the zombies are undergoing random motion
(Z ,R )−−−−i−→i (Z −1,R +1) (44) inside the cell at 1 ft/sec, and they interact with a hu-
man anytime they come within 100 feet. We can then
(cid:104)ij(cid:105):(Z ,Z )−−−−−i→(Z −1,Z +1) . (45) estimate the rate at which humans and zombies will in-
teract as SZRv∆t, which corresponds to a choice of β of
Hereidenotesaparticularsiteonourlattice. (cid:104)j(cid:105)denotes around 3.6×10−3 /hr. Another way to make sense of
asumovernearestneighborsites,(cid:104)ij(cid:105)denotesthatiand these parameter choices is to ask how many susceptible
j are nearest neighbors. In this model, zombies and hu- individuals must be in a cell before a single zombie has
mans only interact if they are at the same site, but the a higher rate for biting a human than transitioning to a
zombies diffuse on the lattice, being allowed to move to neighboring cell. For our choice of parameters, this gives
a neighboring site with probability proportional to their
population and some diffusion constant (µ). We assume Nβ =4µ =⇒ N ∼102 . (46)
that the humans do not move, not only for computa-
tional efficiency, but because, as we will see, the zombie This corresponds to a low population density of
outbreaks tend to happen rather quickly, and we expect ∼11 people/km2, again agreeing with our intuition. All
large transportation networks to shut down in the first of our parameter choices are summarized in Table I.
days, pinning most people to their homes. The addition
of a latent state coincides with the common depiction
C. Simulation Details
that once a human has been bitten, it typically takes
some amount of time before they die and reanimate as a
zombie. If a human is bitten, they transition to the E To effectively simulate an outbreak at this scale, we
state, where at some constant rate (ν) they convert into employed the Next Reaction Method of [6]. We main-
the zombie state. tained a priority queue of all possible reactions, assign-
To choose our parameters we tried to reflect common ingeachthetimeatwhichthereactionwouldtakeplace,
depictions of zombies in movies. The work of Witkowski an exponentially distributed random number with scale
and Blais [22] performed a Bayesian fit of a very similar set by the rate for the reaction. At each time step of
SZR model to two films, Night of the Living Dead, and the simulation, we popped the next reaction off of the
Shawn of the Dead. In both cases, the observed α was queue, and updated the state of the relevant squares on
very close to 0.8. This means that the zombies in the our grid. Whenever population counts changed, we of
filmsare1.25timesmoreeffectiveatbitinghumansthan course needed to update the times for the reactions that
thehumansareatkillingthezombies. Wewilladoptthis depend on those population counts. This method re-
value for our simulation. For our latent state, we adopt mained efficient for simulating the entire US. However,
a value close to that reported for Shawn of the Dead, atlatetimesalargeamountofsimulationtimewasspent
namely a half-life of 30 minutes. To set our movement simulatingthediffusionofthezombiesbackandforthbe-
parameter, we estimate that zombies move at around 1 tween highly populated states. We could have achieved
ft/sec. To estimate the rate at which the zombies will additionalcomputationalefficiencybyadoptingthetime
transition from one cell to the next, we assume that the dependent propensity function approach of Fu et al. [5].
zombies behave like a random gas inside the cell, so that
the probability that a zombie will cross a cell boundary
is roughly 1 Z Lv∆t, that is, one-fourth of the zombies D. Results
within v∆t of the edge will move across that edge in
a small amount of time. This suggests a value of µ of With the simulation in place, we are now in a position
0.0914 /hr. Thiscorrespondstoanaveragetimebetween tosimulateafullscalezombieoutbreak. Wefirstconsider
an outbreak that began with one in every million indi-
viduals starting in the Exposed (E) state in the United
States. For a single instance the overall populations are
shown in Figure 10. This looks similar to the analytical
outbreaks we saw in Figure 1, but with a steeper rate
of initial infection and some slight perturbations to the
curves. Thetotalpopulationcurveshoweverhidemostof
the interesting features. In Figure 11 we attempt to give
(a)1Day (b)2Days
a sense of how this outbreak evolves, showing the state
of the United States at various times after the outbreak
begins.
(c)1Week (d)2Weeks
FIG.10. TheS(blue),Z(red),R(black),andE(green)pop- (e)3Weeks (f)4Weeks
ulationsasafunctionoftimeforafullscalezombieoutbreak
in the continental United States starting with one in every
million people infected (color online). The exposed popula-
tion (E) has been magnified by a factor of 100.
As you can see, for the parameters we chose, most of
the United States population has been turned into zom-
bies by the first week, while the geographic map does
(g)2Months (h)4Months
not necessarily seem all that compelling. In the early
stages of the outbreak, while the population is roughly
homogeneous, the zombie plague spreads out in roughly FIG. 11. Simulation of a zombie outbreak in the continental
uniformcircles,wherethespeedoftheinfectionistiedto United States. Initially one in every million individuals was
the local population density. Infestations on the coasts, infected at random. Results are shown above at (a) one day,
with their higher population density, have spread far- (b) two days, (c) one week, (d) two weeks, (e) three weeks,
ther than those near the center of the country. After (f)fourweeks,and(g)twomonthsaftertheoutbreakbegins.
Shown here are the population of susceptible individuals (S)
several weeks, the map exhibits stronger anisotropy, as
inblue,scaledlogarithmically,zombiesinredandremovedin
we spread over larger geographical areas and the zombie
green (color online). All three channels are superimposed. A
frontisinfluencedbylargeinhomogeneitiesinpopulation
movieversionofthisoutbreakisavailableinthesupplemental
density. Afterfourweeks, much oftheUnitedStateshas
materials online.
fallen, but it takes a very long time for the zombies to
diffuse andcapture the remaining portions of theUnited
States. Even four months in, remote areas of Montana
is shown in Figure 12.
and Nevada remain zombie free.
To investigate the geographical characteristics of the By averaging over all of these runs, we can start to
outbreak, we must move beyond a single instance of an buildazombiesusceptibilitymap,asshowninFigure13.
outbreak and study how different regions are affected in In the top plot, we show the probability that the given
an ensemble of outbreaks. If it takes a month to develop cell is overrun by zombies after seven days. Here you
and distribute an effective vaccine (or an effective strat- can clearly see that there are certain regions – those sur-
egyforzombiedecapitation),whatregionsshouldonelo- rounding populous metropolitan areas – that are at a
catethezombie-fightingheadquarters? Weran7,000dif- greater risk. This is partly because those regions have
ferent28-dayzombieoutbreaksinthecontinentalUnited lots of individuals who could potential serve as patient
Statesstartingwithasingleindividual. Asingleinstance zero, and partly due to the rapid spread of zombies in
of one of these outbreaks originating in New York City those areas. In the bottom plot, we plot the probability
given a closed form analytical solution to the well-mixed
dynamic differential equation model. We compared the
stochastic dynamics to a comparable density-dependent
SIR model. We investigated the critical behavior of the
singlepersonpersitetwo-dimensionalsquarelatticezom-
bie model and demonstrated it is in the percolation uni-
versality class. We ran full scale simulations of a zombie
epidemic, incorporating each human in the continental
United States, and discussed the geographical implica-
tions for survival.
While this work is predicated on a fictional infesta-
tion, one might ask whether there are any phenomena in
the real world that behave in a manner similar to our
modeled zombie outbreaks. As noted, the SZR model
FIG. 12. Status of the United States 28 days after an out- requires that susceptible hosts directly participate in the
break that started in New York City. Here blue represents removal of zombie hosts from the infectious population,
humans, red represents zombies and green represents dead
leading to runaway outbreaks as susceptible hosts are
zombies (color online). The three color channels have been
depleted. One might imagine a similar phenomenon for
laid on top of one another.
infectious diseases that require medical intervention to
be suppressed; as medical personnel themselves become
infected (as has sadly happened to a considerable degree
that the cell is overrun, but at the 28 day mark.
during the recent Ebola outbreak in West Africa), they
After 28 days, it is not the largest metropolitan ar- become less able to stem the spread of infection. (Med-
eas that suffer the greatest risk, but the regions located ical personnel, however, represent only a small fraction
between large metropolitan areas. For instance, in Cali- of all susceptible hosts, so a refinement to an SZR-type
forniaitistheregionnearBakersfieldintheSanJoaquin modelwouldberequiredtoaccountforthis.) Onemight
Valleythatisatthegreatestriskasthisareawillbeover- also imagine SZR-like dynamics in the spread of ideas
run by zombies whether they originate in the San Fran- and opinions: a person spreading a controversial opin-
ciscoareaortheLosAngeles/SanDiegoarea. Thearea ion in a population, for example, might be able to sway
withthegreatestonemonthzombieriskisnortheastern some converts, but is also likely to meet resistance and
Pennsylvania, itself being susceptible to outbreaks origi- counter-arguments, which act to reduce infectivity and
nating in any of the large metropolitan areas on the east perhaps ultimately stop the spread.
coast. Wehopeoursystematictreatmentofanimaginarydis-
ease will provide a useful and inspiring teaser for the ex-
citingfieldsofstatisticalmechanics,networkscience,and
epidemiology.
VI. CONCLUSION
Zombies offer a fun framework for introducing many VII. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
modernconceptsfromepidemiologyandcriticalphenom-
ena. We have described and analyzed various zombie WeacknowledgeNSFIIS–1247696andCornellUniver-
models, from one describing deterministic dynamics in a sityforsupportofthisresearch,andthankPaulGinsparg
well-mixed system to a full scale US epidemic. We have for useful references and conversations.
[1] MaxBrooks. TheZombieSurvivalGuide: Completepro- tems. Journal of Computational Physics, 274:524–549,
tection from the living dead. Broadway books, 2003. 2014.
[2] Max Brooks. World War Z. Querido’s Uitgeverij BV, [6] Michael A Gibson and Jehoshua Bruck. Efficient ex-
Em., 2013. actstochasticsimulationofchemicalsystemswithmany
[3] John L Cardy and Peter Grassberger. Epidemic models speciesandmanychannels.Thejournalofphysicalchem-
andpercolation.JournalofPhysicsA:Mathematicaland istry A, 104(9):1876–1889, 2000.
General, 18(6):L267, 1985. [7] DanielTGillespie,AndreasHellander,andLindaRPet-
[4] Andrew Cartmel et al. Mathematical Modelling of Zom- zold. Perspective: Stochasticalgorithmsforchemicalki-
bies. University of Ottawa Press, 2014. netics. The Journal of chemical physics,138(17):170901,
[5] Jin Fu, Sheng Wu, Hong Li, and Linda R Petzold. The 2013.
time dependent propensity function for acceleration of [8] PeterGrassberger.Onthecriticalbehaviorofthegeneral
spatial stochastic simulation of reaction–diffusion sys- epidemicprocessanddynamicalpercolation. Mathemat-
FIG. 13. Average survivability from US scale runs. In both cases, the plot shows the probability of being infected in that
squareafteranepidemicthatoriginatesfromasingleinfectedindividualchosenatrandomfromthetotalpopulation. Thetop
figure is the probability of being infected after 7 days, while the bottom plot is after 28 days. In total, this represents 7,000
simulated runs starting from a single individual. The top plot represents the 1,467 outbreaks that lasted at least 7 days, the
bottom plot represents 1,458 outbreaks that lasted at least 28 days.
ical Biosciences, 63(2):157–172, 1983. the American Physical Society, 59, 2014.
[9] Ronald Hochreiter and Christoph Waldhauser. Zom- [12] Philip Munz, Ioan Hudea, Joe Imad, and Robert J
bie politics: Evolutionary algorithms to counteract Smith? When zombies attack!: mathematical modelling
the spread of negative opinions. arXiv preprint of an outbreak of zombie infection. Infectious Disease
arXiv:1401.6420, 2014. Modelling Research Progress, 4:133–150, 2009.
[10] MattJKeelingandPejmanRohani. Modeling infectious [13] Mark EJ Newman, I Jensen, and RM Ziff. Percolation
diseases in humans and animals. Princeton University andepidemicsinatwo-dimensionalsmallworld.Physical
Press, 2008. Review E, 65(2):021904, 2002.
[16] Felipe Nunez, Cesar Ravello, Hector Urbina, and Tomas preparedness-101-zombie-apocalypse/, 2011.
Perez-Acle. Arule-basedmodelofahypotheticalzombie [19] Evelyn Sander and Chad M Topaz. The zombie swarm:
outbreak: Insightsontheroleofemotionalfactorsduring Epidemics in the presence of social attraction and re-
behavioral adaptation of an artificial population. arXiv pulsion. Mathematical Modelling of Zombies, page 265,
preprint arXiv:1210.4469, 2012. 2014.
[17] U.S. Department of Health, Human Services Centers [20] Robert Smith? Braaaiiinnnsss!: From Academics to
for Disease Control, and Prevention. Preparedness Zombies. University of Ottawa Press, 2011.
zombies/. susceptible-infected-recovered model on a square lattice.
[18] U.S. Department of Health, Human Services Cen- Physical Review E, 82(5):051921, 2010.
ters for Disease Control, and Prevention. Pre- [22] CaitlynWitkowskiandBrianBlais. Bayesiananalysisof
//blogs.cdc.gov/publichealthmatters/2011/05/ preprint arXiv:1311.6376, 2013.